     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IIFD RE (P157490)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0023656

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P157490                                      IIFD RE

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Indonesia                                    Infrastructure, PPP's & Guarantees


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A2268                                    31-Dec-2020                                              7,149,780.56

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Apr-2016                                 31-Dec-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                         Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               7,400,000.00                                       7,400,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                7,150,000.00                                       7,149,781.52

 Actual                                            7,149,910.46                                       7,149,780.56




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Nestor Ntungwanayo           Kishore Laxmikant            Ramachandra Jammi                 IEGSD (Unit 4)
                              Nadkarni




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As per the Grant Agreement (04/25/1016) on page 5, "the Project Development Objectives (PDO) for the
   Indonesia's Infrastructure Finance Development (IIFD) is to assist Indonesia in closing its large public
   infrastructure gap by supporting the flow of private capital into infrastructure development and improving the
   institutional, legal and regulatory framework to enhance the ability of private capital and public institutions to
   work together for infrastructure development". The PDO in the Project Appraisal Document (04/21/1016) on
   page 14 was identical and remained unchanged throughout the period of project implementation.


                                                                                                       Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IIFD RE (P157490)



   However, the PDO statement was not as clear as desired. Applying the World Bank Guidance of December
   2021 suggesting that compound PDOs with multiple outcomes linked together in a single sentence are
   unpacked and each outcome assessed separately, the PDO will be unbundled and assessed as follows:

   (i) PDO-1: To assist Indonesia in closing its large public infrastructure gap by supporting the flow of private
   capital into infrastructure development.

   (ii) PDO-2: To assist Indonesia in closing its large public infrastructure gap by improving the institutional,
   legal and regulatory framework to enhance the ability of private capital and public institutions to work together
   for infrastructure development.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The main project components (Recipient-Executed Trust Fund-RETF) identified in the PAD, and
   reproduced in the ICR are detailed below.

   (i) Component 1: Strengthening Agencies: (amount at approval of US$2.34 million, actual cost at
   project closing of US$3.82 million). Activities under this component aimed to: (a) provide support for the
   establishment and operations of the Private Public Partnership (PPP) unit of the Ministry of Finance
   (MOF) and key relevant entities under the PPP framework, (b) provide support to the government
   contracting agencies (GCA) and better selection criteria for more efficient investment projects, and (c)
   improve the capacity of the recipient’s agencies involved in the selection and prioritization of PPP projects
   at the local level.

   (ii) Component 2: Improving legal and regulatory frameworks (amount at approval of US$0.30
   million, actual at project closing of US$0.29 million). Activities under this component included
   the provision of: (a) support or advice for improving the regulatory frameworks supporting PPP including
   reviewing regulations, drafting regulations and amendments to the regulations (b) support for the
   implementation of recommendations from the regulatory review on the broader infrastructure
   policy, focusing on access to long term finance resources from the national and international markets.

   (iii) Component 3: Facilitating PPP project selection, preparation and transaction: (amount at
   approval of US$3.65 million, actual cost at project closing of US$1.87 million): Planned activities
   under this component aimed at (a) providing support to the Government Contracting Agencies (GCA) to
   make better use of the project development fund and other PPP supporting instruments; (b) providing
   technical support to move a PPP project from concept through implementation, including technical inputs
   and guidance on project identification, selections, preparation, technical analysis on financial deal structure,
   and (c) selecting and providing support for pilot projects.

   (iv) Component 4: Enhancing inter-agency coordination: (amount at approval of US$0.74million,
   actual cost at project closing of US$1.17 million). Activities under the fourth component included (a)

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IIFD RE (P157490)



   facilitating the coordination among Government stakeholders involved in PPP development, (b) providing
   support in clarifying and strengthening the roles and responsibilities of relevant government national
   agencies working on infrastructure development and enabling better coordination among the stakeholders.

   (v) Unallocated amount at appraisal: US$1.24 million. This amount was set aside to be used in covering
   unplanned project expenses.

    Components of the Bank-executed Trust Fund are as follows:

   Bank- Executed Trust Fund (BETF)
   Pillars                                    Amount at approval in US$ million    Actual at project closing
   Pillar 1: Infrastructure institutional and
                                              4.68                                 4.42
   regulatory support
   Pillar 2: Infrastructure financing
                                              0.82                                 1.98
   support
   BETF total amount                          5.50                                 6.40




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
       Cost: The actual Project cost totaled US$7.15 million, or the equivalent of 86 percent of approved
          amount, with US$1.12 million being cancelled.
         Financing: The Project was financed by an IBRD original grant (TF-A2268, Indonesia's
          Infrastructure Finance Development-IIFD) in the amount of US$2.45 million, and a 2018 additional
          grant of US$4.9 million, for a total amount of US$7.15 million.
         Borrower Contribution: There was no borrower contribution throughout the period of project
          implementation.
         Dates: The Project was approved on April 22, 2016, and became effective on April 25, 2016. An
          MTR took place during February-April 2021, which focused on reviewing the progress of
          implementation of the Recipient Executed Trust Fund component of the IIFD (RETF-IIFD) and the
          results achieved. The Project was closed on December 31, 2022, 20 months after the original
          closing date.
         Restructurings: The Project was restructured twice as delineated below:
               o On June 26, 2020, there was a level-two restructuring which brought in changes in
                  disbursements, in institutional arrangement, in financial management and procurement,
                  and in the implementation schedule and in extending the loan closing date until December
                  13, 2021. The goal was to respond to the new project design and the new result framework
                  and to enable the IIFD program to support the GOI’s New Long-term National Plan, and
                  focus on the agreed tangible outcome, particularly to provide support from the IIFD to help
                  expedite PDF project pipeline development and delivery.
               o On September 13, 2021, a second level-two restructuring brought in changes in project
                  components and cost and the results framework as well. There was also a cancellation of
                  financing and a reallocation between disbursement categories, a change in the



                                                                                                  Page 3 of 19
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       IIFD RE (P157490)



                                   implementation schedule and an extension of the loan closing date by 12 months until
                                   December 31, 2022.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The ICR discussed the relevance of objectives in paragraphs 20-24 as summarized below.

The PDO was in line with the Borrower's priorities. The Annual Work Plans (AWP) for Indonesia in the
initial years of the project focused on capacity building and stakeholder coordination in the
infrastructure development sectors. In the latter years (2019-2022) the focus shifted towards project
preparation. The Project remained the backbone theme for the MOF's PPP unit in capacity building and
creating an enabling environment for PPPs in Indonesia toward transforming it into a fully functional PPP
Unit. At project approval, the PPP Unit was in its nascency, the roles and coordination between various
government stakeholders were unclear, and there were only a few PPP projects in the pipeline. Moreover,
the Project was in line with the Director General of Budget Financing and Risk Management’s Strategic
Plan (2020-24) under Strategy of Management of Government Support and Infrastructure Financing, which
underscored that the MOF would accelerate the infrastructure development and the economic growth by
encouraging the PPP scheme and providing support to Government entities and other relevant
stakeholders.

The PDO was in line with a key pillar of the Bank's strategy in Indonesia until the project closure.
The Project was well aligned with the WBG's Country Partnership Framework FY2021-25 for Indonesia,
particularly in the following key engagement areas described under Pillar 2 of infrastructure finance under
the Objective 2.1 aimed at improving infrastructure provision and quality of service. The goal was for the
stakeholders to increase their capacity to implement various infrastructure developments and to contribute
to the economy.

The Project was pitched at the right level and had a built-in flexibility mechanism that used the
RETF and the BETF to respond flexibly to the Government's priorities. The integrated, system-wide
approach taken by the project limited the risks associated with weak institutional capacity and lack of
coordination, by allowing for specific support tailored to the needs of key institutions. The Project had a
built-in mechanism to strengthen the PPP apparatus as a whole, irrespective of changes in their detailed
responsibilities. Moreover, the project design had the flexibility to make pragmatic adjustments as required
to align with GOI emerging priorities under close coordination between the Director General for Risk
Management and Financing (MOF) and the World Bank. This flexible approach to the evolving needs of the
MOF, which was especially helpful during the pandemic, served well the Government in
boosting the PPP model of infrastructure development financing.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High



                                                                                                                 Page 4 of 19
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  IIFD RE (P157490)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               PDO-1: To assist Indonesia in closing its large public infrastructure gap by supporting the flow of private
               capital into infrastructure development.

               Rationale
               Theory of change

               There was no theory of change in the PAD, but the ICR team reconstructed a result chain (Figure 2 of the
               ICR) based on the PAD and the data and information generated during project implementation. The key
               activities supporting the first PDO aimed to strengthen PPP project selection and PPP project preparation and
               transaction. Expected outputs included (i) the number of successfully piloted PPP projects, (ii) the number of
               competitively tendered projects, and (iii) the number of PPP projects marketed to the private sector, and
               which have reached financial closure. Expected outcomes included (i) an increase of private investment in
               infrastructure, and (ii) an increase in the amount of PPP investment in the infrastructure sector. Overall, the
               theory of change was sound, as the identified activities were realistic and attuned to supporting the PDO and
               the reform program. There was a logical and causal link between the activities and expected outputs and
               outcomes. Assumptions for the theory of change to work were well identified and included the following: (i) a
               sustained macroeconomic and political stability, (ii) Government of Indonesia's commitment to
               undertaking policy reforms and creating fiscal space, and (iii) continued interest by the foreign and domestic
               private investors in investment in the country. However, the results chain did not discuss the outcome
               attribution, although achievements resulted from the contribution of many stakeholders.

               Outputs

                     The target for the number of competitively tendered projects was partially met, reaching the number
                        12 against a target of 14.
                       The target for the number of PDF proposal documents completed was exceeded, reaching the
                        number of 16 against a target between 9 and 12, including 5 projects with green and sustainable
                        design.
                       Toward establishing a methodology to prioritize infrastructure investments and assess their suitability
                        for public- and private-financing, establish transparent PPP selection process, and shortlist eligible
                        PPP projects, the following was achieved: (i) a Manual for prioritization, PPP Project Screening Tool
                        and PPP Evaluation Tool to shortlist the PPP potential projects was completed, and (ii) 32
                        projects have been prepared under the PDF against a revised target of 30.
                       The target for the number of projects ready for bid completed was exceeded, reaching 21 against a
                        target of 20, and a baseline of 2.
                       The target for successfully piloted initial PPP projects was practically achieved, reaching 12, against a
                        target of 13.
                       The target for the development of coordination forum among PPP stakeholders and having regular
                        meetings was achieved, because three the following meetings were held: (i) a Trilateral Meeting
                        among MOF, Bappenas, and GCA, (ii) a market engagement meeting held by PPP Joint-Office under

                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IIFD RE (P157490)



       the support from IIFD, and (iii) an Echelon I meeting with Bappenas and other Joint Office members,
       covering various PPP-related activities.
      Toward preparing up to 2 PPP projects and marketing them for private sector investment,16 PPP
       projects had achieved the Performance Qualification (PQ) process and were offered to marketing
       through PDF facility support, with 10 projects having reached financial closure.
      Toward developing pipeline of environmentally sustainable infrastructure projects eligible for private
       investment, 32 projects were prepared through the PDF and 25 PPP projects reached financial close.

Outcome

      The average duration of project cycle (from PDF main agreement to bid award) for PPP projects that
       have signed PPP agreements through PDF facility support is 18.1 months at closure, against a target
       of 3-4 years, and a baseline of 7 years.
      The target for the total support to the Government in private/PPP investment in infrastructure (Water,
       Telecom, Energy, Transportation) as percent of GDP was practically achieved, reaching 1.12 percent
       against a target of 1.2 percent of GDP.
      The target for the amount of PPP investment in infrastructure was practically met, reaching US$13,25
       trillion in March 2022, against a target of US$13.50 trillion, and a baseline of US$327 million in
       2014. There are two additional toll-road projects under turnkey construction where the financial close
       is well advanced. If these are considered, the target is considered fully achieved.

Overall, the PDO-1 was substantially achieved based on major results, including (i) the significant reduction
of the average duration of PPP project cycle (ii) the achievement close to the target as regards to the total
support to the Government in private/PPP investment in infrastructure and (iii) the substantial performance
toward meeting the target of the amount of PPP investment in infrastructure.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PFO-2: To assist Indonesia in closing its large public infrastructure gap by improving the institutional,
legal and regulatory framework to enhance the ability of private capital and public institutions to work together
for infrastructure development.

Rationale
Theory of change

Toward improving the institutional, legal and regulatory framework supporting better coordination of private
capital and public institutions, the theory of change was sound, as identified activities were adequate and
attuned to achieving the PDO and advancing the reform program. Key activities included (i) strengthening
agencies involved in the selection and prioritization of PPP projects at local level (ii) strengthening regulation
and national policy frameworks through the infrastructure financing framework, (iii) improving legal and
regulatory frameworks, and (iv) enhancing inter-agency coordination. Expected outputs included: (i) a fully

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IIFD RE (P157490)



functional PPP unit, (ii) the establishment of a relevant decision-making authority for PPP implementation, (iii)
the establishment of a coordination forum among PPP stakeholders which hold regular meetings. Expected
outcomes included (i) establishment of operational and business processes of the PPP Unit, and (ii) having a
new 5-year infrastructure PPP program (2020-2024) focusing on key infrastructure sectors (water, urban,
transport, waste management, housing, gas distribution, and health).

Overall, the theory of change was sound, as the identified activities were realistic and attuned to supporting
the PDO and the reform program. As described hereabove, there was a logical and causal link between
the activities expected outputs and outcomes. Assumptions for the theory of change to work were well
identified and included the following: (i) a sustained macroeconomic and political stability, (ii) Government of
Indonesia's commitment to undertaking policy reforms and creating fiscal space, and (ii) adequacy of local
talent pools to right-staff key PPP entities. However, the results chain did not discuss the outcome attribution,
as significant achievements resulted from the contribution of many stakeholders.

Outputs

Regulation strengthening:

      Toward addressing critical legal and regulatory bottlenecks for infrastructure finance and
       development, the following was achieved: (i) the target for critical regulatory bottlenecks amended or
       changed was exceeded, as 4 were identified and addressed, against a target of 2, and a baseline of 1,
       and (ii) the target for strengthening Regulation and National Policy Framework through the completion
       of the “Academic Paper to strengthen regulation framework of PPP infrastructure financing” was fully
       achieved.

      Toward deepening financial markets for infrastructure by supporting GOI in providing best practice
       and advice on capital market issuance, specialized infrastructure funding mechanism, a number of
       new instruments were introduced, including: (i) the securitization backed by infrastructure project
       revenues, (ii) infrastructure funds, (iii) green bonds/sukuk, and (iv) Komodo bonds.

Capacity building and training.

      Toward completing the institutional framework for PPP units, including how to account and budget for
       PPP as well as how to assess and manage the risks that the Government is taking on, the following
       was achieved: (i) Over 375 participants from central and local governments have benefited from
       various training modules organized under the IIFD TF, (ii) 100% PPP Unit staff are certified PPP at the
       foundation level, and (ii) the PPP 4.0 system has been installed.

Institutional development and capital market deepening.

      Toward designing institutional links between/among the President's Infrastructure Task Force,
       the Committee for Acceleration of Priority Infrastructure Delivery (KPPIP), National Land Agency, PPP
       Unit, and relevant Ministries on specific infrastructure project-related decisions, a new PPP Business
       Process Manual for PPP Joint Office was prepared but it has yet to be adopted.

      Toward supporting Government capacity building and put forth and share best practice in public and
       PPP project development across Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) economies, the


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IIFD RE (P157490)



       following was achieved: (i) PPP days were held regularly, except for the years impacted due to
       COVID-19 pandemic, and (ii) MOF's PPP Unit has 46 personnel which consist of 1 Director, 3 Vice
       Directors/Sub-Directorates, 13 Head of Divisions, and 29 analysts / staff. All these personnel
       have already been certified PPP Foundation Level and received capacity building support in the form
       of knowledge and experience sharing sessions with their global counterparts such as the PPP unit in
       South Africa.

      The PPP Unit has internal standard operating procedures and has been equipped with useful tools
       and standardized templates including the Guidelines and toolkit for Viability Gap Funding (VGF)
       evaluation, PPP Screening Tool, PPP Evaluation Tool, Full Business Case (FBC)
       Supplemental Guide, Value for Money (VFM) Supplemental Guide, Application for MOF Support, PPP
       Unit Brochure, Guidance on economic analysis, Guidance on financial analysis, Guidance on the
       government support evaluation and the Report on the infrastructure guarantee aspects. In the initial
       years, the PPP Unit was supported by program management consultants, a multi-disciplinary team of
       international consultants, who provided the incubation support.

      Toward unblocking key bottlenecks to capital market deepening, the following was achieved: (i)
       Following the issuance of Bank Indonesia (BI) regulation PBI 21/2019 for the Derivatives Market,
       setting the foundational infrastructure for hedging instrument markets, and in line with the authorities’
       commitment under the WB Financial Sector DPL to develop the derivatives market consistent with
       G20 recommendations, in 2021 the WB and BI agreed to collaborate in a technical assistance
       program comprising of five key activities which represent the building blocks for the
       derivatives/hedging market.

Outcome

      The target for a fully functional PPP unit established including relevant decision-making authority for
       PPP Implementation was fully achieved at project closure.
      The target of developing a coordination forum among PPP stakeholders and having regular meetings
       was fully achieved at project closure.
      The target for having a new 5-year infrastructure PPP program (2020-2024) focusing on certain
       sectors (water, urban, transport, waste management, housing, gas distribution, and health) was
       achieved, as a PPP Unit Business Plan 2020-2024 was developed and presented to key stakeholders.
      The IIFD provided strategy and management support to the MOF PPP Unit by supporting the
       preparation of the PPP Unit Business Plans for 2016-20 and 2020-24, Database Management System
       (DMS) and Project Monitoring and Evaluation System (PME), the modern digital platform (KBPU 4.0)
       has also been developed for the MOF to enhance automation of its work processes and digital
       collaboration as well as the Environment, Social and Governance (ESG) manual for PPPs, which was
       launched in the G20 forum in Bali in 2022.

Overall, the PDO-2 was substantially achieved, because of major achievements toward PDO-2,
including: (i) a fully functional PPP unit with relevant decision-making authority for PPP Implementation,
(ii) a coordination forum among PPP stakeholders holding regular meetings, (iii) a new 5-year infrastructure
PPP program (2020-2024) focusing on key infrastructure sectors, and (iv) a strategy and management
support to the MOF PPP Unit. There were some shortcomings in regulation strengthening, capacity building
and training, institutional development and capital market deepening.


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                IIFD RE (P157490)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The PDO-1 was substantially achieved based on major achieved results, including: (i) significant reduction
                            of the average duration of PPP project cycle from 3 to 4 years to 18.1 months, (ii) good progress in the
                            targets related to the total support to the Government in private/PPP investment in infrastructure (1.12
                            percent against a target of 1.2 percent of GDP), and (iii) good results for the target for the amount of PPP
                            investment in infrastructure (US$13,25 trillion in March 2022, against a target of US$13.50 trillion).

                            The PDO-2 was substantially achieved based on the following achievements: (i) a fully functional PPP
                            unit with relevant decision-making authority for PPP design and implementation, (ii) a coordination forum
                            among PPP stakeholders holding regular meetings, (iii) a new 5-year infrastructure PPP program (2020-
                            2024) focusing on key infrastructure sectors, and (iv) a strategy and management support to the MOF PPP
                            Unit. However, there were shortfalls in capacity building and institutional development.

                            Overall efficacy is rated as Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   This was a typical technical assistance project, and a quantitative economic and financial analysis was not
   undertaken at the design stage, and the exercise was not done in the context of the ICR preparation either.

   The ICR in paragraphs 33-34 discussed the operational efficiency of the project implementation as
   summarized below.

   Allocated grant funds were fully disbursed, and most project activities were efficiently delivered as confirmed by
   the financial management and procurement reports prepared during the periodic of project implementation. The
   World Bank used continuous dialogue and implementation support missions to support the PMU toward
   achievement of results. The in-person and virtual implementation support missions identified areas of risk to
   meeting objectives of the operation, and remedial measures were undertaken to put activities back on track. The
   missions were regular, with a wide array of expertise to cover the broad range of project activities, and the Aide
   Memoires contained clear action plans. The PMU provided comprehensive status reports, clearly highlighting



                                                                                                                              Page 9 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IIFD RE (P157490)



the major issues, and this facilitated receiving good guidance from management, and assistance in dealing with
project implementation issues and project extension.

Despite the initial years of slower than planned disbursement and the delays following the COVID-19 pandemic
in 2020, the project made significant achievements and most indicators in the result framework were met. As a
result of the COVID-19 pandemic, certain activities experienced delays in 2020, and the overall project duration
had to be extended by two years to 31 December 2022. The IIFD TF was extended twice from the original
closing date, to allow more time for the project to complete its activities and achieve its PDO, 20 months after
the original closing date.

The ICR could have compared the project delivery cost to similar Bank projects, especially given that no
economic and financial analyses were undertaken. However, based on the full disbursement of the grant
resources, and delivery of most activities despite the pandemic context in 2020-2021, this review rates the
overall efficiency of the Project as Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO is assessed as high, while both the efficacy and efficiency performance of the project
are rated as substantial, resulting in an overall Satisfactory rating.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR discussed potential risks to outcome in paragraphs 78-81. These are summarized below.


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IIFD RE (P157490)



The major risk to achieved outcome identified in the ICR is the significant opposition from vested interests to
the PPP program. There needs to be significant progress in reforming the SOE regulation and oversight so
as to create a level playing field and ensure transparency and equity in the project selection and allocation
to implementers. Such a level playing field and an empowered central agency or ministry enforcing such
decisions, will likely pave the way toward using the PPP instrument in developing infrastructure finance in
Indonesia. Linking the PPP program to the reforms in the infrastructure sector and SOE program in
Indonesia is the surest path toward making good use of the achieved outcome.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The ICR discussed issues related to the quality at entry in paragraphs 66-71 and 43-45, but
  the information provided in the above paragraphs did not match the kind of evidence required by the
  Bank guidelines. Upon request, the Project Team provided additional material which is summarized
  below.

  The Program Development Objectives (PDO) were cleared stated in the PAD. The Project aimed
  to assist Indonesia in closing its large public infrastructure gap by facilitating the flow of private capital
  into infrastructure development and improving the institutional, legal and regulatory framework to
  enhance the ability of private capital and public institutions to work together for infrastructure
  development. The Project activities were to be funded by two trust funds, a Bank-executed one and
  a recipient-executed one, all sourced from the Government of Canada.

  The Project was designed in a way allowing to develop operational, ready-to-implement next-steps
  toward a robust infrastructure and PPP financing market in Indonesia. The Project was expected to clarify
  specific legal and regulatory provisions and corresponding operational policies and procedures; enhance
  inter-agency coordination and develop skills and capacity of national level agencies. As the main
  Implementing Agency for the Project, the PPP Unit within the Ministry of Finance (MOF) was expected to
  receive a sizeable portion of grant proceeds. In the interest of flexibility, the project was designed to
  direct financial resources where they were needed the most to support GOI’s PPP agenda, based on
  which the Implementing Agency arrangements may be updated if and as needed. The Project design had
  the flexibility to make pragmatic adjustments as required to align with GOI emerging priorities. This
  flexible approach to the evolving needs of the MOF, which was especially helpful during the pandemic,
  was a unique feature of the IIFD that contributed to the achieved outcome.

  At appraisal, key risks were assessed, and mitigation measures identified. The overall risk rating at the
  project’s commencement varied from higher to moderate, due to two main risk factors: (i) there was a
  high-risk perception on political and government related risks, because when the project was launched,
  there were not many PPPs that had been successfully rolled out and the regulations were still untested
  and there was uncertainty, and (ii) the institutional capacity for developing project pipeline and
  implementing PPP projects was nascent. The flexible design of the Project helped to channel resources
  to where they were needed the most in order to support GOI’s PPP agenda. The PPP Unit within MOF
  received a sizeable portion of grant proceeds under the Recipient-executed trust Fund (RETF)
  component. However, a portion of the Project was directed to other government agencies, based upon
  clarity of roles among these institutions in order to strengthen the PPP process in the country. Further,

                                                                                                         Page 11 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IIFD RE (P157490)



  the Project design had the flexibility to make pragmatic adjustments as required to align with GOI
  emerging priorities.

  The World Bank was to manage the overall IIFD program and administration, execute the BETF work
  program, compile program information from both the BETF and RETF prior to annual Steering Committee
  meetings. The executive body within IIFD was a Steering Committee comprising senior-level government
  and donor representatives as well as the World Bank’s Country Director who chaired the committee. The
  Steering Committee had strategic and overall allocative authority and its responsibilities included: (i)
  reviewing and approving the overall proposed IIFD strategy and policy priorities in relation to the IIFD
  objective; (ii) reviewing progress of the implementation of activities against the results-based framework
  provided in the annual report; (iii) providing strategy and policy recommendations based on the progress
  review; and (iv) approving annual work plans.

  The Project’s Results Framework was complex in nature, in part because the IIFD Trust Fund was
  attempting integrated, system-wide changes in the enabling environment for PPPs in Indonesia. The TF
  attempted to limit the impact of risks associated with weak institutional capacity and lack of coordination
  on the ability to deliver on the Results Framework, by allowing for specific support tailored to the needs of
  key institutions. At design, specific outputs remained to be identified; but their conceptual linkage to the
  outcomes and the intended PDO was described.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR discussed issues related to the Bank's quality of supervision in paragraphs 46-53, and 72-76, and
 based on the presented material, this review rates its performance as Satisfactory.

 A Project Management Unit (PMU) within the PPP Unit in the MOF was established to oversee the
 implementation of RETF activities in a manner to achieve the IIFD PDO. The performance of the RETF
 and its activities was reviewed annually by a Steering Committee. The RETF was subject to World Bank
 rules, procedures, policies and guidelines governing the identification, procurement and selection of
 external vendors be it an individual or a firm. Similarly, the procurement of goods and administration of all
 funding was subject to the required policies of the World Bank.

 The Bank team conducted regular supervision missions, with a wide array of expertise to cover the broad
 range of project activities, and the Aide Memoires contained clear action plans. The PMU provided
 comprehensive status reports, clearly highlighting the major issues, and this facilitated receiving guidance
 from management, and assistance in dealing with project implementation issues and project
 extension. The PMU maintained up-to-date records on each activity funded through the RETF and
 provided this information on a biannual basis to the World Bank, which in turn used this information to
 prepare annual performance reports for the Steering Committee. The biannual reports prepared by the
 PMU for the World Bank included a detailed update on the progress of the various RETF-funded activities
 under implementation as well as all necessary financial information pertaining to the use of RETF



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IIFD RE (P157490)



 funds. The World Bank team and the PMU had agreed to a reporting template for the biannual reports,
 including on all reportable results indicators and targets.

 The structure of the PMU was modified in January 2020 to enhance its integration with various sub-
 directorates of the PPP Unit, namely the sub-directorates of (i) PPP Preparation, (ii) Government Support,
 and (iii) Regulation and Policy Development of Infrastructure. The new structure aimed to
 have representation from all the three sub-directorates and an operational team that oversaw program
 management and contracting. In addition, it included a person in-charge nominated from a sub-directorate
 to manage the technical delivery of each activity of the RETF. This arrangement brought greater alignment
 of work and ownership of the IIFD activities.

  As the project progressed, it appeared that more time was needed to get a new institution off the ground
 and to operate effectively in Indonesia. Moreover, with the outbreak of COVID-19 pandemic, some
 activities experienced delays in 2020. Consequently, the overall project duration had to be extended by two
 years until 31 December 2022. The IIFD TF’s flexible and approach to the evolving needs of the MOF and
 other government agencies in Indonesia was especially helpful during the pandemic and was the
 key feature of the IIFD TF.

 Despite the flexible design, the project confronted challenges during implementation as follows: (i) it took
 time for the MOF PPP Unit to staff itself and establishment of operational and business processes, (ii)
 a great deal of capacity-building at the MOF PPP Unit was needed before the PPP Unit could contribute to
 facilitating PPP project selection, preparation, and transaction, (iii) the sub-project pipeline was slow to fill
 up as the project preparation processes were slow to ramp up due to weak institutional capacity of
 government contracting agencies, (iv) when the IIFD started, the PPP Unit was in its nascency, the roles
 and coordination between various government stakeholders was unclear, and only a few PPP projects had
 been prepared and financially closed. Therefore, the Annual Work Programs (AWP) in the initial years
 focused on capacity building and stakeholder coordination. In the latter years, 2019-2022 the focus shifted
 towards project preparation.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The ICR discussed issues related to M&E design in paragraphs 54-57, as summarized below.

 The Results Framework (RF) for this project outlined the intermediate outcome indicators against which the
 Project was going to be continually monitored and evaluated. The Project’s Results Framework was
 complex in nature, in part because the IIFD was attempting integrated, system-wide changes in the
 enabling the environment for PPPs in Indonesia. The TF attempted to limit the impact of risks associated


                                                                                                       Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IIFD RE (P157490)



 with weak institutional capacity and lack of coordination on the ability to deliver on the Results Framework,
 by allowing for specific support tailored to the needs of key institutions. At appraisal, specific outputs were
 not identified; but their conceptual linkage to the outcomes and the PDO was discussed.

 The project’s M&E system had design limitations, but key indicators for project success did provide a
 reasonable basis for assessing performance in terms of the key PDO objective. However, the indicators
 provided a limited basis for gauging the broader economic and social impact from the sub-projects
 under component 3. Overall, the project’s M&E system served well for the project’s evaluation but had
 limited utility to monitor interim performance aspects of the IIFD operations such as for M&E of social and
 economic benefits. In April 2023, an online survey of participants who had benefitted from IIFD's capacity
 building interventions was undertaken, and the survey results are summarized in the Annex 6 of the ICR.

 Overall, the M&E design and arrangements were imprecise, the choice of PDO indicators was tentative,
 and the link between the theory of change and the results framework could have been improved.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR discussed issues related to the M&E implementation in the paragraph 58. This review
  identified additional information from the ICR as summarized below.

  The RETF was implemented through a PMU, which was embedded in the PPP Unit. The structure of the
  PMU was modified in January 2020 to enhance its integration with various sub-directorates of the PPP
  Unit, namely the sub-directorates of (i) PPP Preparation, (ii) Government Support, and (iii) Regulation
  and Policy Development of Infrastructure. The M&E data collection and analysis was systematic and
  regular. The PMU regularly submitted its progress reports, which included (i) interim financial review
  reports, (ii) IIFD quarterly operations reports, (ii) Steering Committee meeting minutes, (iv) annual reports
  and (v) latest internal and external audits.

  The program level planning and monitoring was undertaken through the management and operations
  team of the PMU. For specific activities, the selected candidates were entrusted with task of managing
  the timeliness and quality of the assigned activities. The RETF program monitoring and reporting was
  conducted by the Reporting and Monitoring Officer under the IIFD-RETF Operational Team in the PMU.
  The PMU provided quarterly and annual reports to the Bank, which were provided in a timely manner.
  The PMU strengthened its data management and reporting arrangements in more systematically manner
  by using the existing systems available in PPP Unit, in particular the Data Monitoring System (DMS) and
  Project Monitoring Evaluation (PME).

  Overall, M&E implementation was strong, but was not guided by the need to achieve the targets in the
  results framework.




c. M&E Utilization



                                                                                                     Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IIFD RE (P157490)



  The M&E system was useful in assessing the project’s progress, and in providing more information
  to support strategic decision-making and course-correction.

  Overall, the M&E system was articulated around the project implementation processes, and less on the
  expected results. Despite the M&E weaknesses described under this section, the ICR document and the
  Project Team provided enough evidence to support substantial ratings of the project efficacy and
  efficiency.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Safeguards issues were discussed in the ICR in paragraphs 61-63 as summarized below.

   While the grant resources were largely utilized towards capacity building, policy and initial project design,
   the Project was classified a category A project, due to nature of infrastructure sub-projects that would be
   promoted or supported by the TF. Accordingly, an Environmental and Social Management Framework was
   prepared to address any negative environmental and social impacts. Moreover, ten E&S policies were
   triggered as follows: (i) Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), (ii) Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12),
   (iii) Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04, (iv) Forests OP/BP 4.36, (v) Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11,
   (vi) Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10, (vii) Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12, (viii) Safety of Dams
   OP/BP 4.37, (ix) Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50, and (x) Projects in Disputed Areas
   OP/BP 7.60.

   The safeguards team had advised the PPP Unit to focus on E&S aspects at an early stage of project
   preparation, even though the final project will be implemented based on the final engineering design and
   feasibility studies. The safeguards team provided training and project specific inputs on the preliminary
   studies prepared under the RETF.

   To institutionalize the E&S aspects in project planning and preparation, the project supported the MOF PPP
   Unit in developing the Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) Manual for PPP projects which is a
   key step towards ensuring that future PPP projects in Indonesia are structured based on ESG best-practice
   criteria. Through capacity building and demonstrated pilot projects for various sectors, the IIFD placed
   greater focus on the sub-project preparation as per higher standards of environmental and social
   safeguards management. However, the capacity of the PPP unit remains modest in reviewing E&S
   compliance and quality enhancement, as in-house E&S specialists have not as yet acquired the required
   capacity. Overall, the Social Safeguards performance of the project was rated "Moderately Satisfactory" in
   the ICR.

   A key omission is that the ICR did not assess any of the 9 E&S policies which were triggered at approval.




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IIFD RE (P157490)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Fiduciary issues were discussed in the ICR in paragraphs 64-65 as summarized below.

  Financial Management. At the project design stage, the financial management risk was assessed as
  Moderate after adoption of proposed FM risk mitigation measures. The PMU has been submitting its
  Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) in a timely manner. The audit reports have been received on time and all
  recommendations have been followed up. The PMU proactively engaged with the Inspector General’s
  office to seek ex-ante views on possible issues and put in place corrective measures to address them prior
  to external audit. This has resulted in clean opinions from the auditors throughout the project
  implementation period. This Project is used as an example in Financial Management training in Indonesia,
  to showcase the internal audit function of the MOF to support to Financial Management. Overall, the
  Financial Management is rated for the Project as ‘Satisfactory’ at closure.

  Procurement. Procurement of goods, non-consulting services and consultants was to be carried out by
  the MOF PPP Unit. Procurement under the project was expected to take place in accordance with the
  World Bank’s Procurement and Consultant Guidelines. The Project Procurement Risk remained
  ‘Substantial’ during the project implementation and thus the applied procurement method
  thresholds remained unchanged. The Bank task team appreciated the efforts made by the PMU in
  processing all agreed activities using the procedures specified in the applicable World Bank Procurement
  and Consultant Guidelines and the agreed Procurement Plan through STEP. Several consulting firms and
  individual consultants were hired under the project to support the PMU in implementing the project. All
  activities including contract implementation have been completed by the project closing date. Overall, the
  procurement performance of the project is rated ‘Satisfactory’ at ICR.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  There was a surge in the investor confidence in PPPs in Indonesia. Based on GoI stakeholders’
  interviews, a major positive impact of the project has been that the Government of Indonesia is regarded
  by the private sector to have several credible institutions, including the MOF PPP Unit, that are capable of
  planning, preparing, promoting and/ or facilitating PPP projects in Indonesia. It is understood that project-
  funded activities were quite effective in improving the enabling environment for PPPs in Indonesia which
  led to building up investor confidence in PPPs in Indonesia and the resulting mobilization of private sector
  financing.



d. Other
  No other impact was identified in the ICR.




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IIFD RE (P157490)



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                               There were significant
                                                                               shortcomings in the M&E
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Modest
                                                                               system's design and
                                                                               implementation.
Quality of ICR                 ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

The ICR identified multiple lessons learned and recommendations in paragraphs 82-94, which are
generally sound, but this review has highlighted four of them as rephrased below:

      A more focused capacity building strategy is required. While good results in terms of
       general PPP training across ministries and agencies has been achieved, a focus on
       developing specific skills in targeted sectors is now required. The development of a
       professional cadre of PPP practitioners sustainably deployed to key sectoral GCAs will
       enhance activities such as project identification, project preparation and contract
       management. Stakeholders expressed that there is varied level of sophistication, and there
       is need to customize training with more relatable local case studies and converting
       current training content into Bahasa Indonesia, as well as allowing participants to conduct the
       examination in Bahasa Indonesia. This would help in improving the understanding of the
       content and encourage wider participation.

      Toward sustained infrastructure finance development, the role of the PPP Unit needs
       to be enhanced. Toward taking the Indonesia PPP Program to the next level, the PPP Unit
       needs to play a proactive and complementary role. The Project has set in place critical
       building blocks, which require to be enhanced and promoted. For instance, there is a need
       to advocate for PPPs and actively engage with line ministries to help them address sector
       policy issues, especially those related to creating a viable and efficient business model for
       PPPs. They need to galvanize political support to reduce the sector funding gaps, as well as
       provide flexible government support mechanisms tailored to sector needs. To accelerate
       the roll out of PPPs, there is need to roll out sector programs for PPPs rather than taking a
       project-by-project approach and ramp up capacity building and project development
       assistance.

      Growth of infrastructure finance requires the creation of a viable business models in
       key sectors. Many sectors have traditionally been dominated by SOEs and other
       government entities for delivery of infrastructure and associated services. These sectors
       have a combination of policy bottlenecks and reluctance for changes in front-end service
       delivery by the private sector. For example, in the health sector thus far most PPP projects

                                                                                                  Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IIFD RE (P157490)



         have been structured as infrastructure-only hospital PPPs, thus constraining the fiscal
         affordability and achieving the full potential for value-for-money. Besides hospitals, there
         could be potential for PPPs in diagnostics and specialty care segments. Therefore, the PPP
         Unit needs to have a proactive policy dialogue with relevant line ministries to move forward
         with PPPs in these sectors.

        Achievement of sustainable results in infrastructure finance development hinge on
         reconciling fiscal management and obligations and the design of sustainable PPPs
         models. Completed infrastructure experience high funding gaps, emanating from high capital
         expenditure needs and/or poor cost-recovery from end customer tariffs, such as in water,
         municipal waste and healthcare. In these cases, there is a need to address the sector
         funding issues. The complexity and magnitude of required funding make it critical that the
         sector level funding issues are addressed squarely to device sector and programmatic
         solutions. There is a need to develop pragmatic PPP options that are not solely based
         on budgetary sources, and where tangible cost efficiencies or revenue enhancements can be
         derived through PPPs models. There could be multiple funding solutions, such as revenue
         sharing from operating assets, asset monetization, blended financing and green grants, that
         could be customized to meet the varying needs of sectors and projects.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed narrative of the Project context and the achieved results. The Project outputs and
outcomes as reported in the ICR were generally evidence-based and internally consistent. Because the choice
of PDO indicators was tentative at appraisal, focus on the results and the outcome in the ICR was challenging.
Moreover, the ICR had significant shortcomings, for instance: (i) the Table 1 on pages 9-12 was the core
material for efficacy, but it was presented under the Chapter 1 discussing project context and development
objectives, (ii) Annex 3 was incomplete as it did not factor in the cost of the BETF; upon request, additional data
and information were provided by the ICR team, and (iii) ten E&S policies were triggered, but were not
assessed in the ICR. Despite these weaknesses, the ICR and the project team provided enough material to
underpin the substantial rating of the project efficacy and efficiency.

Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated as Modest.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                     Page 18 of 19
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
IIFD RE (P157490)




                                                                  Page 19 of 19
