     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LGSP-3 (P159683)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023550

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P159683                                   LGSP-3

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Bangladesh                                Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-59460                                 31-Dec-2021                                        296,718,190.05

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Jan-2017                               31-Dec-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         300,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                          300,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                      299,437,490.56                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Maria Shkaratan            Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objectives (PDO) were to institutionalize the Union Parishad (UP) fiscal transfer
   system, and introduce a fiscal transfer system for Pourashavas on a pilot basis (Financing Agreement, page
   5). The PDO was stated identically in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 1 and page 13).

   The PDO was not revised.



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LGSP-3 (P159683)



   For the purposes of this Implementation Completion Report (ICR) review, the objective will be assessed as
   follows:

   PDO1: To institutionalize the Union Parishad (UP) fiscal transfer system.

   PDO2: To introduce a fiscal transfer system for Pourashavas on a pilot basis.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  14-Dec-2021

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1 Institutionalization of UP Fiscal Transfers (cost at appraisal: US$648.20 million; actual
   cost: US$600.06 million) was designed to provide basic block grants (BBGs) and performance-based
   grants (PBGs) to eligible UPs. The PBGs were to be fully funded by the IDA credit, while the BBGs would
   be financed by both the IDA credit and government contributions through year 3 of the Project and only by
   the government starting in year 4 of the Project, thus institutionalizing UP fiscal transfers. The key planned
   steps in the institutionalization were:

   (i) Creation of the Union Parishad Development Fund (UPDF) budget line for BBG fiscal transfers (using
   IDA funds and government contribution) and its inclusion in the Local Government Division’s (LGD) Annual
   Development Program (ADP). The budget line would be included in the LGD's Medium Term Budgetary
   Framework (MTBF) by year 3 of the Project and used for BBG fiscal transfers by Project closure.

   (ii) Issuance of official guidelines for managing the BBG line item by LGD by year 3 of the Project, and their
   full application from year 4, including the rules for calculating the BBG funding pool, the allocation formula,
   the conditions for access to BBGs, fund flow, and disbursement arrangements.

   (iii) LDG would be responsible for the administration and management of BBGs from year 4 onwards,
   replacing in this capacity the Project Management Unit (PMU).

   Component 2 Audits and Performance Assessments, and Management Information Systems (MIS)
   (cost at appraisal: US$5.14 million; actual cost: US$8.35 million) was to support the institutionalization
   of UP audits and performance assessments, as well as the operationalization of the MIS, through:
   strengthening the process of annual financial auditing, performance assessment, and the preparation of
   annual financial statement (AFS); developing guidelines for reporting on financial audits and for appeals;



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    LGSP-3 (P159683)



  improving performance assessments; and establishing a fully functional MIS in the UPs and LGD, as well as
  a data center, an MIS help desk, and an information and communication technology unit in the LGD.

  Component 3 EBGs to Pilot Pourashavas (cost at appraisal: US$9.88 million; actual cost: US$9.5
  million) was to provide EBGs to 16 qualified Pourashavas for pilot subprojects starting in year 2 of the
  Project. The criteria for qualification included: a satisfactory annual financial audit report, a functioning
  Town-Level Coordination Committee (TLCC), a published annual report, a citizens’ charter, an approved
  budget, and submitted to the LGD (from year 3 of the Project) monthly financial and progress reports. The
  subprojects were selected using participatory approach and included road and drainage improvements (75
  percent of EBGs), water supply investments, and public health services upgrades.

  Component 4 Capacity Development and Project Implementation Support (cost at appraisal:
  US$32.91 million; actual cost: US$19.51 million) was to support capacity building for UP and
  Pourashava officials, training on public FM, project management, and implementation support.

  2. Changes in components during implementation

  The Project’s components remained unchanged during implementation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The appraisal estimate for the IDA credit was US$300.0 million, and actual disbursement at
  closure was US$298.9 million. The difference between the appraisal cost estimate and the disbursement at
  closure in the amount of US$1.1 million was mainly due to the foreign exchange loss, which occurred as a
  result of the depreciation of US$ against the Special Drawing Rights (SDR) over the life of the Project (the
  Project was denominated in SDR) (ICR, page 39).

  Project Financing: The Project was financed by an IDA credit and a Borrower's contribution.

  Borrower/Recipient contribution: The Borrower’s contribution as estimated at appraisal was US$396.1
  million, while the actual contribution at closure was US$338.5 million, with the shortfall of US$57.6 million
  (ICR, page 39). At IEG's request, the team provided information to explain the difference between these two
  amounts, as follows. The impact of COVID-19 created pressure on the budget and led to a change in the
  spending priorities, with the focus on the health care system. As a result, the government budgetary
  allocations for the Project in FY2020-21 and FY2021-22 were lower than originally planned. Also,
  government disbursements for BBGs during FY2021-22 were coming directly from the government budget,
  as opposed to having being transferred from the government contributions to the Project.

  Project Dates: The Project was approved on January 31, 2017 and became effective on March 29, 2017.
  The mid-term review was held on October 21, 2019. The original closing date was December 31, 2021. The
  Project was extended once, for a period of one year (12 months) to December 31, 2022.

  Project Restructurings:

  The Project underwent two restructurings, in December 2021 and in September 2022, with no change to the
  PDO and no reduction in Project scope or ambitions. During both restructurings, the budget was reallocated



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LGSP-3 (P159683)



   across disbursement categories, mainly due to savings under some categories and exchange rates
   fluctuations.

   During the first restructuring, some indicator targets were increased, specifically:

   - For the PDO indicator “Share of beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender, agreeing that UPs are meeting
   local priorities”, the target was increased from 70 percent to 90 percent; the two gender-specific sub-targets
   were increased accordingly.

   - For the intermediate results indicator (IRI) “Percentage of UPs implementing at least one larger scheme
   using 25% of their annual BBG allocation”, the target was increased from 50 percent to 82 percent.

   - For the IRI “Number of new UP functionaries participated in core training (cumulative)”, the target was
   increased from 50,000 participants to 63,000 participants.

   Also, during the first restructuring, the wording of one of the IRIs was modified from “Percentage of the
   schemes selected by women annually” (PAD, page 26) to “Grant to be used for schemes selected by
   women (Percentage)”, without any change in the measurement or the target (Restructuring paper 2021,
   page 9; ICR, page 31).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context: Bangladesh is a centralized state, however, local governments have a
significant role including a statutory responsibility for the provision of basic services to local communities.
The 4,574 Union Parishads (UPs), 95 percent of which have a population between 10,000 and 40,000,
constitute the lowest tier of government in rural and peri-urban areas. The nearly 330 existing Pourashavas
(or municipalities)—80 percent of which have a population of less than 70,000—are the lowest tier of urban
local government. The Government has been long committed to decentralization, and the Project is the
third one in the series of the World Bank operations supporting decentralization and the establishment of
the intergovernmental fiscal transfer system.

Relevance to Government Strategies at approval and closure. The Project was aligned with the
Government’s Seventh (FY2016–2020) and Eighth (FY2020–2025) Five-Year Plans, which emphasized
commitment to strengthening the capacity of local governments to deliver better services to their
constituencies through greater financial and administrative autonomy. The Eighth Five-Year Plan
highlighted the importance of decentralization and outlined the objectives and the related reforms of
strengthening the capacity of local governments to deliver better services through increased financial and
administrative autonomy.

Relevance to the World Bank Group's (WBG’s) Assistance Strategies. The Project was aligned with
the World Bank’s Bangladesh Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY2016–2020, extended to FY2023,
specifically, with the CPF’s Growth Pillar, which had the objectives of improving local governance, revenue
management, and local public services. The Project was also intended to support the Social Inclusion Pillar
of the CPF through community-based initiatives and by strengthening the role of women in decision-

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      LGSP-3 (P159683)



               making. The Project remained aligned with the World Bank Group’s Bangladesh CPF for FY2023–2027,
               specifically with the High Level Outcome A (Improved Private Sector Jobs), Objective 3 (Improved
               Effectiveness of Public Institutions to Deliver Better Services to Citizens and Businesses), which stated that
               “The strong capacity of local governments would allow the public sector to deliver services that are tailored
               to the varying needs of individual regions, districts, and municipalities”. Under this Objective, the WBG
               would “support local governments to strengthen their financial, planning and management capacity to
               deliver quality services in a coordinated, integrated, and accountable manner.” The Systematic Country
               Diagnostic Update (2021) stressed the weak capacity of local government institutions as a constraint for the
               efficiency and targeting of basic infrastructure and social services.

               The Project is the third operation in the series and was built on the experience of the previous two
               operations. The first operation introduced the approach to building the UP fiscal transfer system and
               managing BBGs/PBGs, the second one was aimed at making the system sustainable, and the third
               operation (the reviewed Project) institutionalized the fiscal transfer system. Such a step-by-step approach
               supported the sustainability and potential replication and scale-up of the fiscal transfers.

               The relevance of objectives is rated High because they were aligned with the goals and targets of the
               Government’s Seventh and Eighth Five-Year Plans and with the key objectives of the WBG’s CPF for
               FY2016-20 (extended to FY2023), as well as of the WBG’s CPF for FY2023-27.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To institutionalize the Union Parishad (UP) fiscal transfer system.

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change (ToC) for the Project was developed for the ICR. It showed a direct, logical causal link
                             from inputs to intermediate outcomes, and to the PDO outcomes of the Project. There were two results
                             chains. The first results chain showed that the agreement on phasing the institutionalization process,
                             technical assistance (TA) with the guidelines, LDG capacity building, and UP annual audits and performance
                             assessments (inputs) would lead to the intermediate outcomes of the developed Guidelines, incorporation of
                             the UP MIS into LDG MIS, strengthened LDG institutional capacity for UP BBG management, increased
                             government funding of BBGs/PBGs, and a developed budget framework for UPDA. This would in turn support
                             the achievement of the first PDO objective: UP fiscal transfers are institutionalized and mainstreamed. The
                             second results chain demonstrated that financing the Pourashavas’ grants, capacity building for
                             Pourashavas, and TA for Pourashvas’ operations manual (inputs) would lead to the intermediate outcomes of
                             producing Pourashavas’ annual financial audits, allocation and disbursement of the PBGs, and strengthened


                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LGSP-3 (P159683)



Pourashavas’ planning, budgeting, and financial management. This would in turn support the achievement of
the second PDO objective of the introduction of the Pourashavas’ fiscal transfer system on a pilot basis.

The ToC is logical, covers all main inputs, outputs, intermediate outcomes, as well as the PDO outcomes; it
also shows the generalized links from inputs to outputs, and to the PDO outcomes. The critical assumptions
are also listed. The deficiency of the ToC is as follows: the links from inputs to outcomes, and to PDO
outcomes are limited to the generalized arrows from the block of inputs under each results chain to the block
of intermediate outcomes, and to the final PDO outcome. This way, the ToC essentially consists of the lists of
inputs, outputs and outcomes (under each PDO objective) and does not specify the causal links.

The Intermediate Outcomes and Outputs under Objective 1 were achieved, specifically:

- From FY2019–2020 onward, BBG and PBG allocations became a sub-line item in the LGD’s MTBF and
ADP.

- Comprehensive UP’s Development Assistance Guidelines (UPDAG) were developed and approved,
reflecting the Project-based (and series-based) reforms.

- The LGD took over the UP audits and performance assessments from the fourth year of the Project: in the
following years, private sector-conducted audits were completed and the related costs were budgeted through
the UPDA within the ADP.

- The LGD’s capacity to manage UP fiscal transfers was strengthened with the help of Project-supported
training, and the LGD staff is now managing the UP’s BBGs and PBGs.

- The Project’s MIS was incorporated into the LGD’s MIS.

- The average performance score of UPs nationwide (based on 40 point scale) was 31.49 at closure, as
compared to the target of 30. The target was exceeded.

- The annual percentage increase in UP own-source revenues was 52.86 percent at closure, compared to the
target of five percent. The target was significantly exceeded. The ICR explained it by the above-expected UP
budgetary performance, including increased budget revenues due to improved service delivery (resulting from
larger BBGs and better UP planning) (ICR, page 31).

- The grants to be used for schemes (sub-projects) selected by women amounted to 75.24 percent of the total
number of grants at closure, as compared to the target of 38 percent. The target was exceeded.

- Percentage of UPs implementing at least one larger scheme using 25 percent of their annual BBG allocation
was 90 percent at closure, as compared to the target of 82 percent. The target was exceeded.

The PDO outcomes of the Project under Objective 1 were achieved, specifically:

- The UP fiscal system was institutionalized and mainstreamed by Project closure, as targeted: (i) the BBGs
were fully funded through national budgetary allocations; (ii) the UP annual financial audits and performance
assessments became regular government procedures; and (iii) the BBGs and associated processes were
managed by the LGD.



                                                                                                 Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LGSP-3 (P159683)



- The share of beneficiaries agreeing that UPs were meeting local priorities amounted to 90.5 percent, as
compared to the target of 90 percent. The target was exceeded. The related gender-specific targets were also
exceeded.

The ICR pointed out the difficulty the government was facing in sustaining BBGs at the same level (at BDT
8,000 million) as in the first year of their full funding from the budget. The following years’ funding was 30–40
percent lower, mainly due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, the government remains
committed to sustaining annual BBGs in the range of BDT 6,000 million to BDT 8,000 million (as reflected in
the LGD’s MTBF), which is broadly commensurate with the previous funding levels. In relation to this issue,
the government has strengthened the LGD’s capacity to manage UP fiscal transfers through additional
staffing and is planning to improve the staffing further. (ICR, page 13)

Overall, under Objective 1, all the Project’s targets were exceeded. The COVID-caused difficulty of sustaining
the level of BBG financing in recent years is considered to be a minor efficacy shortcoming.

Rating. The Project exceeded its Objective 1 target; however, due to the minor shortcoming of the decrease
in the level of BBG financing due to the impact of COVID-19, its efficacy is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To introduce a fiscal transfer system for Pourashavas on a pilot basis.

Rationale
Please see the discussion of the TOC under Objective 1, Original Project.

The Intermediate Outcomes and Outputs under Objective 2 were achieved, specifically:

- One annual financial audit was conducted in each participating Pourashava, as targeted. The target was
achieved.

The PDO Outcome of the Project under Objective 2 was achieved, specifically:

- The fiscal transfer system was piloted in 16 Pourashava (using EBGs), and, as a result, urban local
governments were strengthened through predictable annual funding and accountability. The pilots showed
that ownership, participation, and accountability improved. Accountability in FM was enhanced through
regular annual financial audits carried out by private auditing firms. At closure, two EBG tranches were
released per year, on a transparent and predictable basis, to participating Pourashavas, as targeted. The
target was achieved. It is worth noting that the EBGs were used for municipal subprojects, selected through
participatory planning processes, and included investments in road and drainage improvements (75 percent
of EBGs), water supply, and public health.



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                LGSP-3 (P159683)



                            Overall, under Objective 2, all targets were achieved.

                            Rating. The Project achieved its targets under Objective 2, and its efficacy rating is High.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Under Objective 1, the efficacy is Substantial: the objectives were fully achieved, including the Project’s key
                            policy objective to institutionalize and mainstream the BBGs; however, the level of the BBG financing was not
                            fully sustained. Under Objective 2, the efficacy is High: the fiscal transfer system was successfully piloted,
                            showing that it improved ownership, participation, and accountability, as expected. The overall efficacy is
                            Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   I. Economic Analysis.

   No economic analysis was conducted at appraisal. At closure, the economic analysis was prepared for the sub-
   project investments, as a proxy for the achievement of Objective 1. Due to data availability, the analysis focused
   on service improvements in three sectors: water and sanitation, education, and village road climate proofing.
   The benefits were estimated in the following way: for improved water and sanitation, they were based on
   reduced mortality and morbidity; for road climate proofing, they were calculated using the level of risk of storms
   and floods and the related reduced expected damage in terms of lives lost, injuries, economic losses, and
   foregone economic benefits; and for education, they accounted for expected increases in earnings and life
   expectancy.

   The results of the economic analysis show that net economic benefits from investments in the three sectors
   analyzed justify the entire fiscal transfers to UPs under the Project. With the discount rate of nine percent and
   the time horizon of 25 years, the EIRR was 19 percent, the NPV amounted to US$205.1 million, and the benefit-
   cost ratio was 1.5. With the alternative discount rate of six percent and the same time horizon of 25 years, the
   EIRR remained at 19 percent, the NPV was US$358.4 million, and the benefit-cost ratio was 1.8. The ICR
   pointed out that substantial benefits had likely accrued from investments in other sectors but those could not
   have been estimated due to the lack of data (ICR, pages 40-49).


                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LGSP-3 (P159683)



II. Administrative efficiency.

The Project was able to achieve its objectives within the original financing envelope. The only extension of the
closing date, amounting to 12 months, was due to the impact of COVID-19. The ICR reported that with the
exception of the closing date extension, “the UP and Pourashava fiscal transfers reaped allocative efficiencies
and were executed in a timely manner” (ICR, page 15), and the World Bank's administrative costs were low at
0.02 percent of the disbursed funds, while the Project supervision costs only amounted to 0.17 percent, which is
in line with the Bank’s Regional benchmarks (ICR, page 15).

The Project’s efficiency is rated as Substantial. While the ex-post EIRRs were above the opportunity cost of
capital, which is reflected in the discount rate used in the economic analysis (nine and six percent), and the
efficiency of implementation was high overall; there was a 12-month delay in the Project closing date.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     94.00
 ICR Estimate                                              19.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives: High

Efficacy: Substantial

Efficiency: Substantial

Outcome: Satisfactory.

The rating is due to the achievement of the Project objectives as substantial with minor deficiencies and a minor
shortcoming in Project efficiency: a 12-month extension of the closure date due to COVID-19. Also, the
information about the Project’s economic efficiency at appraisal was not available.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LGSP-3 (P159683)




7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial. This risk is present due to limitations for maintaining the level of financing of the BBGs and PBGs
from the government budget. From FY2020 to 2021, the level of BBG funding decreased because of the
budgetary constraints brought on mainly by COVID-19. This risk can arise again when the government faces
a budget shortfall. However, sustained MTBF allocations provide evidence of the government ownership and
commitment to UP fiscal transfers; and the institutional framework for the transfers (embodied in the UPDAG
and MTBF) is likely to hold up.

Policy and institutional. There is a risk that the piloted fiscal transfers to Pourashavas will not be scaled-up.
This is because such scale-up would need to be based on improved enabling environment. A follow-up
support and an explicit institutionalization agenda will be necessary to ensure a scale-up for the Pourashava
EBGs. However, there are no current plans for such support. (ICR, page 24)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Project design was based on the previous two operations of the series, and the lessons were
  embedded in the Project. The preparation was comprehensive and thorough, and as a result, no changes
  in design were needed during implementation (except the increase in targets due to the above-expected
  results and the minor reallocations of the budget across categories due to savings). Preparation and
  appraisal included full assessments of fiduciary, social, and environmental issues and monitoring and
  implementation (M&E) requirements and frameworks. The fiduciary risk assessment highlighted low UP
  and Pourashava FM capacities and therefore the need in capacity building. Procurement-related risks
  were identified, and mitigation measures proposed (specifically, procurement monitoring and opting for
  best and final offers). Social and environmental management assessments were based on nationwide
  consultations with a range of stakeholders and highlighted the need for sound screening to be included at
  all levels and for the use of sub-project-specific environmental management plans. (ICR, page 23)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR reported that implementation support missions were regular, timely, appropriately resourced, and
 solution oriented. There were 12 implementation support missions over the life of the Project, enabling the
 team to keep close track of the problems encountered and agree on timely solutions. The World Bank
 adapted its implementation support mission modalities to the constraints created by the COVID-19
 pandemic. The problems that arose in connection with the Project’s capacity building efforts were flagged
 by the World Bank, and slippages in the process of institutionalization and proposed solutions were


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LGSP-3 (P159683)



 discussed with the government timely. The World Bank ensured that the procedures and formulae for BBG
 allocation that were being institutionalized through the UPDAG were consistent with lessons learned
 through the successive LGSP operations. (ICR, page 24)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Overall, the Project’s results framework (RF) reflected the logic of Project interventions in the PAD and was
 sufficiently linked to the PDO. Some of the RF indicators were quantitative, and some used the “Yes”-“No”
 scale, which was appropriate considering the institutional development nature of the Project. All indicators
 were time-bound, had baselines and targets, and were attributable to the Project. There were two gender-
 disaggregated indicators. The RF measured the PDO outcomes, intermediate outcomes, and outputs. The
 ICR reported that data collection methods, and frequency of and responsibility for data collection were
 defined for each objective and each expected outcome in the PAD (ICR, page 27).

 No deficiencies in M&E design were discovered during implementation. The minor adjustments of the RF
 during the life of the Project were made for the following reasons: the targets for one PDO indicator and two
 IRIs were increased due to better than expected outcomes, and the wording of one of the IRIs was slightly
 modified for further clarity.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR reported that the M&E system provided important inputs to Project-related decision-making.
  Specifically, it was focused on the benchmarks to be achieved, thus ensuring that the decision making is
  timely informed and actions are taken. The benchmarks included the preparation of the UPDAG, the
  inclusion of BBGs in the LGD’s MTBF, and the need to strengthen the LGD’s capacities to adhere to the
  UPDAG and administer BBGs. Given the government’s commitment to comply with the Financing
  Agreement, the value of the M&E system was strengthened by the inclusion of the institutionalization
  benchmarks as dated covenants from the Financing Agreement. (ICR, page 20-21)



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR pointed out that the M&E data and reports were used to track progress and make decisions
  throughout implementation. The mid-term review (MTR) findings were based on M&E results, which
  provided the basis for a revision of the draft UPDAG. They also contributed to the LGD taking on full
  responsibility for managing UP audits and for ensuring that the LGSP UP MIS was incorporated in

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LGSP-3 (P159683)



  LGD’s information management processes. The M&E system was integrated into the LGD M&E system
  to continue to be used for M&E of UP activities. (ICR, page 20-21)



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards. The ICR reported that the Project was classified as Environmental
   Category B and triggered Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01). The Environmental and Social
   Management Framework (ESMF) used for the second project in the series was revised and updated for the
   Project. All schemes (the UP subprojects) were to be subjected to environmental and social screenings,
   which were completed on time. The schemes' cycles were also in compliance with the project’s ESMF.

   The ratings for Project’s compliance with environmental and social safeguards were either Moderately
   Satisfactory (MS) or Satisfactory throughout Project life. The MS ratings were linked to: (a) delays in
   recruitment of environmental and social staff at the beginning of Project implementation; and (b) higher-
   than-acceptable levels of arsenic contamination in 15 percent of the tube wells financed by UPs and
   Pourashavas from their BBG/EBG allocations. The latter issue was quickly addressed by the PMU through
   an information dissemination program.

   The grievance redress mechanisms (GRMs) were established in all UPs and Pourashavas. Given the small
   size of most of the subprojects and their limited negative impacts, only four grievances were registered;
   these were related to the inconvenience caused by road improvements, all of which were resolved at the
   UP level. No cases of fraud were reported. Any anomalies noticed during implementation were reported by
   the auditors and satisfactorily resolved during the audit appeal processes. (ICR, page 21-22)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM).

   The ICR reported that at appraisal, the FM in UPs and Pourashavas was assessed as the principal
   fiduciary risk. Risk mitigation measures included conducting annual financial audits of local government
   institutions, enhancing accountability of the UPs and Pourashavas to local citizens, mentoring by central
   government institutions and Project officials, and providing targeted capacity building. By closure, most of
   the UPs were able to prepare AFSs within one month of the closing of the financial year.

   During implementation, Project’s FM was rated either Moderately Satisfactory (MS) or Satisfactory. The
   MS ratings were largely related to delays in the recruitment of FM staff. At the UP and Pourashava levels,
   FM was robust. UP financial audits, conducted every year by private sector audit firms, showed that most
   UPs received an unqualified or qualified audit opinion. In cases where the adverse audit opinions were
   upheld after appeals, the UPs in question did not receive their BBGs. The same applied to the 16

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LGSP-3 (P159683)



   participating Pourashavas. At the national level, unaudited IFRs were submitted on a timely basis and were
   sound. Project financial statements were audited regularly and received unqualified audit opinions. Any
   material issues arising from the audits were addressed. (ICR, page 22)

   Procurement

   Procurement ratings were either Moderately Satisfactory or Satisfactory. UPs and Pourashavas procured
   mostly small works and goods packages that were financed by their BBG/PBG/EBG allocations. PMU-level
   procurement included important goods packages (for UP computers and information and communication
   technology) and services, such as audit firms and MIS consultants. There were minor deficiencies in
   procurement at the start of implementation: specifically, there were delays in procuring large packages,
   often because of unfilled vacancies in the procurement evaluation committees. (ICR, page 22)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons were derived from the ICR (ICR, pages 24-25):

1. Successful institutionalization takes time and requires extensive consultations. The
principles and processes underlying the UP fiscal transfer system were introduced through the first
project in the series, sustained under the second project, and then institutionalized through the third
project (the Project evaluated in this ICR review). Therefore, the Project was built on the experience
of managing BBGs/PBGs gained over ten years, providing the government and the Bank with a
shared and evidence-based understanding of the UP fiscal transfer system’s institutionalization. In
addition, extensive consultations and coordination were necessary, bringing together several central
government ministries and agencies. The lesson is that builidng institutional reforms on solid
experience and stakeholder engagement can increase their success and sustainability.


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       LGSP-3 (P159683)



2. The Project demonstrated that the investment project financing (IPF) instrument, combined
with the use of Financing Agreement covenants, can be the right modality for
institutionalizing the project-based systems and processes into government frameworks. It is
often assumed that the World Bank’s programs for results (PforRs) or development policy operation
(DPO) financing instruments are better suited to achieving institutional or policy objectives. However,
IPF operations can achieve the same results, especially alongside appropriately designed Financing
Agreements. The use of dated covenants in IPF Financing Agreements can provide a clear timeline
for institutionalization and incentives for the counterpart to meet institutional objectives.

3. A well-designed and institutionalized system can be scaled up and replicated. The ongoing
World Bank Local Government COVID-19 Response and Recovery Project replicated the good
practice under the Project to benefit 40 million people in all municipalities and City Corporations in
Bangladesh. The good practices of the Project were also incorporated in the World Bank’s ongoing
Bangladesh Enhancing Investments and Benefits for Early Years Project. Outside of the World
Bank, the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) has adopted the LGSP approach for its
Upazila Parishad Governance Project. The lesson is that well thought through and well-designed
projects can provide benefits beyond their lives, be used by many new operations, and scaled up.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided sufficient technical details to understand the Project design and value-added; a clear
justification of the PDO relevance, efficacy, and efficiency; comprehensive and robust evidence on most
aspects of Project’s evaluation; and a clear linking of evidence to findings. The ICR is technical, analytical, and
has internal consistency. The lessons are linked to the implementation narrative and useful for future lending
operations. The ICR is succinct, written clearly, and provides all the information necessary for the ICR Review.
The ToC would benefit from providing detailed links from one level to the next one (from inputs to
outputs/intermediate outcomes, and then to PDO outcomes).

Overall, the ICR quality is rated as Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 14 of 15
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
LGSP-3 (P159683)




                                                                  Page 15 of 15
