     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AG & RURAL DEVT (P112526)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0023562

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Project Name
 P112526                                 AG & RURAL DEVT

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 Kosovo                                  Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-50050,IDA-60170,TF-16235,TF-        31-Jul-2017                                         44,162,539.81
 A4664

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 14-Jun-2011                             31-Dec-2022

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                        20,150,000.00                                    10,444,828.13

 Revised Commitment                         49,069,781.53                                     8,832,060.90

 Actual                                     44,162,539.81                                     7,880,937.17




 Prepared by             Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Richard Anson           Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




 P132653_TBL
 Project ID                              Project Name
 P132653                                 AF-DANISH SUPPORT TO RDGP ( P132653 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                              0

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)

                                                                                               Page 1 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AG & RURAL DEVT (P112526)



 25-Sep-2013

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                        0.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                                         0.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                                     0.00                                                0.00




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO), as stated in the Financing Agreement (FA, 2011, p. 5) and the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD, 2011, p. 5), for this Kosovo Agriculture and Rural Development Project
   (KARDP) was:

   “to assist the Recipient to promote competitiveness and growth in the livestock and horticulture sub-sectors
   over the next decade through implementation of selected measures of its agricultural strategy and institutional
   development”.

   While the project had seven restructurings during implementation, the PDO was revised once, during the third
   restructuring (2017), coupled with some revisions in the results framework and associated performance
   indicators and targets. The revised PDO (2017) was: “to improve productivity of and access to markets by
   project beneficiaries in the horticulture and livestock subsectors of Kosovo and strengthen the institutional
   capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Development.”

   For purposes of assessing the extent to which the revised PDO was achieved, this review will parse the
   revised PDO into three objectives:

   Objective 1: to improve productivity by project beneficiaries in the horticulture and livestock subsectors of
   Kosovo;

   Objective 2: to improve access to markets by project beneficiaries in the horticulture and livestock subsectors
   of Kosovo;

   Objective 3: to strengthen the institutional capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural
   Development.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
                                                                                                       Page 2 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AG & RURAL DEVT (P112526)



  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  14-Jun-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Transferring Knowledge to the Rural Sector (Appraisal cost: US$2.50 million,
   including US$2.18 million IDA; Additional Financing/AF: US$0.72 million IDA; Actual cost: US$2.53
   million IDA).

   This component:

   (i) strengthened the knowledge of farm operators, commercial and semi-commercial agro-processing
   enterprises and municipal advisors to effectively plan investments and utilize financial support available
   under Component 2 of the project, other donor-supported grant schemes as well as future grants schemes
   supported under the European Union’s (EU’s) Instrument for Pre-Accession for Rural Development
   (IPARD);

   (ii) strengthened the capacity of municipal advisors to provide guidance and advice to farmers on sound
   investment planning.

   Component 2: Enhancing Investments to Promote Sustainable Rural Development (Appraisal cost:
   US$ 31.23 million, including US$16.86 million IDA3; US$7.98 million DANIDA TF; subsequently also
   US$13.7 IDA AF; Actual cost: US$32.12 million IDA and US$2.03 million, DANIDA TF).

   This component: (i) fostered growth and competitiveness in the rural sector of Kosovo through the
   promotion of modern agricultural technologies among farm operators and agro-processing enterprises; (ii)
   built the capacity and functioning of the Managing Authority (MA) and the Paying Agency (PA) within the
   Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Development (MAFRD) to meet IPARD requirements. Rural
   Development Grant Program (RDGP) sub-component supported matching grants to finance investment
   proposals in line with Measure 2 (support for “restructuring physical potential” at farm level) and Measure 4
   (support for “processing and marketing”) in the milk, fruits, vegetables and vineyards sub-sectors.

   The Institutional Capacity Building sub-component aimed to support capacity building of the MA and PA
   within the MAFRD to manage grant programs supported by the government, the project, other donors and
   eventually future schemes under IPARD.

   Component 3: Project Management, Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation (Appraisal cost:
   US$1.30 million, including US$1.11 million IDA; Actual cost: US$3.28 million IDA).

   This component: (i) supported establishment of a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) within the MAFRD for
   the daily management, administration, and coordination, including procurement, financial, monitoring and
   evaluation, and audit activities; (ii) promoted public awareness of project activities.




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AG & RURAL DEVT (P112526)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Costs: The total project cost at approval was US$20.15 million. Due to additional financing (IDA
  and Trust Funds), project restructuring, revised costs, and implementation performance, the revised and
  final project cost at closing was US$43.93 million (ICR, Annex 3, or about 218% of the approval amount).

  Financing: At approval, the IDA credit (No. 50050) was US$20.15, which was subsequently supplemented
  by two Trust Fund allocations (from the Danish Government: $6.79 million; $2.03 million), and an additional
  IDA credit (No. 60170) of US$22.0 million, with Government counterpart contribution of US$0.51 million and
  contribution from local communities of US$5.17 million, for a total financing of US$56.7 million. Due to
  restructuring, project performance, non-allocations from Government and local communities, by closing the
  financing gap, the revised financing was US$49.1 million (ICR, p. 2: IDA: $41.86 million; Danish TF: $7.21
  million; Government and local communities: $0).

  Borrower/Recipient Contribution: While the Government and local community counterpart contributions
  were originally US$5.67 million ($0.5 million; $5.17 million, respectively), the actual amounts were zero. The
  ICR author clarified to the IEG evaluator that the Government contributed substantial funds to financing the
  national level Rural Development Grant Program/RDGP and the beneficiaries financed about 50% of the
  private investments (although not reflected in the ICR).

  Dates: The project was approved on June 14, 2011, became effective on May 3, 2012, due to delays in
  meeting conditions of effectiveness. The original closing date was July 31, 2017, with the actual closing
  date of December 31, 2022. The project was extended for 5.5 years (66 months).

  Restructurings: Significant Changes During Implementation (see ICR for details: paras. 15 – 33; Annex 6).

  During the ten-year implementation period of the ARDP, it had several changes, including seven
  restructurings (with one level 1 restructuring), due to several reasons, which are summarized below.

  First Restructuring (Sept. 2013): This included an Additional Financing (AF) grant from the Danish
  Government (Euro 6.2 million) to scale up the outreach and impact of the RDGP, and a revision to the
  Results Framework (RF) to introduce improved outcome and output level indicators to better capture project
  results.

  Second Restructuring (March, 2017): A second AF/Danish grant was processed (Euro 1.78 million) to
  further expand the scope of the RDGP, and revised targets in the RF to reflect the larger number of
  potential beneficiaries.

  Third Restructuring (April, 2017): A third AF was approved by IDA (for Euro 20.8 million/US$22 million),
  coupled with a restructuring (Level 1), which introduced several substantive changes: the PDO and Results
  Framework were revised to provide a clearer basis for assessment (e.g., all 4 PDO indicators were revised;
  seven new indicators were introduced, consistent with the revised PDO); the scope of project activities was
  expanded, including activities to: (i) strengthen value chain linkages in the horticulture subsector; (ii) support
  a new irrigation sector component, which triggered two additional safeguard policies, and which included:
  rehabilitation and revitalization of the Radoniqi-Dukagjini Irrigation Schemes (RDIS) and preparation of the
  National Irrigation Strategy and Irrigation Master Plan; (iii) provide additional capacity building of the
  MAFRD; (iv) provide training and lab equipment to the Kosovo Institute of Agriculture/KIA to promote food



                                                                                                      Page 4 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AG & RURAL DEVT (P112526)



   safety and quality standards in the livestock and horticulture subsectors. This additional project support,
   especially for irrigation, was enabled by extending the project’s closing date to June 30, 2021.

   Fourth Restructuring (June, 2017): This revision was requested by Government to change the project’s
   closing date, to March 31, 2019.

   Fifth Restructuring (March, 2019): The original IDA credit (50050) closing date was extended to September
   30, 2020.

   Sixth Restructuring (February, 2021): The IDA Credit (60170) closing date was extended to June 30, 2022;
   there was budget reallocation between grant disbursement categories; revisions in the RF.

   Seventh Restructuring (June, 2022): AF Credit (IDA-60170) closing date was extended to December 31,
   2022; allowing additional time for an additional round of RD grants; budget reallocation between grant
   disbursement categories; revisions of the RF.

   Split Rating: Due to various substantive revisions during the project’s third restructuring, including AF and
   expanded scope of project activities (see above), and changes in the RF, IEG concurs with the ICR that a
   split evaluation was appropriate.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context: At the time of preparation and appraisal of the ARDP (in 2010 and 2011),
Kosovo was one of the poorest countries in Europe (with the lowest GDP per capita), high poverty rate
(30% in 2011), especially in rural areas, high rural unemployment rate (40%). Agriculture was facing several
challenges impeding competitiveness and preventing it from meeting its production potential. Before the
1990s, Kosovo was largely food self-sufficient and a large agricultural exporter. However, after the war,
traditional markets were lost, livestock numbers plummeted, and agricultural land area dropped drastically.
The agriculture sector has been characterized by unfavorable farm structures, outdated farm technologies
and practices, lack of technical expertise, weak rural infrastructure, a rudimentary rural advisory system and
limited access to credit and investment capital.

Relevance to Government Strategies: The PDO was highly relevant to operationalizing Government’s
Agricultural and Rural Development Plan/ARDP (2007 – 2013, updated in 2009), which was addressing the
country’s main developmental constraints (ref. above), and helping to align Kosovo’s rural sector with the 4
axes of the EU’s IPARD: competitiveness; enhanced environment and land use; rural diversification and
quality of rural life; community-based development strategies. All four axis were being supported by eight
measures to promote rural growth and competitiveness, including a matching rural development grant
program (RDGP) to strengthen value chains in the horticulture and livestock subsectors, and to support key
institutional reforms of the MAFRD, including establishing and strengthening an effective Paying Agency/PA
to evolve into the IPARD PA (ICR, para. 3). Accordingly, the Government of Kosovo requested assistance
from the World Bank and the Government of Denmark to help operationalize/finance its ARDP. The revised
PDO also is fully consistent with the NARP (2014 – 2020), which includes various strategic measures


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 25
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      AG & RURAL DEVT (P112526)



               directly supported by the restructured project (including investments supported by RDGP, irrigation,
               expanded private sector environment and role).

               Relevance to Bank Assistance Strategies: The PDO was also highly relevant to the Bank’s Kosovo Interim
               Strategy Note (ISN, FY10 -FY11), which identified two core priorities which supported the transition from
               post-conflict reconstruction to sustainable development: (i) accelerating economic growth, which is broad-
               based and employment-generating; and (ii) strengthening governance, public institutions, and social
               cohesion. The KARDP contributed to both pillars of the ISN by promoting growth and competitiveness in the
               agricultural sector, which would contribute to improved employment and income opportunities among rural
               communities and building and strengthening institutional capacity within the MAFRD and enabling it to
               implement and meet IPARD requirements.

               The revised PDO from the third restructuring (April 2017) was highly relevant to the Country Partnership
               Framework (CPF) for the period of FY2017–2021, Systematic Country Diagnostic (2017), and remained
               highly relevant at project closing with the Bank’s recently updated CPF. The overarching aim of the CPF
               was to provide improved opportunities for a better life through accelerating export-oriented and sustainable
               growth. Under Focus Area 1 (Enhancing Conditions for Accelerated Private Sector Growth and
               Employment), the revised PDO was directly relevant to Objective 1 (Improve productivity of the agriculture
               sector), as it seeks to promote growth and competitiveness in the agricultural sector by increasing
               productivity of beneficiary farmers and agro-processors and expanding access to markets -- both domestic
               and international -- as well as leverage private investments in the sector. Under this Objective 1, the CPF
               stressed the need to improve productivity in the horticulture and livestock sub-sectors and strengthen the
               institutional capacity of the MAFRD. This covers all the elements of the revised PDO. The design of the
               third AF (2017) also addressed positively the CPF’s Objective 3/Focus Area 1: to enhance employment
               opportunities and inclusion for youth and women; the grant program encourages participation of these
               groups in the project through additional targeted support.

               In summary, the Project’s PDO was highly relevant to the country’s development context, the Government’s
               country and sectoral strategies and to the Bank’s assistance strategy. The PDO was pitched at an
               appropriate level to address key development constraints in a strategic sector.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To promote competitiveness and growth in the livestock and horticulture sub-sectors over the next decade
                             through implementation of selected measures of its agricultural strategy and institutional development.

                             Rationale

                                                                                                                           Page 6 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AG & RURAL DEVT (P112526)



Based on evidence provided in the ICR, and other project-related documents, the achievement of the original
PDO and revised PDO is substantial. The section below summarizes the assessment of the original and
revised PDO and associated performance indicators.

The PAD did not include a theory of change (ToC) because it was not required when the PAD was written.
The ICR reconstructed a ToC for the project’s original objective, which was consistent with the overall
objective, strategy and components (ICR, Figure 1, paras. 6 and 7).

Theory of Change: The ToC identifies clearly prioritized components and supporting activities to help
achieve the original PDO, involving:

(a) transferring knowledge to the rural sector through prioritized activities (e.g., provision of training in
livestock production, horticulture, agro-processing; training to farmers and enterprises for preparing grant
proposals/business plans; regional knowledge exchange/study tours; strengthening rural advisory centers;
provision of key equipment);

(b) enhancing investments to promote sustainable rural development through prioritized activities (e.g., rural
development grant program, providing investment support through matching grants for farm operators and for
agricultural enterprises/processors, and which correspond to “measures 2/restructuring physical potential”
and “measures 4/improving processing and marketing of agricultural products”, respectively);

(c) strengthening institutions, especially the paying unit/PU and Managing Authority/MA of MAFRD for RD
support.

These above activities were expected to generate strategic outputs (including farmers and enterprises
provided with investment support; increased investments by farmers and enterprises in improved products
and techniques), and to contribute to the outcomes of enhanced competitiveness in livestock and horticulture
subsectors and of stronger institutional capacities in MAFRD to manage agriculture and RD
support/investments.

The critical assumptions made at preparation/appraisal to ensure causality and linkages between activities,
outputs and outcomes, and their corresponding attribution logic, generally were clear and sound (ICR, para.
7). It would have been useful to indicate more explicitly the strategies/activities for promoting/securing
expanded access to finance from the banks. The positive progress toward achieving the original objective is
highlighted in the following PDO and key output and intermediate level indicators (ICR, Annex 8, Table 1):

Outputs

(i) 3050 client days of training provided, exceeding the original target of 2000. Target exceeded.

(ii) 280 client days of training provided for females, exceeding the original target of 200.

(iii) 244 trainers trained to support grant application process, exceeding the original target of 200.

(iv) 385 extension staff trained on extension and technical services, exceeding the original target of 200




                                                                                                     Page 7 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AG & RURAL DEVT (P112526)



(v) 3172 farmers, entrepreneurs and association members trained for grant applications, exceeding the
original target of 3088.

(vi) 611 farmers and enterprises received investment support (under “Measures 2”), almost achieving the
original target of 637.

(vii) 77 farmers and enterprises received investment support (under Measures 4), achieving the original target
of 76.

(viii) 17 EUR million increase in investments by farmers and enterprises in improved products and/or
techniques, almost achieving the target of 18.5 EUR million.

Outcomes

(i) 697 farmers and enterprises adopted improved products and/or techniques, almost achieving the original
target of 713.

(ii) 21% of milk sold to processors (livestock proxy), from a baseline of 19%, not achieving the original target
of 24%.

(iii) 3637 orchards planted in the country (horticulture proxy) (has.), from a baseline of 3400, not achieving the
original target of 3800.

(iv) The project had 3697 direct project beneficiaries, not achieving the original target of 4245. The project
had 24% female beneficiaries, exceeding the very low original target of 11%.

Based on the above performance indicators, the efficacy with which the original PDO was achieved is rated
Substantial. Of the 4 PDO level indicators/targets, 4 were substantially achieved (above 87%); of the eight
intermediate targets (which were mostly output-oriented), five were achieved/exceeded, and three were
substantially achieved (above 86%). These achievements and supporting evidence also reflect the
soundness of the ToC outlined above. It is noted that the above measures do not capture/reflect adequately
measurable aspects of the stated objectives and specific strategy and institutional measures, hence
reinforcing the rationale for restructuring the project, with revised PDO and indicators. Notwithstanding this
shortcoming, the ICR provides adequate evidence to justify the proposed rating.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve productivity by project beneficiaries in the horticulture and livestock subsectors of Kosovo.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change: The third restructuring involved revisions to the theory of change, which are highlighted
in the ICR. The main differences with the original ToC involved the following aspects: the PDO outcomes

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AG & RURAL DEVT (P112526)



were simplified and re-focused for measurable results, to emphasize explicitly: (i) increases in productivity in
the livestock and horticulture subsectors; (ii) improved access to markets as reflected by indicators involving:
increase in milk sales to processing companies; sales of horticulture production by farmers to aggregators;
(iii) strengthened institutional capacity of MAFRD, as measured by more tangible indicators: preparation of
the RDGP; and support to irrigation systems for expanded irrigated agriculture (plans, rehabilitation works).
Subsequent project restructurings did not modify the revised ToC.

More specifically, Figure 2 in the ICR shows the ToC and the linkages between this revised objective with
respect to relevant activities (e.g., training, regional knowledge exchange, strengthening of rural advisory
centers), which contributed to strategic outputs (e.g., farmers, entrepreneurs, extension workers, municipal
advisors trained, extension workers certified), which together contributed to the outcomes (e.g., increased
crop and milk yields) and contributed to the corresponding revised objective 1 (of increased productivity).

The critical assumptions underlying the revised ToC to ensure explicit causality and linkages between
activities, outputs and the 3 core outcomes, and their corresponding attribution logic, and assumptions, were
clear and sound, and reflects an improvement in the original ToC (ICR, paras. 32 and 33, and Figure 2).

The progress toward achieving the revised objective is highlighted in the following output and outcome level
indicators (ICR, Annex 8, Table 2) (and which correspond to the 3 objectives of the revised PDO):

Outputs

(i) Increased No. of extension staff trained in agricultural technical topics: BL: 629; Revised Target: 1000;
Actual: 1146; % of Target: 115%; (ref. of which women: BL: 149; Revised Target: 200; Actual: 298: % of
Revised Target: 149%)

(ii) No. of extension staff receiving certificates: BL: 0; Target: Revised 300; Actual: 320; % of target: 107%;
(ref. of which women: BL: 0; Target: 100; Actual: 112; % of Target: 112%)

(iii) No. of livestock farmers adopting improved agricultural technologies (under measure 101): BL: 200;
Revised Target: 500; Actual: 364; % of Target: 73%;

(iv) No. of livestock farmers adopting improved agricultural technologies (under measure 103): BL: 45;
Revised Target: 54; Actual: 58; % of Target: 107%;

(v) No. of farmers adopting improved agricultural technologies for improved horticulture production: BL: 374;
Revised Target: 724; Actual: 751; % of Target: 104%;

Outcomes

(i) Yields of key crops supported by project (tons/ha.): BL: 23; Revised Target: 25; Actual: 40: % of Revised
Target: 160%;

(ii) Yields of milk production per animal on livestock farms supported by project (liters/cow): BL: 11.2; Revised
Target: 16; Actual: 14.3; % of Target: 89%;




                                                                                                    Page 9 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AG & RURAL DEVT (P112526)



(iii) No. of farmers adopting improved agricultural technologies: BL: 611; Revised Target: 1250; Actual: 1152;
% of Target: 92%;

Based on the above evidence, the extent to which the revised PDO and supporting indicators/targets were
achieved is Substantial. Of the 7 PDO targets, 5 were achieved/exceeded, and 2 targets were substantially
achieved (89% or more). Of the 15 intermediate indicators, the targets for 6 indicators were exceeded, 5 were
achieved, and 4 targets were mostly achieved. In addition, the targets involving women were all achieved,
while noting that most of the target values for women were very low (absolute and percentage terms). More
importantly, the ICR evidence, as summarized above, indicates that the relevant actions were supported to
generate the expected outputs and PDO outcomes, consistent with the Theory of Change and attribution
factors outlined in the ICR (Figure 2 and para. 33).

In summary, with respect to improving productivity of project beneficiaries in the horticulture and livestock
subsectors, the resulting outcomes involved:

•       increase in crop yields for horticulture crops (using pepper as a proxy crop), to about 40 tons/ha., well
above the target of 25 tons per ha, or 160% of the target;

•         the actual milk production yield was lower than the upward-revised target, and higher than the
original target. Also, the ICR reports that total dairy production increased significantly because of the project’s
grant program;

•         the final evaluation survey also indicates that project-supported irrigation improvements contributed
to significant increased crop yields (reported by about 60% of beneficiaries).



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Original objective 2 - N/A (the original objective was revised into three objectives).

Rationale
N/A



Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve access to markets by project beneficiaries in the horticulture and livestock subsectors of Kosovo.


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AG & RURAL DEVT (P112526)




Revised Rationale
Theory of Change: The Theory of Change contained: (a) relevant activities (e.g., provision of investment
support/matching grants for livestock subsector; grant support for value chain development); (b) resulting
increased outputs of increased production, of increased grant financing for horticultural
aggregators; increased staff and equipment; together contributing to (c) outcomes such as increased access
to markets by beneficiaries in livestock and horticulture markets, helping to generate increased sales in milk
and horticulture from farmers to aggregators.

Outputs:

(i) Increase in investments by farmers and enterprises in improved products and/or techniques (No. of grants
approved): BL: 688; Revised Target: 950; Actual: 874; % of Target: 92%;

Outcomes:

(i) Sales of milk increased to processing companies (liters): BL:100; Revised Target:140; Actual: 145; % of
Target:103%;

(ii) Sales of horticulture production from farmers supported by aggregators (tons): BL: 24; Original Target:
28.8; Actual: 35; % of Target:121%;

In summary, with respect to improving access to markets by beneficiaries in the horticulture and livestock
subsectors, the relevant outcome/output targets were met or exceeded (e.g., average increased sales of milk
to processing companies; sales of horticulture production from farmers supported by aggregators; a large
percent of companies (64%) reported significant (above EUR 20,000) annual sales after the project’s grants),
and significant improvements in product sales and access to markets;



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Original Objective 3 - N/A - the one Original Objective was revised into three Objectives.

Rationale
See above.



Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AG & RURAL DEVT (P112526)



To strengthen the institutional capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Development.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change: Priority activities to support irrigation (e.g., preparation of feasibility studies; rehabilitation
activities of irrigation schemes; preparation of dam safety and preparation of strategy and investment
framework for irrigation subsector); were expected to result in outputs with respect to the irrigation subsector.
These activities and outputs were expected to contribute to strengthened institutional capacity of MAFRD.

Outputs:

(i) No. of client days of training provided: BL: 4246; Revised Target: 6350; Actual: 6346; % of Target: 100%;

(ii) No. of farmers, entrepreneurs and association members trained for grant applications: BL: 2588; Revised
Target: 4200; Actual: 4747; % of Target: 113%; (ref. No. of Women Farmers, entrepreneurs and association
members trained: BL: 334; Original Target: 688; Actual:755; % of Target: 110%);

(iii) No. of grant applications screened and approved for project aggregators: BL: 0; Original Target: 15;
Actual: 13; % of Target: 87%; (ref. No. of women: BL: 0; Original Target: 2; Actual: 2; % of Target: 100%);

(iv) Area provided with improved irrigation services (has.): BL: 0; Original Target: 6833; Actual: 7750: % of
Target: 113%;

(v) Radonqi dam safety plans prepared and adopted: Target: Yes; Actual: Yes; Achieved;

(vi) Grievances registered and responded to within agreed time: BL: No; Target: Yes; Actual: Yes; Achieved;

(vii) Beneficiary participation in working groups for preparation of RDGP measures: Target: Yes; Actual: Yes;
Achieved;

(viii) Citizenship engagement: direct beneficiaries feel project investments reflected their needs and provided
feedback (Percentage): BL: 0; Original Target: 80%; Actual: 72; % of Target: 90%;

(ix) Management Information System for RDIS developed, installed and used by irrigation company; BL: No;
Target: Yes; Actual: Yes; Achieved.

Outcomes:

(i) Preparation of RDGP sub-measures for investment support (consistent with IPARD guidelines): BL: No;
Target: Yes; Actual: Yes; Target Achieved;

(ii) No. of farmers reached with agricultural assets/services: BL: 3861; Revised Target: 7046; Actual: 6719; %
of Target: 96%; Percentage of female farmers reached: Revised Target: 15; Actual: 16: % of Target: 106%;

In summary, the overall efficacy with respect to strengthening the institutional capacity of the MAFRD can be
highlighted as follows: although the project contributed to various institutional improvements (e.g., training,
equipment, management/implementation of 8 rounds of the RDGP activities (funding 874 grants), IPARD
progress toward meeting EU technical requirements, followed by formal accreditation, strengthening of the



                                                                                                      Page 12 of 25
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 AG & RURAL DEVT (P112526)



                              MA and PA, the ICR correctly recognizes that institutional capacity constraints persisted for continued and
                              expanded preparation and effective implementation of the RDGP (ICR, paras. 56, 76 and 77).

                              Also, the envisioned capacity building support to KIA for food safety and quality standards did not materialize,
                              whereby EU grant funds were used to strengthen MAFRD’s labs;

                              Due to these shortfalls, efficacy of the revised objective 3 is rated Modest.



                              Revised Rating
                              Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Efficacy of the Original Objective is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Two of the revised objectives were rated Substantial and the third revised objective was rated Modest,
                            resulting in an overall revised Efficacy rating of Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Overall, the project’s performance and results demonstrated an efficiency rating of Substantial, based on
   various tools applied and qualitative analyses presented in the ICR (paras. 64 – 66, Annex 4, and supported by
   various evidence-based studies). The original project/OP included a financial analysis of individual project
   investments but did not carry out an economic analysis. The ICR carried out a sound ex-post financial and
   economic analysis of the OP, using the same methodology applied for the AF/third restructuring. The analyses



                                                                                                                               Page 13 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AG & RURAL DEVT (P112526)



include an overview of project benefits, and financial and economic analyses of the project, and assessment of
implementation efficiency.

Financial Analyses: It assesses the financial viability of the improved technologies and systems promoted by the
original and revised PDOs (as assessed above), coupled with assessing the increase in incomes and benefits
for beneficiary farm households and enterprises (based on six “indicative” farm and enterprise models). The
results include the following:

(a) Under Component 2 (a) RDGP, the project supported livestock farmers and processors towards increased
profitability and sustainability of their operations. The financial analysis under RDGP includes three indicative
enterprise models to illustrate the potential returns from the investments (with matching grant co-financing). In all
3 cases, there were positive net present values/NPVs and financial internal rate of returns (ranging from 11.9%
to 34.1%, ICR, para. 65).

(b) Under component 2 (b), the project supported the development of the horticulture subsector, targeting
support to smallholders, through aggregators. The models used show positive NPVs and FIRRs for both
smallholders and processing companies (with the latter, FIRRs ranging between 13.4% - 24.7%) (see ICR, para.
65).

Economic Analyses: It was conducted for the operational plan/OP (implemented during 2012 – 2017), for the
restructured project (implemented during 2017 – 2022, including the irrigation component) and for the entire
project. The ICR provides a sound approach based on relevant and available data, and “conservative”
assumptions, to generate the following results (ICR, para. 65, a and b): (a) the OP generated an economic rate
of return/ERR of 22.4%, and a NPV of EUR 24.9 million; (b) the restructured project generated an ERR of
27.8%, and a much higher NPV of EUR 43.9 million, which reflects higher productivity in some investments and
the addition of the irrigation component; (c) for the overall project, with an ERR of 25.6%, and a positive
economic NPV (of EUR 68.3 million). These results confirm the project’s economic viability, generating
sustainable economic returns. The ICR carried out sensitivity analysis to show the robustness of results (with
costs and benefits needing to increase or decrease by 20%, respectively).

Implementation Efficiency: The ICR highlighted various aspects involving the project’s implementation
efficiency, including delay in credit effectiveness (for both IDA credits), two project extensions, and factors
outside the control of the project, which extended the original closing date by 66 months. The longer period also
involved additional and substantial IDA credit and Danish Trust funds. The overall project management costs
showed a reasonable proportion of total project costs (5%). Considering the country’s “fragile”/conflict context
and multiple changes of Government, the project generated positive results, which reflected positive efficiencies
during implementation.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)

                                                                                                      Page 14 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AG & RURAL DEVT (P112526)



                                                                                   85.00
Appraisal                                                 22.40
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   87.00
ICR Estimate                                              25.60
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The outcome rating is based on a split evaluation of the performance of the project’s objectives and supporting
activities and emerging results/impacts. The main changes involved changes in the PDO, which was defined
more sharply, addition of an irrigation component, an addition of a grant/HDGP mechanism, strengthened
training activities, and an enhanced results framework, comprised of stronger/measurable indicators. Based on
the project’s high relevance, substantial ratings for efficacy (for the OP and revised PDO) and substantial
efficiency, and subsequent clarifications provided by the TTL (see below), this ICRR concludes that the project’s
achievements warrant a final overall outcome rating of “Satisfactory” (while noting the weighted outcome
average of 4.55, see Table 2 below).

Table 2: Split Rating for Project’s Overall Outcome Rating

Components/Criteria                  Original PDO (2012-2017)        Revised PDO (2017 – 2022)
1) Relevance of Objective            High
                                                                     Substantial with moderate
2) Efficacy                          Substantial
                                                                     shortcomings
Objective 1                          Substantial                     Substantial
 Objective 2                         N/A                             Substantial
 Objective 3                         N/A                             Modest
3) Efficiency                        Substantial                     Substantial
Outcome Ratings:                     Satisfactory                    Moderately Satisfactory
Numerical value of outcome rating    5                               4
Disbursement (US$ million)           24.2                            19.7
Share of Disbursement (%)            55                              45
Weighted value of outcome rating     2.75                            1.8
                                     Satisfactory
Final outcome rating
                                     (2.75 + 1.8 = 4.55)




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AG & RURAL DEVT (P112526)



7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR and follow-up communications with the project’s TTL (Sept. 15, 2023) implies there is “low” to
“moderate” risk to sustaining the project’s outcomes and contribution to achieving and sustaining the
project’s impacts. This assessment is based on the updated PDO, and evidence of ongoing and emerging
follow-up support by Government and development partners, especially the EU and the Bank), and further
clarifications provided by the Bank’s TTL. There is low risk with respect to technical aspects. The moderate
risk refers to a “complex political environment”, which is outside the control of the project/MAFRD. While the
ICR provides partial rationale and evidence, the ICR does not identify and provide explicit additional risk-
mitigation measures. The ICR assumes the main project risks will be adequately addressed and sustained
from the project’s interventions and emerging results, and from Government’s commitment to and on-going
efforts to scale-up the NARDP, as documented in the ICR. There are 3 main types of risks and
corresponding project interventions which are highlighted in the ICR (ICR, paras. 102 – 104). Based on
information provided through the ICR and other project/sector/country-related evidence, and communication
with the TTL, the IEG evaluator concludes that there is a “moderate” to “high” likelihood that project
achievements will be sustained and expanded through ongoing and forthcoming policies, programs
(especially the NARDP) and activities, to warrant the overall risk assessment (closer to “low”). This risk
assessment reinforces the importance of Kosovo meeting the IPARD requirements, which appears to be the
case, and of securing likely formal entry/approval by the EU to enable continued follow-up support and
sustained/expanded benefits from IPARD entry and from the Government’s ongoing support for expanding
its NARDP.

(a) Institutional and Sector Sustainability Risks, which comprised a key risk at project design and the major
challenge during implementation, was supported by the following risk mitigation measures and evidence:

The project invested heavily in institutional strengthening of implementing agencies and beneficiaries,

      The project created a cadre of professionals in MAFRD newly formed institutions (PA and MA);
      There was large scale support for building the extension/advisory service capacity, which are
       assumed to be supported and sustained through certification;
      Training to beneficiaries covered all aspects of preparation of applications from the business plan
       side to the technical side, as well as showing innovative technical solutions through study visits.
       These activities enhanced the beneficiaries’ capacity to apply to future IPARD program opportunities,
       given that the project-supported RDGP activities included many elements like the IPARD program.

 (b) Financial Sustainability Risks, which comprised a key risk at project design and implementation,
supported by the following risk mitigation measures and evidence:

      The project increased the capacity of the relevant institutions and beneficiaries to implement IPARD,
       which are assumed to contribute to the project’s financial sustainability because additional funds are
       expected/assumed to be available through IPARD, and farmers are assumed to be able to absorb the
       funds;
      Grant programs under ARDP were driven by the principle of a market-driven approach, coupled with
       the project’s active engagement of the private sector (including sustainable access to finance), are
       expected and assumed to contribute to and sustain financially viable investments; and
      The project supported sub-projects that went through a rigorous selection process. The earlier of
       these subprojects have already demonstrated their viability, having largely survived even a global

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AG & RURAL DEVT (P112526)



       pandemic, and are a sign of sustainability, although limited time has transpired to assess their
       sustainability.

(c) Policy Sustainability Risks, which comprised a key risk at project design and implementation, supported
by the following risk mitigation measures:

      ARDP priorities continue to be aligned with government priorities ensuring and assuming thus that
       policy focus and commitment will not wane. At project closing, ARDP remained consistent and highly
       relevant with the Government’s NARDP which continues to emphasize and promote investments in a
       commercialized and competitive agriculture sector;
      Approval of the Government’s Irrigation Master Plan which was supported by the project is a high
       priority investment of the Government. While the ICR assumes this approval reflects Government’s
       strong commitment to the water sector, there is a need to demonstrate the progress in the financing
       and implementation phase. Currently, the Bank is finalizing further support for the irrigation sector
       (with EU grant funding), which will contribute to addressing the above risks.

In summary, for each of the 3 major types of project risks, there is evidence that the project’s
interventions/achievements are serving as sound risk mitigation measures (as outlined in the ICR paras. 102
– 104), and are providing adequate foundation for being sustained, provided the Government's ongoing
commitment and initiatives are sustained and supported. It is noteworthy that the Bank’s TTL recognized
continued “moderate” political risks, given a complex environment, hence the Bank’s (with EU financing)
support with the forthcoming (expected to be approved by end of 2023) Irrigation Support Project (IRIS) can
help consolidate/sustain the needed support. Close monitoring/follow up may be needed with respect to
Government performance.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The ICR (paras. 96 – 99) provides evidence of the project’s generally sound design at appraisal, together
  with highlighting some shortfalls (at design and during restructurings):

  (i) the project design aimed to support implementation of key elements of Government's new agricultural
  strategy and its priorities;

  (ii) the PDOs were ambitious, and key indicators needed to measure changes in productivity, production
  capacities and sales were partially reflected in the original RF;

  (iii) while the appraisal included a risk assessment, the ICR is correct in recognizing that the political and
  governance risks were underestimated. The original risk was “medium likelihood”, and during the second
  and third restructuring, the risk ratings, especially for governance, became more realistic (“moderate”);
  and

  (iv) the project design was overly optimistic in having a short time to implement and disburse substantial
  AF activities, with a large shortfall in disbursements of the second AF (funded by DANIDA)


                                                                                                      Page 17 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AG & RURAL DEVT (P112526)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR (para. 100) provides a candid assessment of the mixed quality of supervision, as follows:

 (i) while there was a total of five Task Team Leaders/TTL during the ten-year implementation period, who
 conducted regular implementation support missions (24), in-country and virtual (during the COVID-19 travel
 restrictions); only the last TTL was based in the region, which enabled more intensive engagement during
 implementation;

 (ii) the ICR notes, as also supported by project documentation, that the Bank team endeavored to be
 proactive in reviewing key aspects (including safeguard/fiduciary), addressing and resolving with key
 counterparts major implementation issues, and facilitating achievement of the PDO/outcomes (also
 reflected by the large number of restructurings);

 (iii) the Bank team took a proactive role in promoting partnership with other development partners which
 contributed to the scale-up of the project’s grant program, as reflected by the two DANIDA-supported TFs;

 (iv) an area of shortfall involved a deficient M&E system, with weaknesses in the design of the RF; while
 the third AF and restructuring aimed to address these issues and to better define clear and realistic RF
 indicators, the improvements should have been conducted earlier. The ICR recognized continued
 shortcomings in the redesign of the RF, stating the “World Bank team could have been more diligent in
 designing the RF“ (ICR, para. 98). This statement also reflected the candor of the Bank’s team in
 addressing key issues.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Overall, the ICR is correct in recognizing the shortcomings in the design of the project’s M&E system,
 including the enhancements made during the project’s restructurings, as follows:

 (i) the original RF was not aligned with the original PDO; the two PDO indicators were not sufficient or not
 relevant to measure the PDO. It was unclear how the PDO and intermediate result indicators/IRIs defined
 at appraisal would capture adequately the contribution of project activities to outputs and PDO-level

                                                                                                   Page 18 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AG & RURAL DEVT (P112526)



 outcomes. This shortcoming complicated project monitoring until the RF was revised (first AF and
 restructuring in 2013);

 (ii) the revised and newly added PDO and IRI indicators were generally adequate to monitor the project’s
 progress toward the stated outcomes. Additional indicators to measure competitiveness and growth in
 livestock and horticulture subsectors’ objective and institutional strengthening could have been included in
 the RF, as also noted in the ICR;

 (iii) while the revised PDO and RF (under third restructuring) reflected an improvement, there were still
 some shortcomings in their design and implementation;

 (iv) during the project’s latter restructurings, some additional indicators were added to capture new project
 activities (e.g., institutional building, irrigation and citizen engagement activities).



b. M&E Implementation
  During the project’s implementation, its M&E activities endeavored to address some of the design
  shortcomings (see above), with improvements taking place toward the end of the project’s
  implementation.

  (i) the PIU included a M&E specialist who was responsible for coordinating the project’s M&E system and
  associated tasks (e.g., updating the data base for each component, liaising with component coordinators
  in the collection and reporting of the required
  information);

  (ii) The project’s M&E system included: preparing regular semi-annual PIU reports and various surveys
  (e.g., an independent entity providing the project’s baseline, mid-term and completion surveys, including
  project achievements, perceived impacts and key lessons); interim evaluation of the project’s training
  program; the monitoring and reporting committee visited all beneficiary sites twice during implementation
  to assess performance and compliance requirements of the grant subprojects. Generally, the quality of
  these reports was good.

  (iii) a local monitoring group (LMG) and participatory monitoring were established and carried out to
  monitor the project-supported irrigation rehabilitation works. This combined approach helped to ensure
  good quality and timeliness in
  implementation;

  (iv) the project established an effective Geo-Enabling Monitoring and Supervision (GEMS) system with
  respect to monitoring and assessing the HDGP activities.



c. M&E Utilization
  Overall, the project’s M&E data and findings were used to monitor and assess the project’s progress,
  and to provide an objective basis for guiding and adjusting/enhancing implementation of the project.




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AG & RURAL DEVT (P112526)



  (i) Semi-annual progress reports formed the basis for informing and guiding PIU management role, for
  discussion/decisions during supervision missions, the MTR and end-of-project assessment;

  (ii) the project’s M&E data, surveys and specific assessments carried out under the project provided
  valuable information on the project’s achievements and to make relevant adjustments during
  implementation, especially following Bank supervision missions;

  Due to the shortcomings in the M&E design, the quality of M&E is rated Modest. There were sufficient
  evidence for a Substantial rating of Efficacy due to the evidence presented from independent
  evaluations.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as environmental category B (partial assessment), and triggered two safeguard
   policies at appraisal. The two policies included Environmental Assessment (OP BP 4.01), and Pest
   Management (OP4.09). The inclusion of the new component “Support for Irrigation”, under the third AF
   triggered the application of two additional policies: Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37), and Projects in
   International Waterways (OP/BP 7.75). On the latter, since the investments involved only rehabilitation of
   existing irrigation infrastructure and did not include activities that would increase the original command area
   and affect the quality or quantity of water flows to the other riparian countries, the project met the exception
   conditions under OP/BP 7.75, hence no notification was required.

   Under Component 2, the ARDP supported investment grants that financed activities that could have
   potentially adverse environmental impacts. To mitigate against negative environmental impacts,
   Environmental Assessment (EA) and Environmental Management Framework (EMF) were prepared for the
   project prior to appraisal. The EMF proved robust and was largely implemented according to plan. Adequate
   due diligence and environmental and social screening were performed for grant applications in accordance
   with the Grant Operational Manual (GOM). Only one issue arose at the beginning of RDGP implementation
   (i.e., EA and EMF were not fully integrated into the GOM for the 2013 and 2014 grant calls and, as such,
   incomplete review of the environmental impacts was conducted for the two calls). This led to the safeguards
   rating being downgraded to Moderately Unsatisfactory in 2014 to reflect the partial compliance with the
   environmental safeguards under RDGP. No further problems arose. Overall, sound environmental
   measures and screening procedures were included in the RDGP in line with the provision of the EMF.

   Good environmental performance was observed by the PIU for the on-site environmental monitoring for the
   HDGP sub-projects. All the activities were implemented following the ESMP mitigation measures. For
   irrigation, rehabilitation works under Component 3, an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)
   was prepared. All the procedures were put in place and completed adequately. Disclosure and public
   consultations were conducted using various methods. Works were carried out in compliance with the ESIA.




                                                                                                     Page 20 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AG & RURAL DEVT (P112526)



  In summary, there was satisfactory safeguard performance at project closure. This included a positive role
  of the PIU safeguard specialist, who devoted efforts to build the capacity of the Ministry’s PA through the
  provision of training on overseeing and applying sound environmental safeguards.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


  (i) Financial Management:

        The FM and disbursement arrangements, including FM staffing, accounting, financial reporting,
           internal control procedures, planning and budgeting, and audit were adequate and acceptable;
          Quarterly Interim Financial Reports were submitted on- time to the Bank. The reports were
           reviewed regularly, and they were assessed to be reliable.
          Project external audit reports submitted throughout the project’s life (to the Government auditor,
           considered to be independent) have been received timely, and no qualified findings were reported
           to the respective auditor’s opinion.
          The project experienced delays in the execution of the payments to contractors and beneficiaries
           by the MAFRD, but those have been either systemic or due to changes in MAFRD staff, which
           required a close follow-up by the Bank team.
          The internal control system established at both PA, PIU and MAFRD has been functioning properly,
           and there have been no significant issues raised by the auditors.

  (ii) Procurement:

        The project did not experience any serious procurement problem(s), although during the project’s
         life there were some related issues (e.g., delays in evaluation of bids and entering the required
         documents in STEP, and some delays in getting timely Government approvals). Also, COVID-19
         pandemic restrictions caused a slowdown of the procurement process for the irrigation
         rehabilitation contract, which was delayed by two months, while noting that the project already was
         delayed by 3 years, prior to the onset of COVID.
        The PIU generally followed the Bank’s procurement procedures and guidelines, including: the PIU
         prepared and updated a sound Procurement Plan; the Bank’s post-review of contracts did not show
         any procurement irregularities; the PIU conducted post review of contracts awarded under the
         RDGP and HDGP sub-projects.
        The PIU organized training on procurement procedures for beneficiaries under the grant program.

  The Bank team often provided ad-hoc targeted training to evaluation committees to ensure their
  understanding of the procurement guidelines to be applied in the evaluation processes.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)


                                                                                                 Page 21 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AG & RURAL DEVT (P112526)



  The ICR highlighted the following other outcomes and impacts (while noting the evidence presented in the
  ICR is very limited to show measurable results, and mostly provides qualitative results):

  (i) The project contributed to building a climate resilience agriculture sector, including: climate-friendly
  activities under the RDGP and HDGP grant schemes; promoting carbon sequestration (through orchards);
  building adaptive capacities through irrigation schemes/water saving technologies;

  (ii) Development of the Irrigation Master Plan under ARDP is producing positive outcomes (e.g., by
  providing a clear road map and action plan; prioritization and financing of irrigation schemes);

  (iii) the grant program is having a direct impact on improving rural health, through: increased production of
  milk, livestock, fruits and vegetables, and resulting improved diets; improving healthier working
  conditions.



d. Other
  (i) The following positive results were reported in the IR, though without supporting evidence:

        social impacts were positive, since the project raised agricultural productivity, output, and improved
         incomes for farmers and rural entrepreneurs, and enhanced human capital and job creation;
        the project did not trigger Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) for components 1 and 2, but used a
         Memo of Understanding/MOU and LMG mechanisms to enable a temporary pass-through for
         rehabilitation of irrigation canals;
        a grievance redress mechanism throughout the RDGP stages was developed and implemented in a
         smooth manner (responding to all 1445 complaints); and
        the PIU organized robust regular citizen engagement and communication tools and mechanisms,
         which were used to improve the grant program.

  (ii) Gender: The project included explicit support targeted for women, including the following achievements:

        Both the original and the revised RF had indicators on project beneficiaries with the gender
         dimension. The project met or surpassed all its targets in terms of percentage of women directly
         benefiting from the project and horticulture development grant facility, participating in training and
         women farmers reached with agricultural assets and services. At the same time, it is noted that the
         project included a very low target in the number of women to be trained (only about 10 - 30% of the
         total target, well below the % of potential women beneficiaries);
        Screening/evaluation criteria under the RDGP included additional points for women applicants to
         encourage their participation in the project’s grant program.
        Women were targeted to be included in study visits to countries in the region to learn from
         experiences of peers; 41% were women.

  (iii) Mobilizing Private Sector Financing: The project’s grant program/RDGP helped to mobilize (indirectly,
  based on existing financial system) productive private sector investments in agriculture (EUR 26.6 m of
  grant supported was complemented by EUR 20 million of additional private investment, mobilized by
  producer and processor beneficiaries.



                                                                                                    Page 22 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AG & RURAL DEVT (P112526)




11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 An average rating of 4.55 is
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Satisfactory               rounded up to 5 and hence the
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                 Satisfactory outcome rating.
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR presents relevant and sound lessons, supported by the project’s design and
implementation experience and evidence, and which have broader application in Kosovo and
beyond this project.

Lesson 1: Simple project design and intense implementation support may counter fragility
and institutional weaknesses. The ARDP concept and structure were simple and relevant, aiming
to match the implementing capacity of the government. For the new client countries with rather
limited experience in the World Bank operations, the lesson is that the Bank project team’s active
proactivity in guiding and advising counterparts from the outset on sound project design and
implementation practices will help to ensure that they are in accordance with the relevant Bank
policies and guidelines, good practices and the country’s developmental requirements.

Lesson 2: If a clear definition of the PDO, its indicators and accurate targets is missing,
measuring the project results and impacts effectively may become challenging. The high-level
original PDO, some indicators or the methodology to collect them which were not well defined at
project design, and posed a challenge when evaluating the project’s impact. The lesson is that
Project design team’s assurance that PDO and indicator definitions are clear early in the life of the
project will help ensure sound RF and basis for design, measurement and assessment. The lesson
further highlights the importance of targets being realistic and achievable during the life of the
project. A proactive approach to introduce adjustment as necessary, both in terms of PDO and RF,
taken at an early stage of the project implementation, supported by an effective M&E system, will
help ensure sound measurement and assessment by the end of the project. Also, the project
highlights the lesson of the importance of the project: being selective, strategic and simple in the
number and content of the performance indicators; if these features are not followed, this could
result in a M&E system becoming overly complex and ineffective, with limited usefulness.

Lesson 3: Participatory monitoring (by beneficiaries and key government and community
actors) may contribute to the success of implementation and sustainability of investments.
Introducing participatory monitoring for ARDP irrigation infrastructure rehabilitation works provided
several benefits, which included the active engagement of the beneficiaries in advance of the
investment implementation, provided an opportunity for the beneficiaries to fully understand the


                                                                                                    Page 23 of 25
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       AG & RURAL DEVT (P112526)



feature of the investments, the benefits it will provide and the active role the beneficiaries can play in
ensuring the investments will address their priority needs. This participatory mechanism provides the
implementing agency with the opportunity to promptly respond in case any obstacles or wrongdoing
on the side of the contractor arise during the implementation. Finally, participatory monitoring helps
ensure long term sustainability, since the investments are owned by the beneficiaries and other key
stakeholders; participatory monitoring enabled beneficiaries to become an active part of the process
versus being simply considered the passive recipient of the investments.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Overall, the quality of the ICR is “Substantial”. The ICR was well written, consistent with ICR guidelines,
analytical and underpinned by a generally sound reconstructed Theory of Change, evidence-based, solid
financial and economic analyses, a candid, sound, and clear rationale for the project’s seven restructurings,
results-focused and generally supported by adequate evidence to justify the assessment and proposed ratings.
The result framework (ICR, Annex 1, Parts A and B) reflects a sound structure and breakdown according to the
main types of results and their corresponding indicators, at outcome and output levels. However, some key
indicators were not sufficiently clear. The project’s available main evidence, especially the independent
evaluations, was well integrated into the ICR, including the results of the analyses of data presented in the
Results Framework (Annex 1), with the corresponding components, indicators, targets, revisions arising from
the seven restructurings (ICR, Annexes 6, 7 and 8); from the Project’s independent “Impact and In-Depth Study
of the RDGP” (May 2016); Project’s final survey (2022).

The ICR exhibited some while still demonstrating a well-prepared ICR. For some of the yes/no indicators,
the measures of actual and extent of project progress were not evident, and subsequently, the TTL provided
the IEG evaluator with further details. Some key performance indicators were missing, including productivity
increases arising in project-supported irrigated areas; increases in incomes from direct beneficiaries; no.,
amounts, and types of loans provided by the private sector/commercial banks (as a counterpart to the RDDG
grants – see below); the TTL highlighted results of the project’s final survey for these variables, which had not
been reflected in the ICR.

Overall, the ICR quality is rated as Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 24 of 25
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
AG & RURAL DEVT (P112526)




                                                                  Page 25 of 25
