     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cabo Verde - Transport Sector Reform (P126516)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023629

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P126516                                   Cabo Verde - Transport Sector Reform

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Cabo Verde                                Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52660,IDA-61000                       30-Jun-2019                                         46,035,932.32

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Jun-2013                               30-Sep-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           19,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            45,962,630.43                                              0.00

 Actual                                        46,035,932.32                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally               Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Transport Sector Reform Project (TSRP) as articulated in
   the Financing Agreement (FA, page 4) was identical to the one stated in the Project Appraisal Document
   (PAD, paragraph 40) and aimed to:

   "support the Recipient’s efforts to improve efficiency and management of its national road assets and
   lay the groundwork for transport sector State Owned Enterprise reform."


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cabo Verde - Transport Sector Reform (P126516)



   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on the following two Objectives:

   1. To support the Recipient's efforts to improve the efficiency and management of its road assets.

   2. To lay the groundwork for state-owned enterprise (SOE) reform of the transport sector.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following four components:

   1. Road Asset Preservation (appraisal estimate: US$22.00 million, estimate including AF: US$39.00
   million, actual cost: US$39.00 million). This component financed the rehabilitation works and routine
   maintenance, including emergency works and reinforcement, on selected roads in the islands of Santo
   Antao, Maio, Fogo, and Sao Nicolau, using Performance-Based Maintenance Contracts
   (PBMCs); monitoring and evaluating PBMC performance; and implementing small-scale rehabilitation works
   on the national road network, as emergency repairs were required in instances not covered under the
   PBMC.

   2. Institutional Strengthening and Project Management (appraisal estimate: US$2.08 million,
   estimate including AF: US$3.08 million, actual cost: US$3.08 million). This component supported the
   following activities: (i) the development and operationalization of a road and bridge management system
   through the annual collection and analysis of data relating to the condition of bridges and roads; (ii)
   strengthening the institutional capacity of entities under the responsibility of the Ministry of infrastructure and
   maritime economy (MIEM), including the Roads Agency (IE) and the Second Generation Road Fund
   (FAMR) through capacity-building activities; (iii) developing complementary funding mechanisms to widen
   the resource base of FAMR; (iv) helping to enforce legislation on axle load control, including through the
   provision of weighbridges; (v) developing improved construction, rehabilitation, and maintenance standards
   for road drainage networks based on best practice; and (vi) supporting the PCU through the provision of
   training, operating costs, and audits.

   3. Road Safety (appraisal estimate: US$1.00 million, estimate including AF: US$2.00 million, actual
   cost: US$2.00 million). This component supported the following activities: (i) development and
   implementation of a road safety action plan; (ii) development and implementation of an accident database
   and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system; (iii) development of a national road safety observatory; (iv)
   drafting of the recipient’s highway code; (v) support to enforce road safety control through the provision of
   radars for speed limit enforcements and alcohol breath analyzers; (vi) enhancement of the General
   Directorate for Mobility and Transport (DGMT) and IE institutional capacity in the area of road safety,
   including road engineering standards; and (vii) carrying out awareness-raising campaigns on road safety.

   4. Inter-island Transport Strategy (appraisal estimate: US$3.92 million, estimate including AF:
   US$6.92 million, actual cost: US$6.92 million). This component intended to help improve the quality of

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cabo Verde - Transport Sector Reform (P126516)



  inter-island sea and air transport services; the management of ports and airports; and the efficiency of
  transport state-owned enterprises (SOEs) by supporting the following activities: (i) strengthening the SOE
  ownership and SOE oversight functions through institutional capacity-building activities and preparation of
  performance agreements between the Ministry of Finance and Planning (MOFP) and each of Cape Verde
  National Airline (TACV), the National Company of Port Administration (ENAPOR), and the National airport
  operator (ASA), monitoring SOE performance, reviewing audit reports, and monitoring fiscal risks; (ii) laying
  the groundwork for the concession of sea transport services, delegating port/airport activities to the private
  sector, improving the financial situation. of transport SOEs, including but not limited to the TACV, through
  studies and provision of technical assistance; and (iii) supporting the Engineering and Sea Sciences
  Department (DECM) through advisory services to redefine its curriculum and the provision of teaching
  material specific to the maritime sector.

  Revised components. The project received additional financing (AF) to support scaling up of key activities
  in order to enhance the development effectiveness of the original project. The AF financed the rehabilitation
  and climate adaptation of about 50 km of additional roads.

  Component 1 received US$17.00 million, of which US$14.00 million was for PBMCs for rural road
  rehabilitation and US$3.00 million for small-scale emergency road repairs that were not covered by the
  PBMC.

  Component 2 received US$1.00 million for capacity building and included training for the entities directly
  involved in the project, as well as operating costs for the PCU.

  Component 3 received US$1.00 million for the development of an accident database and M&E system, as
  well as the improvement of the highway code.

  Component 4 received US$3.00 million for technical assistance and studies related to transport SOE
  reforms, air and maritime sector reforms, climate-related mitigation and resilience actions in the road sector,
  trade and logistics performance, and increased efficiency and efficacy of FAMR. Also, US$5.00 million
  was allocated for contingencies.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost was estimated at US$31.00 million. The actual cost was US$58.04
  million (ICR, Data Sheet, page 2). The difference was because the project received Additional Financing
  (see below).

  Financing. The project was financed through an IDA Credit worth US$19.00 million, with a final maturity of
  40 years including a grace period of 10 years. The project also received additional financing (AF) in the
  amount of US$27.00 million. The total Bank financing was US$46.00 million. The actual amounts disbursed
  were US$18.56 million and US$27.48 million for the original loan and the AF, respectively. The total amount
  disbursed was US$46.04 million (ICR, Data Sheet, page 2).




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cabo Verde - Transport Sector Reform (P126516)



   Borrower Contribution. The Borrower was expected to contribute US$12.00 million of counterpart funds.
   According to the ICR (Data Sheet, page 2), the Borrower contributed 100% of the estimated amount of
   counterpart funds.

   Dates. The project was approved on June 24, 2013 and became effective three months later on September
   17, 2013. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on June 27, 2016, which was about three years
   after effectiveness. The PAD did not specify a date for the MTR, and this Review finds that the MTR was
   timely conducted and was in line with other Bank-financed projects. The project closed on September 30,
   2022 which was 39 months beyond the original closing date on June 30, 2019. The project extension was
   needed to allow more time to complete activities after scaling up the project under the AF. Also, the COVID-
   19 and associated restrictions disrupted supply chains and more time was needed for delivery of materials
   needed for the road works (ICR, paragraph 22). The project was restructured three times, all were Level 2
   restructuring, as follows:

   1. On August 18, 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$35.67 million, in order to approve an
   additional financing (AF) worth US$27.00 million revise the Results Framework (RF), and extend the loan
   closing date from June 30, 2019 to December 31, 2020.

   2. On November 9, 2021, when the amount disbursed was US$45.51 million, in order to extend the loan
   closing date from December 31, 2020 to June 30, 2022.

   3. On June 21, 2022. when the amount disbursed was US$46.07, in order to extend the loan closing date
   from June 30, 2022 to September 30, 2022.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. Cabo Verde is an inhabited nine-island country about 500 km in the Atlantic
ocean west of Dakar. As an archipelago and with a mountainous nature of the islands, transport plays an
important role in economic and social development: good inter-island transport contributes to the integration
and cohesion of the territory, and roads and road transport are critical for rural people’s access to markets,
education, and health care. Cabo Verde road network consisted of 1,350 kilometers (about 44% is
asphalted and the rest was paved with cobblestones) spread among the nine inhabited islands. According
to the data available on road safety, between 2002 and 2011, on average there were about 4,000 accidents
per year. The number of fatalities (respectively injuries) fluctuated between 47 and 77 (respectively 690 and
950) over the same period, about twice as much per capita as in the European Union. Despite a sizable
investment (US$400 million - over the ten years) by the Government in the transport sector, the quality and
reliability of transport services were unsatisfactory, and customer satisfaction was poor. This was expected
to continue unless structural issues for the Corporate Governance for State-Owned Enterprises are
addressed. This project aimed to improve efficiency and management of its national road assets and lay the
groundwork for transport sector State Owned Enterprise reform.

Previous Bank Experience. The Bank has extensive global experience in designing and implementing
transport projects. In Cabo Verde, the World Bank financed the Road Sector Support Project (RSSP, 2005–
2012) that directly preceded this project. The design of the TSRP benefited from the same institutional

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Cabo Verde - Transport Sector Reform (P126516)



               arrangements applied under the Road Sector Support Project, which allowed the TSRP to leverage the
               PIU’s institutional memory and experience.

               Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with Bank's Country Partnership
               Strategy for Cabo Verde (CPS, FY2013-FY2016). The CPS aimed to support Cabo Verde in its economic
               transformation, with a focus on improving public sector efficiency, and competitiveness.

               At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with Bank's Country Partnership Framework for Cabo Verde
               (CPF, FY2020–FY2025). Specifically, it was aligned with the Results Area II: Strengthening the
               environment for a more diversified economy. The first objective of the project aimed to improve the
               efficiency and management of road assets, which was in line with the CPF’s broad agenda to improve the
               availability of quality services. It was also aligned with the CPF's objective 4 which aimed to improve the
               foundations for private sector growth. This focused on three critical areas that were expected to have major
               impact on diversification of the economy: (i) transport and logistics; (ii) digital services; and (iii) access to
               finance. Both well-functioning air and maritime transportation between the islands and to/from foreign
               countries, and roads for intra-island transport, were key elements of the country’s competitiveness. To
               address connectivity constraints, the World Bank aimed to expand its support for the reform of
               transportation SOEs, bolster private sector engagement in transport, and continue investing in
               infrastructure. The second objective to reform SOE's in the transport sector, was in line with the CPF’s
               objective 3 which aimed to sharpen fiscal and macroeconomic resilience to help the government increase
               fiscal and macroeconomic resilience, and manage the economic impact of climate shocks. This would be
               achieved through three sets of actions, the first one was through the introduction of hard budget constraints,
               with a priority focus on the reform of the SOEs which was in line the PDO.

               Consistency with Government Strategies/Priorities. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with
               Government's program (2011-2016) which emphasized that road maintenance was an obligation. The PDO
               was also in line with the Transport Sector Strategy (2008-2020), which reflected the Government's vision for
               the development of the sector in support of social activities and economic growth and equal access for the
               spatially dispersed population. At completion, the consistency of the PDO with the Government Strategy/
               Priorities was not discussed by the ICR.

               Summary of Relevance of PDO Assessment. The PDO statement was pitched at an appropriate level of
               ambition given the context. The second objective was not sufficiently monitorable with relevant PDO-level
               indicators to comprehensively measure outcomes that were exclusively attributable to the activities financed
               by the project. This was later addressed at the AF stage. At completion, the PDO continued to be in line
               with the Bank's strategy, however, the consistency with the Government priorities at completion was not
               reported in the ICR. Therefore, the Relevance of Objectives is rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Cabo Verde - Transport Sector Reform (P126516)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To support the Recipient's efforts to improve the efficiency and management of its road assets.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported the following activities:
rehabilitation works, routine maintenance including emergency works and reinforcement, development and
operationalization of a road and bridge management system, develop a road safety action plan including an
accident data base, and develop an inter-island transport strategy (including institutional capacity building
activities). The expected outputs were: roads in good and fair condition including through performance based
maintenance contracts, and improved management of road safety. Intermediate outcomes were: improved
management of country road assets, and improved access/connectivity of people living in the vicinity of the
rehabilitated roads. All of these would contribute to the achievement of the objective to support the Recipient's
efforts to improve the efficiency and management of its road assets. Anticipated long-term outcomes included
improved access to markets; health and education; and tourism development which would contribute to
poverty alleviation, equity and GDP growth.

The stated activities in the ToC were connected to the outputs, intermediate outcomes and the objective in a
plausible causal chain. However, the ToC reported in the ICR (Table 2) lacked the critical assumptions that
underpinned the achievement of the stated objective.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      56.3 km of rural roads were rehabilitated which exceeded the target of 50 km (target exceeded).
      485.10 km of roads were rehabilitated and/or maintained under project financed PBMCs substantially
         achieving the target of 524 km (target substantially achieved).
        276,051 jobs were created through the cobblestone road rehabilitation (person/days) significantly
         exceeding the target of 25,000 (target exceeded).
        17,304 female jobs were created through the cobblestone road rehabilitation (person/days)
         significantly exceeding the target of 10,000 (target exceeded).
        Annual reports on the condition of the national network and on priorities in terms of rehabilitation and
         maintenance were published satisfactorily and were available on Estradas de Cabo Verde’s (ECV’s)
         website (target achieved).
        Annual reports on accidents were not issued every year from the improved database and monitoring
         system (target not achieved). The accident database is not implemented and, consequently, the
         objective of publishing annual accident reports issued from the database is not achieved (ICR,
         paragraph 32).
        None of the national road network had axle load control enforced, target was 77% (target not
         achieved). The axle load law was approved by the Council of Ministers and published, but not yet
         implemented (ICR, paragraph 32).
        The highway code was not revised (target not achieved). The ICR (paragraph 32) noted that the
         highway code was pending finalization and approval by the Council of Ministers.




                                                                                                     Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Cabo Verde - Transport Sector Reform (P126516)




      In a further communication, the project team confirmed that the operationalization of a road and bridge
       management system was achieved. It consisted of the preparation of a Roads Database and technical
       assistance for data collection, training, GIS development and training.

Outcomes

      By project completion, roads in good and fair condition as a share of total classified roads reached
       1,070 km out of 1,248 km of national roads which represented 86% exceeding the target of 80%,
       baseline was 50%. Also, the share of the national road network maintained through performance-
       based contracts reached 1,185 km of 1,248 km of national roads, corresponding to 95% compared to
       the initial target of 80% and a baseline of 44% which helped contribute towards the efficient
       management of road assets. Finally, direct project beneficiaries reached 158,409 beneficiaries
       exceeding the target of 120,000. The entire population within 2 km on either side of the road targeted
       by the intervention was considered as beneficiaries.
      A notable achievement of the project was the Ribeira dos Picos road that unlocked the country’s
       largest agricultural valley.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project achieved the stated objective through supporting
rehabilitation works, routine maintenance including emergency works and reinforcement, development and
operationalization of a road and bridge management system, development of a road safety action plan
including an accident database, and development of an inter-island transport strategy. The project exceeded
its three PDO outcome targets, as noted above. However, there were minor shortcomings in the achievement
of targets for some of the intermediate results. Overall, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is
rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To lay the groundwork for state-owned enterprise (SOE) reform of the transport sector.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported conducting studies and
providing technical assistance (including capacity building) on SOE reform for Cabo Verde Airlines (CVA),
Port SOE of Cabo Verde (ENAPOR), National airport operator (ASA), Interisland maritime transport operator
(CVI). The expected output was an improved management of SOEs. This was expected to lay the
groundwork for SOE reform in the transport sector.

The activities stated in the ToC were connected to the output and the PDO in a plausible causal chain.
However, the ToC lacked the critical assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the stated objective.

Outputs/Intermediate Results



                                                                                                  Page 7 of 18
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Cabo Verde - Transport Sector Reform (P126516)




                                  1,523 students benefitted from the training equipment exceeding the target of 400 (target exceeded).
                                  Comprehensive aggregate Annual Fiscal Risk Report on SOEs were published on line
                                   (target achieved).
                                  Port tariffs were adjusted through a single and simplified tariff framework, to be attractive for foreign
                                   customers from the transshipment, fishing, cruise ship, ship repair, and bunker markets (target
                                   achieved).
                                  A realistic loss reduction strategy was defined, adopted, and implemented for Cabo Verde Transport
                                   Airline (TACV) (target achieved).
                                  The Maritime authority's (IMP) regulatory agency model, training, and business plan was defined. The
                                   study was finalized in December 2018, and recommendations were under implementation, in
                                   particular the new organization chart, new financial system, and new pricing system, among others
                                   (target achieved).

                            Outcome

                                  By project completion, one realistic plan or strategy was defined, adopted, and implemented to reform
                                   the Cabo Verde Airlines (CVA), which was below the target of 3 plans. Two concession contracts, CV
                                   Inter-ilhas, in charge of the maritime inter-island connectivity services; and the National airport
                                   operator (ASA) were signed with international private operators, and two tender processes were to be
                                   launched, following the plans prepared under the project.
                                  Despite effort to privatize CVA, it continued to be government owned at the time of the ICR. The ICR
                                   paragraph 33) noted that the privatization process was complicated by the COVID-19 pandemic and
                                   issues related to the governance of the CVA and the difficulty of the strategic shareholder to invest in
                                   the company. As a result, the Government decided to renationalize CVA (ICR, paragraph 33).
                                  While the legislation enabling the privatization of airport management (ASA) was approved in 2019,
                                   signing the contract with the private operator was postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic (ICR,
                                   paragraph 33).

                            Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project aimed to achieve this objective through supporting studies
                            and technical assistance (including capacity building) on SOE reform. The project contributed to laying the
                            groundwork for SOE reform in key sectors, such as air transport, inter-island maritime, transport, and ports.
                            However, the project efforts were undermined by the challenges associated with the COVID-19 pandemic,
                            which put the government of Cabo Verde under strong fiscal pressure (ICR, paragraph 36). This delayed (or
                            reversed in the case for CVA) some of the SOE reforms’ key milestones. Also, some critical reforms for CV
                            Inter-ilhas and the CVA were still ongoing. The project fell short of achieving its target on its PDO outcome
                            indicator. Overall, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY

                                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Cabo Verde - Transport Sector Reform (P126516)




  Rationale
  Overall efficacy is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings. For Objective 1, the project exceeded its
  three PDO outcome targets as noted above, however, there were some shortcomings in achieving some
  targets on three intermediate results related to the management element of the PDO. For Objective 2, the
  project contributed to laying the groundwork for state-owned enterprise (SOE) to reform of the transport
  sector. However, the project fell short of achieving its target for its PDO outcome indicator, which was partially
  due to exogenous factor beyond the project's control (COVID-19 and its associated negative impacts on
  transport).



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

ex-ante

     The analysis at appraisal did not offer an overall economic rate of return (ERR) for the whole project. It
      offered ERR estimates for separate investments on four different islands. The ERRs ranged from a low
      of 10% to a high of 32%. The discount rate was 10%.
     The economic analysis was carried out for the road rehabilitation through a performance-based contracts
      program, representing a total investment of about US$9 million in rehabilitation works, including
      contingencies and supervision costs (US$0.5 million).
     Net benefits were evaluated using the Roads Economic Decision Model, which simulates life cycle
      conditions and costs and provides economic decision criteria for multiple road design alternatives.
     Overall, the PAD included a brief economic analysis that lacked details.

ex-post

     The ex-post analysis did not offer an overall ERR for the project investments. It offered ERR estimates
      for separate investments supported by the project. The estimated ERRs ranged from a low of 6% to a
      high of 18%. All ex-ante ERRs were lower when compared to the ex-post ones, except for the Ribeira de
      Picos road, where both the ex-ante and ex-post ERRs were at 18%. The ICR (paragraph 31) attributed
      this to the impact of increased agricultural production from improving the Ribeira de Picos road, which
      was sufficient to absorb the 26% excess of real investment in relation to the program.
     The ex-post ERR values were lower than expected for all other roads due to an underestimation of the
      cost of works in the ex-ante analysis, with a deviation of +15-20% between the estimated and final
      prices. The Ribeira dos Picos road benefitted from a government-supported, full-fledged detailed design
      before procuring the works’ contract, which resulted in more accurate cost estimates. While the other
      interventions were simpler upgrading works considered more straightforward, these relied on less
      detailed studies that resulted in underestimating costs (ICR, paragraph 42).



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Cabo Verde - Transport Sector Reform (P126516)



      The ICR included a detailed economic analysis that provided an adequate justification of the project
       investments.


Implementation Efficiency. The project closed on September 30, 2022, 39 months beyond the original closing
date of June 30, 2019. The project extension was needed to allow more time to complete activities after scaling
the project under the AF. Also, COVID-19 and associated restrictions disrupted supply chains, and more time
was needed to deliver materials needed for the road works (ICR, paragraph 22). Also, some road projects
experienced significant delays that reached 271% in the case of Nova Sintra/Nossa Senhora do Monte road.

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. The ex-post ERRs were all lower than the ones estimated at appraisal,
except for one road, as noted above. All road investments experienced cost overruns that ranged from 26% to
108% and significant implementation delays. Therefore, Efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial. Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial with moderate
shortcomings. For Objective 1, the project exceeded its three PDO outcome targets, however, it missed its
targets on some intermediate results related to the management element of the PDO. For Objective 2, the
project contributed to laying the groundwork for state-owned enterprise (SOE) to reform the transport sector.
However, the project fell short of achieving its target for its PDO outcome indicator. Efficiency was rated Modest
since all the ex-post ERRs for the project roads were lower than the ones estimated at appraisal, except for one
road. Also, all road investments experienced cost overruns that ranged from 26% to 108% and significant
implementation delays.

Based on the assigned ratings for the three Outcome criteria, Outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Cabo Verde - Transport Sector Reform (P126516)



   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The Following risks could potentially impact the Development Outcome:

1. Technical risk. Regarding PDO 1, the risk to sustainability of the achieved development exists but should
be manageable if timely action is taken to finalize the tasks that have not yet or partially been achieved. An
effective axle load control is needed to ensure that traffic on the roads is adapted to the quality and capacity
of the assets and ensure sustainability of the investments.

2. Financial risk. It is important to continue working on recommendations for improvements in the funding of
road maintenance. The new project in preparation (Improving Connectivity and Urban Infrastructure in Cabo
Verde, P178644) will allow to continue the efforts made within the TSRP on road rehabilitation,
complementing the network and accompanying the ECV through technical assistance and capacity building.

3. Institutional Support risk. For PDO 2, on laying the groundwork for SOE reform: the ASA airport
concession is signed and parties are working on addressing the conditions precedent for contract
effectiveness; on air transport, efforts need to be continued to strengthen the current civil aeronautics
regulatory system; on the port sector, reforms are ongoing, and the likelihood of a concession/Public-Private
Partnership (PPP) being launched soon is high; on maritime, the SOE reform represents a very sensitive
topic, as quality of service has decreased in the last months. The government is actively working on
addressing these challenges, including through technical assistance from the World Bank.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic relevance and approach. The project was built on the Bank-financed Road Sector
          Support Project (RSSP, 2005–2012) with the aim of improving efficiency and management of
          national road assets and laying the groundwork for transport sector SOE reform. The project
          was strategically relevant and in line with the Bank strategies and Government priorities
          regarding both road asset management and the broader connectivity challenges that the SOEs
          aimed to tackle (see section 3 for details).
         Technical, financial, and economic aspects. The design of TSRP featured an
          ambitious objective. The project aimed to address multiple road sector challenges that
          spanned multiple assets and institutional needs, and supported an ambitious SOE reform agenda
          with a large set of priorities. In the road sector, the design aimed to holistically approach road
          asset management through rehabilitation/upgrading and maintaining the road network, while
          reflecting climate resilience aspects, and ensuring adequate resources allocated for sustainable
          road maintenance. Design also aimed to lay the groundwork to reform SOEs and respond
          effectively to inter-island mobility needs. However, the cost estimates for road rehabilitation were
          underestimated, and SOE reform proved more challenging. Design also featured performance-


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cabo Verde - Transport Sector Reform (P126516)



           based road contracts (PBMCs) as an effective approach to road rehabilitation. The PAD included
           an economic analysis that was brief and lacked details.
          Poverty, gender, and social development aspects. The project was expected to reduce
           poverty and stimulate development by facilitating trips
           between islands by sea and air. This would benefit the islands with the highest poverty rates as
           their locally grown agricultural and seafood products would be shipped toward the main tourist
           destinations. Gender was considered both in the original project and in the AF through gender
           disaggregated indicators. Also, tender documents and contracts for construction companies and
           monitoring firms contained specific clauses against gender-based violence and violence against
           children.
          Environmental and fiduciary aspects. The project design included appropriate environmental
           and social risk assessments with adequate mitigation strategies. Design featured
           adequate procurement and financial management (FM) arrangements.
          Implementation arrangements. The project benefitted from the institutional arrangements
           established under the preceding project (RSSP). This allowed the TSRP to leverage the PIU’s
           institutional memory and experience. Arrangements also reflected clear roles and responsibilities
           of different stakeholders. Overall, implementation arrangements were adequate.
          Risk assessment. The overall implementation risk was rated Moderate. The identified substantial
           risks related to two main areas: design and , social and environmental risk, and delivery
           monitoring and sustainability. Overall, risks were clearly defined and adequate mitigation
           measures were reflected in the PAD. However, the impact of the project demand on local inputs
           (mainly cobble stone) and skilled labor was overlooked, and it was difficult to anticipate the risk
           related to the outbreak of COVID-19 pandemic.
          M&E arrangements. The collection of the data required for the monitoring and evaluation of the
           project was under the responsibility of the PCU, replicating the arrangements effective under the
           RSSP. However, M&E design suffered from shortcomings as the Results Framework (RF) lacked
           a PDO level indicator to assess road safety even though there was a component dedicated to
           road safety. Also, several indicators were revised as part of the AF to better track and measure
           implementation progress (see section 9 for details).

  Summary of QAE Assessment. The project was strategically relevant. Design benefitted from the
  RSSP experience, and reflected adequate environmental and fiduciary aspects. However, the SOE
  reform was ambitious, and required more time to be fully implemented. Implementation
  arrangements and risk assessment were both adequate. However, the impact of the project demand on
  local inputs (mainly cobble stone) was overlooked, and it was difficult to anticipate the risk related to
  the outbreak of COVID-19 pandemic. M&E had adequate implementation arrangements, but M&E design
  suffered from moderate shortcomings. Overall, Quality at Entry is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cabo Verde - Transport Sector Reform (P126516)



       The Bank conducted bi-annual supervision missions that provided in-depth and constant follow up
          throughout the implementation period. The Bank’s support continued virtually during the COVID-19
          restrictions.
         The Bank followed up with the borrower on the critical aspects of the project and on the contractual
          covenants. However, there were some delays in taking action on the borrower’s side.
         With four Task Team Leaders (TTLs / co-TTLs) over the nine years of the project’s implementation
          duration, the project benefitted from relatively limited turn-over in leadership. This ensured
          institutional memory, continuity, and consistency from preparation to implementation and
          completion.
         The reversal of the decision to privatize the CVA was candidly and timely discussed between the
          Bank and the Government. Also, the recommendations and justifications on the key decisions that
          impacted the project implementation were thoroughly discussed, for example: the decision to shift
          from cobblestone to asphalt paving due to a lack of capacity in the local industry to produce the
          stones needed for the four roads in Santiago.
         It is worth noting that COVID-19 was a key disruptive factor that delayed the works on road
          rehabilitation and impeded the effective deployment of a sound SOE reform agenda. The Bank and
          the Government worked together to overcome such challenges as noted above.
         However, the Bank could followed up on the implementation of the new law introducing axle load
          control, since it was one of the dated covenants of the AF, to be effective before May 2018.

 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. The Bank team guided implementation and provided
 support to achieve the PDO. The Bank worked with the Government to process two restructurings and an
 AF to address the project needs. Overall, Bank Supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 Based on the assigned ratings for QAE and Bank Supervision, Bank Performance is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) which was not required by the Bank at the time
        of appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR included a ToC that was constructed based on the
        project activities, outputs, and outcomes as described in the PAD. However, the ToC lacked the
        underlying assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the PDO.
       The PDO was measured through five PDO outcome indicators: (i) roads in good and fair condition
        as a share of total national roads (percentage); (ii) share of the national road network maintained
        through performance-based contracts (percentage); (iii) direct project beneficiaries (number), of
        which female (percentage); (iv) Legal framework for ports concession drafted;(v) performance

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cabo Verde - Transport Sector Reform (P126516)



          agreements signed between the state-owned enterprise (SOE) unit within the Treasury and the
          transport SOEs (ENAPOR, ASA, and TACV). The first three indicators tracked the first outcome
          objective of the PDO (to support the Recipient’s efforts to improve efficiency and management of its
          national road assets), while the latter two tracked the outcome objective of laying the groundwork
          for transport sector SOE reform.
         The PDO indicators were relevant, measurable and connected to the stated objectives. The fifth
          PDO outcome indicator was modified at the AF to better align it with stated objective and reflect
          what the project intended to achieve.
         While there was a component dedicated to road safety, there was no associated indicator to
          measure this aspect.
         The Results Framework (RF) included 12 intermediate results indicators (IRIs) to track the progress
          of the project and measure achievements of different activities. The IRIs were measurable and
          reflected realistic targets, but these were later modified after the AF. Also, the IRI related to the
          adjustment of the Airport departure tax per international passenger was later dropped as no activity
          was connected to this indicator. Similarly, the IRI measuring the reduction in the number and
          duration of road closures per year was dropped because dropped since its values couldn’t be
          estimated in advance or used to measure progress (ICR, paragraph 19).
         Overall, the M&E design adequately captured all dimensions of the project intervention related
          to road asset management, and legal milestones for SOE reform. However, the M&E design lacked
          an outcome indicator to reflect the road safety dimension supported by the project.



b. M&E Implementation
       According to the ICR (paragraph 58) "M&E data were collected and analyzed in a
         methodologically sound manner." The indicators in the results framework were used as a checklist
         and updated periodically to monitor progress. However, axle load control suffered from a long
         delay before starting to be implemented.
        The progress toward the project’s objectives was regularly monitored through periodic reports and
         supervision missions. The delays in approving the law related to axle load (this dated covenants
         of the AF, to be effective before May 2018, was only approved in 2020) did not allow to deploy
         and accompany axle load control as initially planned.
        The AF provided an opportunity to refine and improve the RF. The PDO outcome targets for three
         indicators were revised, and one PDO outcome indicator was dropped and replaced with another
         indicator that better captured what the project supported. Also, 8 new IRIs were added to the RF
         and several IRIs had their targets revised to reflect the to support scaling up of key activities under
         the AF. These revisions were relevant and allowed adjusting the SOE indicators and reinforcing
         social monitoring of the project through the introduction of indicators related to grievances and
         labor, including a target on female jobs created.
        COVID-19 had a negative impact on results and reporting. The project was strongly impacted by
         COVID-19 as two indicators were reverted: “Realistic plans or strategies defined, adopted, and
         implemented to reform the transport sector including SOEs” and “a realistic loss reduction strategy
         has been defined, adopted, and implemented for TACV”.




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cabo Verde - Transport Sector Reform (P126516)



c. M&E Utilization
       According to the ICR (paragraph 60) M&E data were "comprehensively reflected in the ISR
         reports and the aide-memoire of monitoring missions and shared with government counterparts."
         This facilitated project management and enabled decision making in a timely manner at
         important moments of the project including decisions on emergency interventions; and treatment
         to give to SOEs regarding maritime inter-island and air transport.

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. M&E design adequately captured most dimensions of the
  project intervention related to road asset management, and legal milestones for SOE reform. However,
  the M&E design lacked indicator to reflect the road safety dimension supported by the project. M&E
  implementation allowed the collection and analysis of M&E data in a methodological sound manner.
  Also, the AF provided an opportunity to refine the RF to further improve tracking the project activities.
  Finally, M&E utilization was adequate despite that COVID-19 hindered the reporting on some indicators.
  Overall, M&E Quality is rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
        The project was classified as and environmental category B because the supported road works
          might result in adverse environmental and social impacts such as facilitating the loss of acacia tree
          cover which is critical in reducing erosion along the right-of-way, and the risk of accident for the
          construction workers due to the sometimes dangerous location of some road sections.
         The project triggered two environmental safeguard policies and one social safeguard
          policy: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)
          and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). An Environmental and Social Management Framework
          (ESMF), four Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs), and a Resettlement Policy
          Framework (RPF) were prepared for the project.

   Compliance with Environmental and Social safeguards. While the ICR did not include an explicit
   statement on the compliance with Bank's safeguards policies, it reported that "the management of the
   environmental and social impacts of road works financed by the AF can be considered a success story
   (paragraph 64)." The project benefited from solid and close attention to safeguards. The project established
   a functional Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM), which was accessible to all stakeholders including local
   communities. A number of complaints were received, resolved, and being treated.
   Also, no gender-based violence (GBV)-related complaints were reported.

   In a further communication, the project team confirmed that the project explicitly complied with the World
   Bank Safeguards policies.




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cabo Verde - Transport Sector Reform (P126516)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM). The ICR (paragraph 65) reported that "the project maintained appropriate
   financial management." No further details were provided. FM was rated satisfactory in the final ISR.

   Procurement. All activities in the approved procurement plan were despite some delays, especially during
   and post the COVID-19 pandemic period (ICR, paragraph 65). Procurement was rated satisfactory in the
   final ISR.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   "The high demand for cobblestone could not be met by the existing supply. Cutting and installing
   cobblestones is skilled work and there was not enough skilled labor to meet the unusually high demand
   created by the project. It is also relevant to mention that the local population preferred asphalted roads over
   cobblestones roads because the former are more comfortable to ride. This resulted in a reorientation of
   some of the road work under the project having to be done with asphalt (ICR, paragraph 51)."



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included six lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. Successful SOE reform needs a long-term, continuous and stable engagement, including
in terms of project management. The project experience demonstrated that, in terms of country
support, TSRP benefitted from previous experience and presence of the World Bank in the transport
sector in Cabo Verde, building on RSSP (2005–2012) and now informing the design of the
Improving Connectivity and Urban Infrastructure in Cabo Verde Project (P178644) in preparation.

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Cabo Verde - Transport Sector Reform (P126516)



This long-term relation is needed in terms of SOE reform (from laying the groundwork to effective
private sector participation through public-private partnerships or privatizations). It also helped
create, step by step, a convening environment to expose, test and ramp up the country’s interest
and
experience on performance-based road contracts, PBMC approaches taking time to be understood,
accepted, and adopted. Also, in terms of project management, the stability of the dialogue and
monitoring benefitted from a limited turn-over of World Bank task team leaders (four TTLs over the
nine years of the project’s implementation duration), which ensured institutional memory, continuity,
and consistency from preparation to implementation and completion.

2. PBMC contracts can be a useful tool to effectively and efficiently deliver road
infrastructure in the national network in good or reasonable condition. The TSRP allowed to
mainstream and see the benefits of the concept of performance-based contracts to Cabo Verde road
network. The project was successful in getting PBMCs to be implemented country wide. Efforts need
to be maintained in finding the more suitable type of PBMC contracts that reflect national and
international experience.

3. To avoid unanticipated supply constraints in smaller markets, road/infrastructure projects
need to carefully assess the impact of the project demand on the local supply of input
materials and labor. The project experience showed that high demand for cobblestone could not be
met by the existing supply, aggravated by the difficulty to mobilize manpower for such physically
hard work. In smaller markets, a project can create tensions in some of the supplies and on the
availability of workers (and their willingness to work, depending on the hardness of the task); it is
better to anticipate and integrate such constraints from the design stage. The project design may
need to be modified given unanticipated market constraints during implementation. For the project
under preparation, the decision was made to focus on cobblestone material for some targeted
islands only, and to use asphalt concrete in others.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. Overall, the ICR provided an adequate evidence base to support the achievements
reported.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings and used the evidence base
to serve the arguments under the different sections, in particular, the discussion on outcomes. However, the
ICR could have benefited from a concise summary to justify the rating assigned to Bank Performance. Also,
reporting on safeguards and fiduciary aspects lacked details.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.



                                                                                                  Page 17 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Cabo Verde - Transport Sector Reform (P126516)



Results Orientation. The ICR included an adequate discussion on the achievement of the PDO. The outcome
discussion was slightly skewed towards reporting on the achievement of outcome indicators at the expense
of what the project actually achieved on the ground.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the available data to justify most of the assigned ratings. However,
the ICR did not explicitly report on compliance with the Bank's safeguard policies and did not discuss any risks
that materialized during implementation and whether risk mitigation measures were adequate. There were also
inconsistencies between the results reported in the main text and the RF Annex.

Conciseness. The ICR provided comprehensive coverage of project activities and candidly reported on most
shortcomings in a concise form.

 Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. The ICR provided an adequate account of the project
achievements and candidly reported on implementation challenges. It reflected relevant lessons, and most
sections were concise and reflected relevant information. Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 18 of 18
