     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Barbados COVID19 Response & Recovery DPF (P175492)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023585

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P175492                                   Barbados COVID19 Response & Recovery DPF

 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 Barbados                                  Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-92760                                30-Jun-2022                                        100,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Jun-2021                               30-Jun-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                         100,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                          100,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                      100,000,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Shahrzad Mobasher          Clay Wescott                 Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC
 Fard



2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Program Document (PD) states the objective of this single-tranche Development Policy Financing (DPF)
(the operation) for Barbados was: “to support Barbados’ response to the COVID-19 crisis and to promote the
post-crisis economic recovery”. For this ICR Review, the objectives are:



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Barbados COVID19 Response & Recovery DPF (P175492)



    Objective 1: strengthening the response to COVID-19;

    Objective 2: enhancing macroeconomic and fiscal management; and

    Objective 3: promoting trade and finance for a sustainable recovery.

The Financing Agreement does not state the objective of this DPF operation.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
There were three pillars/policy areas aligned to the objectives of the DPF operation, which consisted of:

Pillar 1: Strengthening the Response to COVID-19. This pillar provided labor market and business
initiatives to support households and businesses adversely affected by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic
and contain the spread of the virus to limit the impact of the pandemic on the economy.

Pillar 2: Enhancing Macroeconomic and Fiscal Management. This pillar is comprised of measures
intended to strengthen the governance framework of the Central Bank of Barbados (CBB), improve the
transparency and monitoring of fiscal risks related to state-owned enterprises (SOEs), improve voluntary
taxpayer compliance to enhance revenue collection and build resilience to disasters by expanding eligibility to
the Catastrophe Fund.

Pillar 3: Promoting Trade and Finance for a Sustainable Recovery. This pillar comprised of measures to
enhance electronic payment options and customs collection practices to support financial inclusion and
business transactions and the review of the insurance industry’s risks to maintain its ability to support post-
disaster recovery.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Project cost and financing. While Barbados graduated from the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (IBRD) in 1994, the operation was approved for an exceptional IBRD loan of US$100 million due to
the COVID-19 pandemic. The actual disbursed amount was US$100 million.

Dates. The operation was approved on June 24, 2021, became effective on June 29, 2021, and closed on June
30, 2022, as envisaged.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Barbados’ economy—a small island country heavily dependent on tourism receipts—was severely affected by
 the COVID-19 pandemic. According to the PAD, the country’s GDP was projected to contract by 18.0 percent
 in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic that halted tourism activity which, according to the Central Bank of
 Barbados’ estimates, accounted for 17.5 percent of GDP. P. 6 of the PAD reports that the COVID-19


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Barbados COVID19 Response & Recovery DPF (P175492)



pandemic resulted in about half of middle-income household workers losing their jobs and roughly one-third of
the labor force claiming unemployment benefits in 2020.

Meanwhile, the country’s fiscal position deteriorated significantly with the government’s response to the
COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in increased public spending and reduced public revenues. The PAD projected
a deterioration in the country’s overall fiscal balance from a surplus of 3.8 percent of GDP in 2019 to a deficit
of 5.1 percent of GDP in 2020. According to p. 5 of the PAD, the country’s financing gap could not be met on
reasonable borrowing terms due to the sovereign debt restructuring it had entered before the pandemic.

This operation—which came in response to an emergency request for assistance by the government in the
aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic—supported emergency measures to mitigate the impact on the
population and the economy and also supported the government’s structural reforms as part of the Barbados
Economic Recovery and Transformation (BERT) Plan adopted in 2018 within the context of the IMF Extended
Fund Facility (EFF) program. The funding provided through this operation, combined with support from the
IMF and other creditors, allowed Barbados to meet its financing needs in FY2021/22 partially. There was no
World Bank country engagement in Barbados, given that the country had graduated from IBRD lending status
in 1994.

The project was aligned with Goals 4 (strengthening the physical infrastructure and preserving the
environment) and 5 (enhancing Barbados’ prosperity and competitiveness) of the Government’s National
Strategic Plan 2005-2025. The project was also aligned with the overarching goals of the Green, Resilient, and
Inclusive Development (GRID) approach and the Saving Lives, Scaling-Up Impact and Getting Back on Track:
World Bank Group COVID-19 Crisis Response Approach Paper.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

The operation comprised of 10 prior actions (PAs), with PAs 1-3 supporting Objective 1, PAs 4-7 supporting
Objective 2 and PAs 8-10 supporting Objective 3 (Table 1).

Table 1: Prior Actions

 Objective 1: Strengthening the Response to COVID-19
 PA1: To reduce adverse labor market effects due to COVID-19 and enhance the sustainability
 of the tourism sector, the Borrower, through the Cabinet, has approved the Barbados
 Employment and Sustainable Transformation (BEST) Plan aimed at employee re-
 engagement, investment in green technology, plant refurbishment, training and digitalization in
 the tourism sector.
 PA2: To reduce adverse labor market effects due to COVID-19, the Borrower, through the
 Cabinet, has approved the COVID Relief Program aimed at providing temporary employment
 opportunities for 12 months to unemployed people affected by the pandemic.
 PA3: To reduce transmission of COVID-19, the Borrower, through the Ministry of Health and
 Wellness, has adopted a strategy and implementation plan for COVID-19 vaccination
 consistent with WHO recommendations, which includes criteria to prioritize people for
 vaccination.

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Barbados COVID19 Response & Recovery DPF (P175492)



Objective 2: Enhancing Macroeconomic and Fiscal Management
PA4: To enhance macroeconomic and financial stability, the Borrower has approved
legislation aimed at strengthening the Central Bank’s governance and independence while
maintaining accountability and ensuring compliance with internationally recognized accounting
standards.
PA5: To improve fiscal transparency and strengthen monitoring of fiscal risks, the Borrower,
through the Cabinet, has directed the Ministry of Finance to report to the Cabinet, on a
quarterly basis, key metrics on selected SOEs' liquidity, solvency, profitability, financial
performance, and financial dependency on the Borrower.
PA6: To increase revenues in an equitable way, the Borrower, through the Revenue Authority,
has approved a compliance improvement plan aimed at improving on-time tax filing and
payment of taxes by large taxpayers.
PA7: To improve disaster risk management, the Borrower has enacted legislation aimed at
expanding the Catastrophe Fund eligibility criteria for post-disaster financial aid to individuals
and businesses.
Objective 3: Promoting Trade and Finance for a Sustainable Recovery
PA8: To increase financial inclusion and efficiency in payments, the Borrower, has enacted
legislation aimed at facilitating financial transactions and enhancing financial inclusion of
citizens and businesses.
PA9: To improve the business environment and enhance international competitiveness of its
economy, the Borrower, through the Cabinet, submitted to the Parliament legislation aimed at
improving trade facilitation and enhancing revenue collection at the Borrower’s ports of entry.
PA10: To enhance the disaster and climate resilience of the insurance industry, the Borrower,
through the Financial Services Commission, has issued a regulatory guideline requiring that
all domestic insurers run annual natural disaster stress tests.

Objective 1: Strengthening the Response to COVID-19

PA1 supported the recovery of the tourism sector through the provision of grants and equity investment via
preference shares (i.e., convertible, fixed-rate, non-cumulative, redeemable equity in participating companies)
by (i) facilitating the re-engagement of tourism sector employees and (ii) upgrading assets in the tourism
sector.

      PA1 provided a grant that was used as a wage subsidy to cover 80 percent of tourism workers’ salaries
       to support their re-engagement in the labor market and to provide a comprehensive training program
       over 24 months to support labor productivity. Prior to PA1, a significant portion of tourism workers had
       either been laid off or were on temporary leave without pay as a result of the pandemic. P. 19 of the
       ICR points that the results of a phone survey conducted by the IDB in June 2020 had indicated that 38
       percent of workers were employed in the tourism, accommodation, and food services industries. The
       re-engagement of tourism workers through the government financing of 80 percent of workers' salaries
       was a temporary measure intended to save workers from prolonged unemployment and support their
       livelihoods while also supporting firms’ survival. The government financed 80 percent of tourism
       workers’ pay (with workers required to work 80 percent of the number of their working hours prior to
       COVID-19) up to the National Insurance and Social Security Scheme’s maximum insurable earnings
       limit of $4,880 per month. PA1 also provided a grant to the National Transformation Initiative (NTI) to
       assist firms with the preparation of tourism-specific training plans in the areas of customer service,

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Barbados COVID19 Response & Recovery DPF (P175492)



       health and safety, use of green technologies and digital skills, seeking to increase employee retention,
       productivity and adaptability to changing market conditions. The re-engagement of tourism workers
       through PA1 was accomplished prior to the final lifting of containment measures, with workers expected
       to perform their regular duties in as much as containment measures allowed the tourism sector to
       operate.

      PA1 also supported the upgrade of assets in the tourism sector through the provision of equity
       investment via preference shares. Companies were required to submit a Greening and Digitization
       Investment Plan, with the proposed investments intended to support an improvement in net revenues of
       more than 20 percent when tourism activity returned to pre-pandemic levels. The investments were
       targeted toward firms' (i) transition to renewable energy sources and other means of water and energy
       savings, (ii) climate resilience and deepened integration into the supply chain for manufacturing,
       agriculture and services, including creative and cultural services, (iii) digitize services and processes to
       lower costs and improve services and sustainability, including continuity of services during natural
       disasters, and (iv) refurbishment and expansion of plants in a green and sustainable manner. These
       investments were intended to support climate mitigation, adaptation and resilience. Firms had the
       discretion of deciding in which of the four areas they wished to upgrade their assets. To qualify for
       financing under the Greening and Digitization Plan, firms were required to be registered tourism
       businesses operating in Barbados and to have a viable business plan for the proposed investment. The
       implementation unit reviewed the business plans to assess the potential impact of the investment on the
       revenue stream of the firm.
      The relevance of PA1 is rated Satisfactory to the achievement of the overarching objective of
       strengthening the response to the COVID-19 pandemic. PA1 supported tourism workers’ re-
       engagement in the labor market and labor productivity through the provision of a grant to subsidize
       tourism workers’ salary and their training. It supported improved firms’ net revenues following the
       pandemic through the provision of equity investment via preference shares to support firms’ asset
       upgrades (relevance of PA1=S).

PA2 allowed workers who had lost their jobs due to the COVID-19 pandemic to become employed for 12
months. The three types of jobs offered through the program consisted of: (i) community health liaison officers
tasked with visiting families and providing assistance to individuals at high risk of getting very sick if exposed to
the COVID-19 pandemic due to underlying medical conditions, (ii) primary school instructors intended to assist
teachers and school staff in enforcing COVID-19 protocols, and (iii) support services provided to the elderly
population under the community elder care program by assisting workers of the National Assistance Board in
providing support mainly in care centers. The eligibility requirement for the COVID-19 Relief Program consisted
of prospective beneficiaries reporting themselves as unemployed due to the COVID-19 pandemic and as
reflected in the National Insurance Scheme records. The program was thought to serve as a self-selection
mechanism for lower-income workers in the absence of a means-tested selection process, given that it targeted
workers who were willing to earn relatively low wages and be provided temporary jobs. Roughly 1,200 workers
were expected to benefit from the program. The relevance of PA2 along the results chain is rated Satisfactory
as it allowed low-income workers who had become unemployed due to the COVID-19 pandemic to be
temporarily employed in public service delivery, thereby supporting employee retention and strengthening the
country’s response to the pandemic, which would ultimately facilitate the economic recovery as containment
measures eased (relevance of PA2=S).

PA3 supported the development of a comprehensive National COVID-19 Vaccine Deployment and Introduction
Plan that outlined the terms under which the country would introduce, deploy and monitor the roll-out of the
COVID-19 vaccinations across the country. The Plan relied on the guidelines developed by the Strategic

                                                                                                      Page 5 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Barbados COVID19 Response & Recovery DPF (P175492)



Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization that advises the World Health Organization on global health
policies and strategies. The relevance of PA3 along the results chain toward achieving the overarching
objective of strengthening the response to the COVID-19 pandemic is rated Satisfactory as it supported the
effective deployment of the COVID-19 vaccine to priority groups, which strengthened the response to the
pandemic (relevance of PA3=S).

Objective 2: Enhancing Macroeconomic and Fiscal Management

PA4 led, through the enactment of the new CBB law in December 2020, to the modification in the governance
structure of the CBB to allow the institution to achieve better its dual objectives of preserving the value of the
local currency and promoting financial stability. According to the IMF Article IV conducted in 2019, a
safeguards assessment carried out by the IMF in 2018 revealed that the CBB did not focus on core central
bank activities and that the fiscal dominance over the conduct of monetary policy resulted in the CBB’s negative
capital position. The IMF pointed to the need to separate the oversight and executive management functions to
allow the institution to carry out its objectives better. The new CBB Act will limit the function of the CBB Board
to oversee the work of the newly established Executive Committee, allowing the latter to implement monetary
policy and lead the daily management of the CBB independently. According to the IMF Article IV conducted in
2019, the new CBB Act also limited funding of the government’s financing gap to: (i) 7.5 percent of the average
of government revenues in the preceding three years if there were large variations in government revenue
and/or expenditures due to unforeseen circumstances and (ii) up to 3 percent of GDP in exceptional (and tightly
defined) emergencies declared by Parliament, such as hurricanes. The relevance of PA4 is rated Satisfactory
to the objective of enhancing macroeconomic and fiscal management as the new CBB Act supported greater
political independence of the CBB’s Executive Committee, allowing the institution to better carry its mandate,
including by limiting recourse to quasi-fiscal activities, which had significantly reduced the country’s foreign
exchange reserves, thereby supporting the overarching objective of enhancing macroeconomic and fiscal
management (relevance of PA4=S).

PA5 strengthened the monitoring of fiscal risks of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) to enhance macro-fiscal
management. PA5 supported enhanced monitoring of SOEs through reporting of key metrics and assessment
the fiscal risks of SOEs to the Cabinet on a quarterly basis. The metrics generated and reported included the
current liquidity ratio, debt-to-equity ratio, debt-to-assets ratio, net profits margin, return on assets ratio, return
on equity ratio, cost recovery ratio, operating costs to revenue ratio and grants to revenue ratio. PA5 was
complemented by the EFF program that supported the development of a dashboard that analyzed the financial
performance of SOEs. The reporting of key metrics and assessment of fiscal risks were considered
preconditions for the reform of SOEs to reduce their costs, enhance their revenues, and lead to mergers and
divestments as necessary. Since PA5 led to the production of financial performance metrics of SOEs rather
than to actual decisions to improve their financial performance, the relevance of PA5 is rated Moderately
Satisfactory to the overarching objective of enhancing macroeconomic and fiscal management (relevance of
PA5=MS).

PA6 supported voluntary taxpayer compliance with tax regulations by developing a risk-based compliance plan
to improve on-time filing and compliance rates for large taxpayers. Prior to PA6, the main compliance risks
were related to the on-time filing of income tax returns and, to a lesser degree, to the underreporting of income
and the non-payment of taxes (i.e., tax evasion). The risk-based compliance plan supported improving the
timely filing of returns for all large taxpayers for all core taxes, consisting of (i) the value-added tax (VAT), (ii)
corporate income tax (CIT), and (iii) the Pay as You Earn (PAYE) withholding payroll tax. The Fourth Review
under the IMF EFF identified the major compliance risks on registration, filing, reporting and payment of taxes
for each of the core taxes, analyzed the causes for low compliance, determined treatment strategies for each

                                                                                                        Page 6 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Barbados COVID19 Response & Recovery DPF (P175492)



risk and developed a plan to implement the strategies that had been identified. The implementation of the plan
was to be supported by the IMF through its EFF program. The relevance of PA6 is rated Satisfactory given that
the measure was to be complemented by the implementation of the voluntary taxpayer compliance plan
supported by the IMF (relevance of PA6=S).

PA7, through the enactment of the Catastrophe Fund Act 2020, supported the broadening of the definition of a
catastrophe and the expansion in the coverage of eligible beneficiaries to the Catastrophe Fund to include
businesses adversely affected by catastrophes. The definition of a catastrophe was expanded from one that is
limited to natural hazards to include non-weather related events. Further, the Act expanded the coverage of
eligible beneficiaries to the Catastrophe Fund to include businesses adversely affected by catastrophes. The
expansion in the eligibility criteria and the coverage of eligible beneficiaries to the Catastrophe Fund were
intended to compensate individuals and businesses against damages and losses incurred as a result of a
catastrophe that was not a natural disaster. The PD indicates that the Catastrophe Fund Act 2020 required the
preparation of monthly statements of the Catastrophe Fund by the Director of National Insurance, who is
responsible for managing the Fund, with the Auditor General being tasked with auditing the Fund’s accounts at
least once every financial year and submitting a report to the Finance Minister on the statement of accounts,
investment portfolio and other economic activity, and a general report on the discharge of the Committee’s
functions during the year. The relevance of PA7 is rated Satisfactory to the objective of enhancing
macroeconomic and fiscal management, given that a results indicator was incorporated to measure adherence
to the publication of the Catastrophe Fund’s monthly expenditure reports through RI9 (relevance of PA7=S).

Objective 3: Promoting Trade and Finance for a Sustainable Recovery

PA8 supported financial inclusion by expanding licensed payment service providers for the processing of digital
payments, remittances, government payments, securities, and money market transactions. Prior to the
enactment of the National Payment System legislation, only commercial banks were allowed to engage in
payment and settlement systems. The new legislation would facilitate non-bank financial institutions in
becoming licensed payment service providers, increasing competition in digital payment and settlement
systems and driving innovation for the development of digital financial services. The law also increased
oversight through the establishment of the National Payment Systems Council, providing guidance and
recommendations to the CBB on the regulation and oversight of payment systems. The relevance of PA8 is
rated Satisfactory as it supported financial inclusion during the COVID-19 pandemic, which facilitated digital
payments, remittances, government transfers, securities, and money market transactions, thereby supporting a
sustainable recovery (relevance of PA8=S).

PA9 supported the submission of the Customs Bill to Parliament. The new bill sought to enhance the legal and
regulatory framework, in alignment with international trade facilitation standards and modern customs systems
and procedures. It, notably, provides for a Customs Automated Control System, which consists of an electronic
information declaration system to be used by the Comptroller for the reporting of cargo and the collection of
customs revenues and the processing of data. Prior to PA9, there were problems with the traceability of cargo,
long delays for the clearance of goods, long delays for post-clearance audits and special regime controls, which
undermined the country’s international competitiveness. PA9 complemented customs reforms supported by the
IMF related to Barbados Customs and Excise Department (BCED’s) governance structure, operational
standards, legal framework, and its ability to retain adequate levels of trained personnel. The relevance of PA9
is rated Satisfactory to the objective of promoting trade and finance for a sustainable recovery as it enhanced
customs procedures aimed at facilitating trade, enhancing the country’s international competitiveness, and
increasing customs revenues (relevance of PA9=S).



                                                                                                  Page 7 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Barbados COVID19 Response & Recovery DPF (P175492)



 PA10 supported the adoption of a regulatory guideline issued by the Financial Services Commission (FSC)
 imposing a mandatory requirement for all domestic insurers to conduct annual natural disaster stress
 tests. Prior to PA10, domestic insurers were not required to conduct annual natural disaster stress tests to
 determine the sustainability of their reserves based on insurance premiums being collected. PA10 mandated
 domestic insurers to conduct annual natural disaster stress tests to support the solvency of domestic insurers in
 the event of a natural disaster. PA10 was supported by the WBG Caribbean Disaster Risk Finance Technical
 Assistance Program, which provided technical assistance to the FSC to increase alignment with international
 practices in hazard risk modeling and policies with international insurance regulatory measures, such as the
 European Union’s Solvency II Directive. The relevance of PA10 is rated Satisfactory to the objective of
 facilitating trade and finance for a sustainable recovery by reducing the solvency risks of domestic insurers,
 thereby reducing the likelihood of disruptions to economic activity in the event of a natural disaster for
 individuals and businesses covered by domestic insurers (relevance of PA10=S).



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

The program included 12 Result Indicators (RIs). Objective 1 (strengthening the response to COVID-19)
included five RIs. Objective 2 (enhancing macroeconomic and fiscal management) included four RIs.
Objective 3 (promoting trade and finance for a sustainable recovery) included three RIs (Table 2).

Table 2: Results Indicators

                                                                         Actual
                                                                         Change in
                                                               Actual
                                         Baseline Target                 RI        RI
                    Associated RI                              Value as
 RIs                                     (including (including           Relative Achievement
                    PA(s)      Relevance                       of Target
                                         date)      date)                to        Rating
                                                               Date
                                                                         Targeted
                                                                         Change


 Objective 1: Strengthening the Response to COVID-19


 RI1: Number of                                                                More than
 workers re-                                                                   100
                                                        1,850       2,481 (30-
 engaged in          PA1         S          0 (2020)                           percent of High
                                                        (2021)      Jun-2022)
 tourism firms with                                                            targeted
 at least 80 percent                                                           change

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Barbados COVID19 Response & Recovery DPF (P175492)



of their previous
salaries




RI2: Percentage
of female workers                                                      Less than
re-engaged in                                               56 (30-    100
tourism firms with PA1      S          0 (2020)   60 (2021) June-      percent of High
at least 80 percent                                         2022)      targeted
of their previous                                                      change
salaries.
RI3: Number of
                                                                      More than
companies
                                                                      100
completing a                                                36 (30-
                    PA1     MU         0 (2020)   28 (2021)           percent of [High]
Greening and                                                Jun-2022)
                                                                      targeted
Digitization
                                                                      change
Investment Plan
RI4: Number of
affected people
                                                                       Less than
accessing
                                                                       100
temporary job                                     1,200     1,164 (30-
                    PA2      S         0 (2020)                        percent of Substantial
opportunities                                     (2021)    Jun-2022)
                                                                       targeted
through the
                                                                       change
COVID Relief
Program
RI5: Percentage
                                                                      More than
of health workers
                                                                      100
(as defined in the                                          66 (30-
                    PA3      S         0 (2020)   65 (2022)           percent of High
priority group)                                             Jun-2022)
                                                                      targeted
vaccinated for
                                                                      change
COVID-19


Objective 2: Enhancing Macroeconomic and Fiscal Management


RI6:
Establishment of                                                      100
Executive                                                   Yes (30- percent of
                  PA4        MS        No (2020) Yes (2021)                     High
Committee of the                                            Jun-2022) targeted
Central Bank of                                                       change
Barbados
RI7: Number of    PA5       MS         0 (March   4 (June   4 (30-Jun- 100        High
quarterly reports                      2021)      2022)     2022)      percent of
on SOEs                                                                targeted
                                                                       change

                                                                                          Page 9 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Barbados COVID19 Response & Recovery DPF (P175492)



submitted to the
Cabinet



                                                           Average:
RI8: Percentage
                                                           91 (CIT:      More than
of on-time filing of
                                                           92; VAT:      100
returns for all large                  75 (March 90 (March
                      PA6    S                             91;           percent of High
taxpayers for core                     2021)     2022)
                                                           PAYE:90)      targeted
taxes (VAT, CIT,
                                                           (30-Jun-      change
PAYE)
                                                           2022)
RI9: Publication of
                                                                         100
Catastrophe
                                                   9 (June    9 (30-Jun- percent of
Fund’s monthly      PA7      MU        0 (2020)                                     [High]
                                                   2022)      2022)      targeted
expenditure
                                                                         change
reports (number)


Objective 3: Promoting Trade and Finance for a Sustainable Recovery


RI10a*:
Establishment of
                                                   Yes (June No (30-   No
the National       PA8       MU        No (2020)                                    Negligible
                                                   2022)     Jun-2022) change
Payment Systems
Council
RI10b:
Establishment of a
Currency and                                                          100
Payments                                          Yes (June Yes (30- percent of
                   PA8       MS         No (2020)                               High
Oversight                                         2022)     Jun-2022) targeted
Department at the                                                     change
Central Bank of
Barbados
RI11: Percentage
of declarations
covered by the                         12.22       25 (June   12.22 (30-
                   PA9       MS                                          No change Negligible
Trusted Trader                         (2020)      2022)      Jun-2022)
Pilot Program
(percent)
RI12: Percentage PA10        S         0 (2020)    60 (June   96.7 (30- More than High
of domestically                                    2021)      Jun-2022) 100
insured assets for                                                      percent of
which the insurer                                                       targeted
has submitted and                                                       change
complied with the
results of the

                                                                                             Page 10 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Barbados COVID19 Response & Recovery DPF (P175492)



FSC’s natural
disaster stress test




*The government decided not to proceed with the establishment of the National Payment Systems
Council which is measured through RI10a, and given that the program design provided flexibility for
achieving either RI10a or RI10b, the achievement and relevance of RI10a are not rated. Note:
RI achievement ratings in brackets reflect ratings that may have been adjusted based on the weak
relevance of the results indicator (discussed in the efficacy section).

Objective 1: Strengthening the Response to COVID-19

RI1 and RI2 measured the number of workers in the tourism sector, including the proportion of female
workers who were on temporary leave from their jobs or who had become unemployed due to
containment measures as a result of the COVID-19 who were able to return to their job through the wage
subsidy provided by the BEST Program. Since RI1 and RI2 measured strengthening the country’s
response to the COVID-19 pandemic through an improvement in labor market outcomes in the tourism
sector, the relevance of each of the two indicators is rated Satisfactory (relevance of RI1=S; relevance
of RI2=S).

RI3 measured the number of firms to have submitted a plan to upgrade their assets such that their
revenues could increase by more than 20 percent following the resumption of tourism activity. Since RI3
measured the number of firms that submitted a plan that could result in a hypothetical increase in
revenues, its relevance is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory (relevance of RI3=MU).

RI4 measured access to temporary employment opportunities for individuals who had become
unemployed due to the COVID-19 pandemic in critical and high-demand areas of public service
delivery. Since RI4 measured progress toward strengthening the country’s response to the COVID-19
pandemic through a credible results chain, its relevance is rated Satisfactory (relevance of RI4=S).

RI5 measured the level of immunization against the COVID-19 virus for healthcare workers who were
identified as a priority group of individuals in society given their exposure to patients. This indicator is
well-defined and credible along the results chain towards the objective of strengthening the response to
COVID-19, and its relevance is rated Satisfactory (relevance of RI5=S).

Objective 2: Enhancing Macroeconomic and Fiscal Management

RI6 measured the establishment of the Executive Committee of the CBB, which was expected to improve
the political independence of the CBB and limit quasi-fiscal activities. Since RI6 measures the
establishment of a committee and does not assess its function or its impact, its relevance is rated
Moderately Satisfactory (relevance of RI6=MS).

RI7 measured the number of quarterly reports submitted to the Cabinet that provide information on the
financial performance and risks posed by SOEs. The relevance of RI7 to measuring progress toward the



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Barbados COVID19 Response & Recovery DPF (P175492)



objective of enhancing macroeconomic and fiscal management is rated Moderately Satisfactory as it does
not assess the actual change in SOEs’ financial performance (relevance of RI7=MS).

RI8 measured the share of large taxpayers’ returns filed on time as a result of the adoption of the
voluntary taxpayer compliance plan supported by the Bank and IMF. The relevance of RI8 to measuring
the progress toward the objective of enhancing macroeconomic and fiscal management is rated
Satisfactory, given that on-time filing was considered one of the key problems to voluntary tax compliance
(relevance of RI8=S).

RI9 measured the number of monthly expenditure reports of the Catastrophe Fund to have been
published that included disaggregated expenditures intended to increase the transparency of
expenditures. The relevance of RI9 is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory, given the aggregated nature of
expenditure reports, without the details needed to achieve transparency and accountability for the direct
payouts made from the Catastrophe Fund to beneficiaries as highlighted on p. 16 of the ICR (relevance
of RI9=MU).

Objective 3: Promoting Trade and Finance for a Sustainable Recovery

RI10a (associated with PA8) measured the establishment of the National Payment Systems Council,
intended to provide guidance and recommendations to the CBB on the regulation and oversight of the
payment systems that have been established. Since RI10 only measures the establishment of a council
and does not assess actual impact, its relevance is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory (relevance of
RI10a=MU). RI10b (associated with PA8) measured the establishment of the Currency and Payments
Oversight Department at the CBB with a mandate that includes, notably, establishing the general and
individual conditions, standards, rules or procedures in accordance with the National Payment System Act
and any other regulations applicable to an entity licensed or authorized under the Act. Given that the
Department only establishes the regulatory framework for the payment systems and does not assess
actual impact, the relevance of RI11 in measuring achievement toward the objective of promoting trade
and finance for a sustainable recovery is rated Moderately Satisfactory (relevance of RI10b=MS).
According to p. 49 of the PAD and as confirmed by the Bank, either RI10 or RI11 was to be accomplished.
The Bank identified two RIs to provide greater flexibility to the government as it was considering whether
to establish a National Payments Council or a Currency and Payments Oversight Committee. The
government later decided to establish a Currency and Payment Oversight Committee and for the
purposes of this ICRR, the relevance of RI10b is considered for assessing the overall relevance rating of
RIs.

RI11 measured the share of customs declarations that underwent expedited border inspections for
trustworthy traders through the Trusted Trade Pilot Program. Since the Trusted Trade Pilot Program was
a first step along many steps required to promote trade and finance for a sustainable recovery along the
results chain, its relevance is rated Moderately Satisfactory (relevance of RI11=MS).

RI12 measured the proportion of domestically insured assets for which the insurer has applied the FSC’s
natural disaster stress test to measure the insurer’s solvency in the event of a major natural disaster. The
relevance of RI13 for the purposes of measuring achievement in enhancing trade and finance for a
sustainable recovery is rated Satisfactory (relevance of RI12=S).




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 18
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Barbados COVID19 Response & Recovery DPF (P175492)



   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Strengthening the response to COVID-19

               Rationale
               Outcomes. The DPO met four of the five RI targets, with RI3 being downgraded due to its low relevance.

                     The number of workers re-engaged in tourism firms, with at least 80 percent of their previous salaries,
                        rose from 0 in 2020 to 2,481 workers by June 30, 2022, surpassing the target of 1,850 workers (rating
                        of RI1=High).
                       The share of female workers re-engaged in tourism firms with at least 80 percent of their previous
                        salaries rose from 0 percent in 2020 to 56 percent of beneficiaries by June 30, 2022, against a target
                        of 60 percent. The target is considered to have been met in nominal terms, however, with 1,389
                        female beneficiaries (i.e., 56 percent of 2,481 beneficiaries) surpassing the target of 1,110 female
                        beneficiaries (i.e., 60 percent of 1,850 beneficiaries) (rating of RI2=High).
                       The number of companies completing a Greening and Digitization Investment Plan rose from 0 in
                        2020 to 36 by June 30, 2022, against a target of 28. The RI3 rating is downgraded due to the low
                        relevance of the RI (rating of RI3=[High]).
                       The number of workers affected by the COVID-19 pandemic who were able to access temporary job
                        opportunities through the COVID-19 Relief Program increased from 0 in 2020 to 1,164 by June 30,
                        2022, falling slightly short of the target of 1,200 (rating of RI4=Substantial).
                       The percentage of health workers (as defined in the priority group) vaccinated for COVID-19 rose from
                        0 percent in 2020 to 66 percent by June 30, 2022, against a target of 65 percent (rating of
                        RI5=High).



               Rating

               Satisfactory

               OBJECTIVE 2
               Objective
               Enhancing macroeconomic and fiscal management

               Rationale
               Outcomes. While the DPO met all four RI targets, the achievement rating on Objective 2 has been
               downgraded due to the low relevance of RI9.



                                                                                                               Page 13 of 18
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Barbados COVID19 Response & Recovery DPF (P175492)




                            The Executive Committee of the CBB was established by June 30, 2022, as targeted (rating of
                             RI6=High).
                            The number of quarterly reports on SOEs submitted to the Cabinet rose from zero in March 2021 to
                             four by June 30, 2022, as targeted (rating of RI7=High).
                            On-time filing of returns for all taxpayers rose from 75 percent, on average, in March 2021 to 91
                             percent across the various types of taxes (CIT: 92 percent; VAT: 91 percent; PAYE: 90 percent) by
                             June 30, 2022, against a target of 90 percent, on average (rating of RI8=High).
                            The number of publications of the Catastrophe Fund’s monthly expenditure reports published rose
                             from 0 in 2020 to nine by June 30, 2022, as targeted (rating of RI9=[High]).



                      Rating

                      Satisfactory

                      OBJECTIVE 3
                      Objective
                      Promoting trade and finance for a sustainable recovery

                      Rationale
                      Outcomes. The DPO met two of the three RI targets.

                            The Currency and Payments Oversight Department was established within the CBB’s Currency
                             Department in December 2020 following the approval of the CBB’s Board and began its mandate on
                             January 1, 2021. The ICR reports that the Department has discussions with potential applications and
                             worked closely with the CBB’s Supervision Department to establish the licensing framework and
                             regulations (rating of RI10b=High). The government decided not to proceed with the establishment of
                             the National Payment Systems Council which is measured through RI10a, and given that the program
                             design provided flexibility for achieving either RI10a or RI10b, the achievement of RI10a is not rated.
                            The percentage of declarations covered by the Trusted Trader Pilot Program remained unchanged at
                             12.2 percent by June 30, 2022, relative to the baseline assessed in 2020, against a target of 25
                             percent (rating of RI11=Negligible).
                            The percentage of domestically insured assets for which the insurer has submitted and complied with
                             the results of the FSC’s natural disaster stress tests rose from 0 in 2020 to 96.7 percent by June 30,
                             2022, against a target of 60 percent (rating of RI12=High).



                      Rating

                      Moderately Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale
                                                                                                                     Page 14 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Barbados COVID19 Response & Recovery DPF (P175492)




Overall efficacy is rated Satisfactory, with the efficacy of Objective 1 (strengthening the response to COVID-19)
rated Satisfactory, the efficacy of Objective 2 (enhancing macroeconomic and fiscal management) rated
Satisfactory, and the efficacy of Objective 3 (promoting trade and finance for a sustainable recovery) rated
Moderately Satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Satisfactory


6. Outcome

Rationale

With the relevance of PAs rated Satisfactory and efficacy rated Satisfactory, the outcome of this DPO is rated
Satisfactory.


a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

The main risk to the development outcome of this operation consists of the potential increase in insurance
payouts from the Catastrophe Fund which could put pressure on pension liabilities given that the Fund’s
resources are derived from the National Insurance Scheme. The ICR indicates that the funding of the
Catastrophe Fund remained unchanged following the implementation of PA7 despite the anticipated increase
in insurance payouts to individuals and businesses, with contributions being made by the government and
employed/self-employed individuals (equivalent to 0.1 percent of their earnings). These factors could
undermine the sustainability of the Fund and compromise pension liabilities.


 8. Assessment of Bank Performance

 a. Bank Performance – Design

 Rationale


Given the Bank's lack of engagement with Barbados, which had previously graduated as a borrower from
IBRD, the operation's design was guided by ongoing reforms supported by other development
partners. The Bank conducted a Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) to improve its knowledge of
the country context at the project preparation stage. The results of the PSIA, which are featured in Annex

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Barbados COVID19 Response & Recovery DPF (P175492)



5 of the PD, informed the design of the program. The design of the M&E framework was adequate, with
the Ministry of Finance, Economic Affairs and Investment assuming the role of coordinating actions by
other relevant ministries and agencies, namely, the Ministry of Energy, Small Business and
Entrepreneurship (Commerce), Ministry of Health and Wellness, Ministry of Tourism and International
Transport, Customs and Excise Department and National Insurance Department. Notwithstanding this,
there were some shortcomings with the design of PA1, PA5, PA6 and PA7, with the risk of sustaining
development outcomes remaining high for PA1 and PA7. The ex-ante assessment of risk and mitigating
measures was inadequate for these PAs.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The Bank monitored progress on measures adopted through PAs virtually in the context of the COVID-19
pandemic. Macroeconomic risk was the only type of risk assessed to be high, and the IMF's EFF program
mitigated that risk. The Disaster Risk Financing Technical Assistance (DRFTA) was the only technical
assistance provided for the implementation of this operation. As mentioned under the relevance of PA10, it
supported the capacity building of the FSC on incorporating hazard risk modeling into industry stress tests.




Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Overall, Bank performance is rated Satisfactory, with Bank performance on design rated Satisfactory and
Bank performance on implementation rated Satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Barbados COVID19 Response & Recovery DPF (P175492)




a. Social and Poverty

None noted.



b. Environmental

None noted.



c. Gender

None noted.



d. Other

None noted.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The quality of the ICR is rated Substantial. The ICR could have, however, better explained the government’s
limited ability to implement more ambitious reforms such as, for example, make it a requirement for SOEs to
report key financial metrics rather than to implement reforms to strengthen SOE governance. Further, the
collaboration between the World Bank and the IMF could have been better explained to understand
complementarities in reforms areas. Further, it would have been helpful for RI1, RI2 and RI4 to present the total
figures (e.g., total tourism employees) such that the achievement on these indicators could be
contextualized. Without the total figures, it is impossible to assess the scale of the achievement in relative
terms. The Bank later clarified, however, that it was difficult to obtain these figures to contextualize the
achievements.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings

                                                                                                   Page 17 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Barbados COVID19 Response & Recovery DPF (P175492)



                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreement/Comments
Outcome                          Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory           Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                    Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR identifies several lessons for this operation, including:

     1. Subsidizing active labor market policies, such as re-engaging tourism workers and other workers in the
        labor market during a period of economic slowdown, can maintain the job readiness of workers. In the
        case of this operation, workers’ job readiness would not have been maintained if unrestricted cash
        transfers had been made instead.
     2. Close collaboration and reliance on the ongoing work of other development partners can facilitate the
        design of an operation in a country that has graduated from IBRD lending status.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                    Page 18 of 18
