     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Liberia Land Administration Project (P162893)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023683

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P162893                                      Liberia Land Administration Project

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Liberia                                      Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D2370                                    31-Oct-2022                                           6,941,337.48

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Sep-2017                                  31-Jan-2023

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                 7,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                                  7,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                              6,941,337.48                                            0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Azada Hussaini               Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was to strengthen the institutional capacity of the Liberia Land
   Authority and establish a land administration system, as stated on page 4 in the Legal Agreement (LA) and
   page 17 in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD).

   The PDO will be parsed as follows:

       1. To strengthen the institutional capacity of the Liberia Land Authority

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Liberia Land Administration Project (P162893)



        2. To establish a land administration system



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had 4 components:

   1. Support to the Liberia Land Authority (LLA) (US$ $2.29 million, actual: US$ 2.44 million). The
   component activities were to focus on operationalizing of the LLA and its core responsibilities,
   including: developing land laws/regulations and administrative procedures; developing business systems,
   plans and processes, and a strategic investment strategy for financial sustainability; capacity building;
   communication and awareness raising; acquisition of office equipment, furniture, supplies and vehicles
   necessary for conducting the work of the LLA and the project, and minor renovation of LLA’s offices.

   2. Piloting of Registration of Customary Land (US$1.12 million, Actual: US$ 0.88 million). Initially, this
   component was titled "Support for inventory and analysis of tribal land certificates" and aimed to support
   assessments and pilots. It aimed to establish a central database including inventory of tribal land certificates
   in additional counties, integration of all inventory data, and analysis of the data. At the time of restructuring,
   activities around inventory of tribal certificates were replaced by a pilot activity to test different approaches
   and methods for the systematic registration of customary land rights. The restructuring also replaced the
   relevant indicators in the results framework.

   3. Development of a land administration system (US$ 1.57 million, Actual: US$ 1.2 million). This
   component aimed to support assessments and pilots to develop methods for collecting, recording, and
   managing land rights information. Proposed activities included development of strategies and options,
   establishment of a land administration system in Liberia, establishment of a geodetic network as well as the
   plan for decentralization of land related services. The first restructuring revised the target for “number of
   decentralized LLA offices established and operational” from 10 to 5 due to high costs of implementation.

   4. Project Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$1.60 million, Actual US$ 2.04 million). This
   component aimed to support operational costs required for project implementation within the framework of
   the LLA. The project also planned to undertake a baseline study and social assessment, and the mid-term
   and end-of-project evaluations.

   The project was restructured twice in March 2020 and June 2022. The first restructuring revised component
   2 activities and related results indicators. It also lowered the target for rehabilitation of local offices from 10
   offices to 5 offices. The second restructuring in June 2022 was a no-cost extension of the closing date by
   three months due to implementation delays in part caused by Covid-19 and delays in the first year of
   implementation. A split evaluation will not be undertaken since around 30% was disbursed at the time of
   restructuring when the scope of offices to be rehabilitated was reduced. and it would not have any
   implications on the outcome ratings. The outcome indicators remained the same.


                                                                                                         Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Liberia Land Administration Project (P162893)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project costs: A total of US$ 7 million was allocated to the project through IDA. This included allocations to
   the four components as well as a Project Preparation Advance (PPA) of US$ 0.42 million. The total funding
   envelope as well as component allocations remained the same following the two restructurings in March
   2020 and June 2022. The actual project cost at the time of closing was US$ 6.9 million.

   Financing and borrower contribution: The project was financed through a World Bank IDA grant of US$
   7 million. There were no borrower contributions or co-financing by other partners.

   Dates: The project was approved on September 28 2017 and became effective on March 22, 2018. The
   expected closing date was October 31, 2022 which was later extended by three months until January 31,
   2023. This extension was requested to allow for the completion of remaining activities. The project MTR
   took place on April 12, 2021.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. At the time of project appraisal, Liberia faced significant land tenure
challenges including contradictory natural resource policies, unclear legal framework, lack of an effective
land information system, and low professional and technical capacity in land administration and
management. Tenure insecurity had a disproportionate impact on women and smallholder farmers.

Alignment with Government strategy. Government of Liberia (GoL) took a few measures to establish a
land tenure system. This included: i) establishing the Liberia Land Commission (LLC) in 2009 which ended
its term in 2016 and was replaced by a new entity – the Liberia Land Authority (LLA); ii) introducing the
Land Rights Policy in 2013 and approving the Land Rights Act in 2018 (a year after the project approval).
The PDO was aligned with government efforts as it sought to support the operationalization of the new
institution and law.

Alignment with Bank strategy. The World Bank Country Partnership Strategy (CPF) FY13-17 highlighted
land tenure as a key challenge to sustainable and inclusive growth, as well as a driver of fragility, and a key
priority for women's economic development. The CPS included land administration in the list of pipeline
operations. The Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY19-24 retained a focused on land administration
and included the project in its list of operations under pillar 3 "Narrowing the Infrastructure Gap to Foster
More Equitable Development Nationwide" and objective 8 "More-resilient urban environments and rural
communities". The CPF results framework included the following related indicators: (i) Land area under
sustainable landscape management practices; (ii) Number of counties with a complete tribal land certificate
inventory; (iii) Policies and processes for identification and recording customary land rights are developed
and adopted; and (iv) A tribal land certificate inventory database has been established and is being used by
the Liberia Land Authority



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Liberia Land Administration Project (P162893)



               The PDO was aligned with the CPF objectives and results. A few of the relevant indicators were also
               reflected in the project’s results framework although at the time of the Country Portfolio Learning Review
               (PLR) in 2022, the results indicators were not updated. The PLR reflected on how the project outcomes
               could be sustained through a long-term engagement plan in the sector.

               Previous World Bank Experience. The World Bank had been involved in the land sector in Liberia since
               2009, through a previous operation, the Rehabilitation and Reform of Land Rights and Related Land
               Matters SPF (P117010). Through this operation, the Bank supported Liberia’s Land Rights Policy, drafting
               of the Land Rights Law, and developing Land Administration and Urban Land Use Policies. The Bank also
               supported the capacity building of the Liberia Land Commission and digitized 50,000 land deeds. In terms
               of comparative advantage, support for developing a land administration system around the new law was
               aligned with the Bank’s global and country experience in the land sector, however, the PAD did not reflect
               on whether procuring vehicles and refurbishing offices were aligned with Bank’s comparative advantage as
               a broker of global knowledge and technical expertise or of the procurement activities could have been
               completed by the government or other agencies.

               Level of the PDO. The PDO, “To strengthen the institutional capacity of the Liberia Land Authority and
               establish a land administration system”, was pitched at a relatively lower level in the results chain to
               address a development problem. Considering the project builds on a previous operation, and the theory of
               change discusses higher-level outcomes such as higher land tenure security, and improved land services,
               the objective could have reflected a higher-level result. However, given the context, as the LLA was a newly
               established entity and the land law was approved two years into the project, the PDO can be considered
               realistic in expecting what could be achieved.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen the institutional capacity of the Liberia Land Authority (LLA)

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change
                             The Liberia Land Authority was established in 2016 and subsumed the functions of three existing entities: the
                             Department of Lands, Surveys, and Cartography under Ministry of Mines and Energy, the Deeds Registry
                             under the Center for National Documents and Records Agency, and the relevant functions from the Ministry
                             of Internal Affairs. The project’s inputs included a range of activities to improve LLA’s capacity such
                             as supporting the LLA to develop business systems, plans, and processes; preparing an investment strategy
                             for financial sustainability; delivering trainings; conducting awareness raising campaigns, procuring vehicles,
                             furniture, and equipment for LLA and local offices; and renovating the new main LLA building and 10 county

                                                                                                                               Page 4 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Liberia Land Administration Project (P162893)



offices. Following the March 2020 restructuring, the target for renovation of local offices was reduced from 10
to 5 county offices.

These activities were expected to lead to outputs such as government staff trained in land administration and
services; regulations and processes developed; investment strategy prepared; office buildings renovated and
furnished; logistics equipment made available; county-level LLA offices established. The Results Framework
(RF) included an indicator to track technical staff and management hired in LLA departments. Although the
project was not involved in the hiring process, it contributed by developing the LLA HR manual, organizational
development study, organizational manual, and a board of commissioner policy manual. The activities and
outputs above were expected to lead to outcomes such as enhanced institutional capacity of the LLA,
improved awareness of the public about the updated legal and institutional arrangements, and functional
systems for service delivery. In the long term, the project was expected to contribute to improved land
services in Liberia, reduced conflict and disputes, and improved tenure security.

A few assumptions around the ToC were not explicitly discussed or addressed, particularly in the areas of
public awareness and staff capacity. For example, awareness campaigns can be less impactful due to
structural barriers such as literacy rates, internet connectivity, and physical accessibility of the local offices for
the rural population. Similarly, it’s unclear whether short-term training to LLA staff would be adequate in
increasing staff technical capacity in the LLA and local offices. Issues such as high staff turnover, lack of staff
with higher education credentials, and availability of long-term learning or exchange programs may affect
capacity-building outcomes.

Outputs

      The project developed a business plan that identified potential revenue streams and developed 10
         procedures (including an organization manual, human resources manual, internal communication
         strategy, training policy, Board of Commissioners policy manual, performance management system,
         M&E manual, ICT policy, County Land Office, Standard Operating Procedures). This exceeded the
         target of one business plan and four administrative procedures.
        The RF included an indicator on LLA staff capacity (baseline: 50%, target: 80%). The ICR reports that
         staff capacity increased to 71%. It is difficult to interpret this achievement as the indicator did not have
         a clear calculation methodology. The 71% achievement rate also seems optimistic given that only
         15% of the 429 trained staff completed training assessments.
        429 staff were trained in land-related disciplines, against a target of 400. Of the 429 staff, 99 of the
         trainees were female. The ICR did not reflect on the quality and outcome of the training.
        145 training certificates were issued (no target was established for this indicator).
        The RF included an indicator of public awareness increased (baseline: 32%, target: 57%). The
         calculation methodology around this indicator was unclear. The ICR reports an achievement rate of
         51%, what that entails is however unclear.

In addition to the achievements recorded in the Results Framework the ICR reported that LLA’s headquarters
was relocated to a four-story building that was renovated, furnished, and equipped with solar powered ICT,
and five County Land Offices were renovated.

Outcomes




                                                                                                        Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Liberia Land Administration Project (P162893)




      LLA departments are functional, with managers and minimum technical staff in place (Achieved the
       target of “Yes” from a baseline of “No”).

While indicators to measure functionality and efficacy were absent from the Results Framework itself, the
project did measure an increase in deeds registration and a significant reduction in service delivery time, both
good indicators of functionality and efficacy:

      Deeds registration increased on average by 49% during the during the period of implementation
      Service delivery time was reduced from 44 days to 10 days

The project restructuring introduced changes to the results framework, but this did not change the overall
theory of change in a significant manner. The original project document prioritized activities around tribal
land inventory to shed light on the extent of tribal lands and the amount of land that needed to be transferred
to private land. The restructuring paper and ICR provided sufficient rationale that the inventory was no longer
necessary to inform the tribal land formalization process and that the intended results had at least partly been
achieved. The rationale around lowering the target for county offices from 10 to 5 seems reasonable given the
operating environment and inflation across countries following the Covid-19 pandemic.

Overall, the project achieved the expected results by putting in place a physical and organizational structure
for the LLA through the renovation of the building, procuring furniture and vehicles, supporting the hiring and
training of technical staff, and developing related business procedures. At the same time, as discussed
above, the ToC included several assumptions not addressed in the project design, and the results framework
included indicators with unclear calculation methods and output-oriented benchmarks that do not capture the
quality, functionality, and sustainability of the LLA structures put in place. Despite this, as shown above, the
project managed to report on relevant indicators to demonstrate the efficiency of the institutional
strengthening.

The outcome rating for this objective is thus Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To establish a land administration system

Rationale
Theory of Change

To establish a uniform and decentralized land administration system, the project planned the following
activities: to develop new regulations and policies; prepare an inventory of tribal land certificates; carry out
assessments and pilots in key areas of the land policy; establish a geodetic network; prepare a plan for
decentralization of land services and develop an institutional framework for management of government and



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Liberia Land Administration Project (P162893)



public land. Following the March 2020 restructuring, activities around tribal certificates were replaced with
pilots on registration of customary land titles with the aim of developing an upscaling strategy.

Expected outputs included a land administration regulation developed; geodetic network developed; and tribal
certificate inventory database established. These outputs were expected to enhance information processing
systems, establish a functional regulatory framework, and decentralize land management services at the
county level. These outputs were in turn expected to contribute to outcomes such as improved land services
in Liberia, reduced conflict and disputes, and improved tenure security which were identified as high level
outcomes in the results chain.

It is noteworthy that the objective formulation is at a lower level of the results chain (at output level: land
administration system established). It was assume that once the land administration system was put in place
it would automatically be functional and effective. The ToC had some logical gaps. For example, preparing a
decentralization plan and renovating 5 out of 15 county offices may not be sufficient for decentralized land
services functions. The need for hiring qualified staff in local offices, improving local coordination mechanisms
with local authorities, and setting up dispute resolution mechanisms for local conflicts were not discussed or
addressed. Similarly, the new indicators on “gender-sensitive upscaling strategy” and gender-disaggregated
Customary Land Development and Management Committees (CLDMCs) assumed that the barriers facing
women would be resolved through their participation in the CLDMCs.

Outputs

      Four CLDMCs were established (target fully achieved)
      A gender-sensitive upscaling strategy was developed (target achieved)
      Four communities were surveyed and registered based on gender-sensitive community by-laws
         (target achieved)
        A network of geodetic and survey control points was established and functional (target achieved)
        The system, capacities, and budget for maintenance of geodetic network were not put in place. The
         system and capacities were developed for the geodetic network, but no budget for maintenance the
         network was approved. (target partially achieved). The ICR team clarified that the maintenance budget
         is required only for one aspect of the network i.e., the modern ‘Continuously Operating Reference
         Station (CORS) which requires regular maintenance and payment of internet services.
        Five LLA offices were established and operational (target achieved)
        Two national land laws/regulations were adopted (measured without targets). The project did not
         assign a target for this indicator, and the significance of this progress is therefore unclear.

The ICR reported on the following additional outputs that were not captured in the Results Framework, and
hence had no target values:

      formalization of customary land rights completed in four communities with 29,529 community
         members
      a statutory deed was issued to each of the four communities based on the boundaries that were
         collectively identified

Outcomes



                                                                                                   Page 7 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Liberia Land Administration Project (P162893)




                                  A policy and processes for the identification and recording of customary land rights were developed
                                   and adopted (target achieved)
                                  A system for recording and managing land rights information was established (target achieved)

                            According to the ToC presented in the ICR, the above outcomes were expected to lead to the objective “land
                            administration system established”. The ToC assumed that once the systems and platforms are established,
                            they would be functional and effective. While the RF did not capture the functionality aspects of the system,
                            the project reported on relevant outcome indicators (as outlined under Objective 1 above), demonstrating the
                            functionality of the system.

                            Some evidence on efficacy of objective 2 was presented in the cost-benefit analysis section in terms of
                            number of deeds registered and time savings in the land registration process. At the same time, it is unclear
                            to what extent these changes can be attributed to the project impact alone and to what degree other external
                            factors such as increased demand, and improvements through other agency involvements (Embassy of
                            Sweden, USAID, UN, and FAO) may have contributed to the results as well.

                            The project achieved all output targets, and most outcome targets. While relevant indicators to measure the
                            functionality and effectiveness of the land registration system were lacking in the Results Framework itself,
                            the project did measure both an increase in deeds registration and a significant reduction in service delivery
                            time, both good indicators of functionality and efficacy. The objective “to establish a land registration system”
                            is thus rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project achieved most of the planned outputs and the three PDO-level outcome indicators. Although the
                            results framework did not track outcome-level results, the ICR reported an increase in deeds registration and
                            a significant reduction in service delivery time, both good indicators of strengthening institutional capacity.
                            The methodology for assessing some of the underlying output indicators in terms of increased staff capacity
                            and awareness among public of LLA and its mandate was not clear. The overall efficacy is rated as
                            Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency

                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Liberia Land Administration Project (P162893)



Economic and financial efficiency

During appraisal, the project carried out three types of cost-benefit analyses: i) cost-benefit analysis based on
the assumption that US$2 million would be allocated to LLA; ii) a financial analysis that concluded that LLA
could not be self-sustaining in the short to medium term; and iii) a fiscal impact analysis that asserted the LLA
could acquire benefits through real estate tax. In the cost-benefit analysis, the estimated economic rate of return
(ERR) for the project was 25 percent with a net present value (NPV) estimated at US$72.6 million at appraisal.

The project team informed the IEG (on September 12, 2023) that the operating budget was allocated to LLA,
and a business plan had been developed with options for revenue generation. These steps increase the
likelihood of LLA's financial sustainability over the medium to long term. However, the financial and economic
analysis done at appraisal could not be replicated in the ICR given the lack of data on financial revenues and the
shift in activities at the time of restructuring (fiscal analysis had been estimated based on tribal land inventory
which was dropped). The efficiency analysis at the time of appraisal relied heavily on estimations that were not
directly connected with the project's performance and achievement of results indicators.

 At the time of restructuring the Bank could have updated the financial analysis to incorporate changes to design
in terms of their impact on the financial viability and efficiency of the project. The ICR did not present an
assessment of unit cost of each result achieved to inform a more practical efficiency analysis as this information
was not available.

The ICR efficiency analysis used project examples from other countries as a proxy to demonstrate the high
returns to project activities such as decentralization in Mongolia's land management system, or public
awareness campaigns in Namibia. While these are helpful benchmarks, the exact nature and depth of activities
are unclear. For example, the decentralization efforts supported by the project covered five out of 15 counties
and four pilot communities, while the geographic coverage of the Mongolia project may not have been
comparable.

The number of deeds registered increased over the project duration, and the time required to carry out
registrations also decreased from 44 days to 10 days, indicating cost savings in the land registration
process. The ex-post CBA based on estimated time savings showed a present value of US$4.1 million, which
shows economic gains though much lower than the estimated net present value of $72 million as calculated
during appraisal.

Administrative efficiency

The cost of project components remained at the original estimated amounts even though the scope was
reduced. Inflation and Covid-19 pandemic led to cost increases. Under component 2, the target for county office
renovation was reduced from 10 offices to 5. A few other activities, not reflected in the RF, were also canceled.
Some of those activities were taken up by other operations. The project was extended by three months to allow
for the completion of the remaining activities.

Many of the project activities were implemented by local and international consultants rather than civil servants
and LLA staff. The counterfactual scenario would have been to use existing government staff and agencies to
implement project activities. This was not feasible since the LLA was a newly established entity without prior
experience in Bank operations.




                                                                                                      Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Liberia Land Administration Project (P162893)



Given the lack of robust economic analysis and shortcomings in the implementation efficiency given the cost
overruns, the overall efficiency rating is Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      100.00
 Appraisal                                                 25.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

As the analysis above reflects, the project was relevant and responsive to the country context and aligned with
both government and Bank strategies, hence Relevance is rated High. It achieved substantial results toward
enhancing the institutional capacity of the LLA and toward establishing a functional land administration system
in Liberia, as reflected in the rating of a Substantial Efficacy. The project demonstrated a modestly efficient use
of resources given cost overruns during implementation period. The overall Outcome is thus rated Moderately
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional Risk: The LLA is a newly established entity and there are substantial risks to retention of the
capacity developed both in terms of maintenance of goods and supplies (cars, ICT hardware and software,
generators, reconstructed buildings) and in terms of soft capacity (management and staff recruitment and
training). Staff turnover could jeopardize the training outcomes, lack of commitment or corruption could lead
to misuse and deterioration of the platforms put in place.

Financial Risk: There is a moderate risk that lack of budget availability may lead to reduced involvement of
consultancy firms and local contractors, which the project relied heavily on for implementation. The current
level of support from donors may not continue. Without adequate financing, the government would not be


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Liberia Land Administration Project (P162893)



able to allocate operation and maintenance budget to the LLA and the decentralization plan and upscaling
strategy may not be fully implemented.

Political Risk: Liberia was removed from the World Bank Group's list of Fragile and Conflict-affected States
(FCS) in FY22 mainly due to changes in classification thresholds for FCS rather than significant
improvements in Liberia’s institutional environment. There was a marginal increase in the Country Policy and
Institutional Assessment (CPIA) score driven by improvements in economic policy management and quality
of public administration. There continues to be a moderate risk of political changes that may lead to
interventions in LLA functions and in the application of regulations/policies supported by the project.

Social Risk: Given a history of land disputes, contradictory policies, and inequalities in land ownership in
Liberia, there is a substantial risk that the new land law approved by the government and regulations
developed through project support are challenged by certain social and interest groups. Although a project
GRM was established for project implementation, there is a risk that the national grievance redressal
mechanism falls short of ensuring fair and just dispute resolution that advocates for the poor and
marginalized communities and individuals.

Technical Risk: Although the project delivered over 3,600 training days, continued training and updates are
needed to retain and update technical capacity. The geodetic network and M&E systems established also
require regular upgrading. Inadequate continued attention to these aspects may affect the level of
performance necessary to meet user expectations and technical requirements.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project followed a previous operation, Rehabilitation and Reform of Land Rights and Related Land
  Matters SPF (P117010). The project design reflected and incorporated lessons learned from the previous
  operation, as well as international experience in the land management sector including the need for long-
  term capacity building and upskilling of land administration staff.

  The LLA was a new partner and the use of PPA helped to initiate some of the activities. The PAD laid out
  a clear implementation support plan including an 18-month procurement plan and financial management
  arrangements.

  The project assumed the validity of the Land Rights Policy (2013) and anticipated the approval of the
  Land Rights Act (LRA) which was passed in 2018, a year after project approval. The project’s strategic
  approach through an incremental implementation plan was pragmatic and helped to focus on LLA
  capacity building in the first two years and land administration policy support in the last years of
  implementation following the approval of the land law.

  The PAD drew on existing research to identify gender gaps in land ownership, particularly under
  customary norms. While the analysis was reflected in the project document, a clear course of action and
  outcome-oriented benchmarks were missing on gender. Indicators tracked women’s participation in
  training programs and used broad descriptions i.e., gender-sensitive upscaling strategy without specifying
  what outcomes would be achieved for women in terms of asset ownership or voice and agency. The

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Liberia Land Administration Project (P162893)



  response to the vulnerability of specific population groups was not clearly articulated in the project
  design. It was unclear how the project would support these communities beyond the blanket land policy
  and related procedures.

  The project identified and discussed two Safeguards triggers and put in place appropriate mitigation
  measures. However, a functional GRM was missing at the design stage and for several years into
  implementation. Similarly, stakeholder consultation and communication plans were postponed until the
  implementation phase despite the availability of a PPA.

  As part of component 1 activities, the project developed an M&E framework for LLA’s operations. The
  ICR and PAD did not share details on the project-level M&E arrangements. It was noted that the PIU
  would lead this function. The results framework lacked clear outcome indicators, as well as definitions
  and calculation methods for several indicators. A baseline study was not completed at the time of
  appraisal.

  Since the PPA could not be used to pay staff time, the project did not hire core implementation team in
  the PIU needed for procurement and project management functions. The LLA had no prior experience in
  project implementation with the Bank. These factors contributed to procurement delays in the first two
  years of implementation. For these reasons, Quality at Entry is thus rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 While there were implementation delays in the first two years due to several factors discussed in the ICR
 including lack of adequate technical staff, the task team took steps to address bottlenecks. Procurement
 trainings were carried out, a procurement specialist was seconded to the PIU, an international consultant
 was hired to facilitate key functions, and key agencies were engaged to release timely payments.

 The Bank team carried out project restructurings at two points to align the project with the new law and
 adjust targets and implementation timeline in response to emerging challenges. ICR Annex 4 notes that the
 financial efficiency analysis was not updated at the time of restructuring when the project scope changed,
 and the appraisal analysis was no longer applicable. Also, the shortcomings in the Results Framework
 were not adequately addressed, and some indicators lacked a target value until project completion (ICR,
 para 51).

 The Bank team included two task team leaders who remained engaged in the project throughout
 implementation to maintain consistency. The team closely collaborated with the inter-agency platform on
 land administration and closely coordinated activities. The ICR shared examples of how the Bank's
 convening and supervision helped to address implementation challenges. However, the ICR notes (para
 56) that the central level GRM was established with delay and insufficient staffing.

 The Quality of Supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



                                                                                                  Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Liberia Land Administration Project (P162893)



 The Overall Bank Performance rating as Moderately Satisfactory given moderate shortcoming at design.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 While an explicit ToC was not presented in the PAD, the ICR provided this based on the original
 components and results indicators. As discussed in section 4, the ToC had a logical flow although it relied
 on a few implicit assumptions. Key aspects of a “functional” land administration system were not measured
 in the RF. The second outcome "land administration system established" mainly measured outputs but did
 not track longer-term results on the functionality and effectiveness of the system and the established
 platforms. During the 2017 restructuring, the indicators introduced at that point were relatively at the output
 level. There were other shortcomings including a lack of clear methodology for measuring some indicators.

 The ICR and the PAD did not provide detailed information on M&E design and arrangements. The PIU was
 expected to lead M&E arrangements, and the project developed an M&E framework for broader LLA
 activities (going beyond the project implementation arrangements).



b. M&E Implementation
  The PIU was responsible for the project’s M&E functions. The PIU was newly established and the LLA
  itself was a new institution, therefore M&E capacity had to be developed over time. As the ICR efficiency
  section reflected, by the time of completion, the client’s MIS/M&E system was not able to respond to
  information requests from consultants hired to support the ICR completion and cost-benefit analysis
  leaving an incomplete overview of benefits and results achieved. The M&E manual for LLA was
  developed shortly before project completion.

  The last ISR updated all indicators. Some indicators on training and public awareness could not be
  meaningfully updated during ISRs due to unclear measurement criteria. The project did not carry out a
  baseline survey during project preparation or completion. As the Bank team clarified on November 18,
  2023, the team agreed with the client to collect individual baselines for the indicators on awareness
  raising and capacity improvements. This data was meant to serve as the baseline for these indicators
  that required a baseline. However, the collected data was not of the expected quality. The project
  restructurings did not address shortcomings in results indicators discussed above and these issues
  affected the quality of results reporting.




                                                                                                     Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Liberia Land Administration Project (P162893)



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E findings were used to provide evidence for some outcomes such as time and efficiency
  improvements in land registration processes. All indicators in the RF were expected to be updated on a
  quarterly basis, however several indicators did not report any updates until the last year of project
  implementation. The LLA’s M&E and MIS capacity was low as it was a newly established entity. There
  was no evidence that the M&E data was used to inform project management and decision-making. The
  ICR did not share information on the extent to which M&E findings were shared with stakeholders, and
  whether they informed subsequent interventions.

  While there were shortcomings in the Quality of the M&E, the project provided sufficient additional
  evidence of achievements at both output and outcome levels for a Substantial rating of Efficacy.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category B. The project triggered OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) and
   OP 4.36 (Forests). The extent and impact of building renovations were expected to be minimal. The Bank
   team informed IEG on September 12, 2023, that ESMPs were prepared for the HQ and county offices, a
   consultant was hired in the PIU to oversee the activities. Contractors were trained on the code of conduct.
   Given that renovations were minor no major issues came up. The Forests OP was triggered as a cautionary
   measure, E&S specialists reviewed the legal documents prepared with project support and did not observe
   any major issues.

   The 2017 restructuring included an updated ESMF and stakeholder engagement plan to take into account
   potential risks of the new activities. The GRM was established late in implementation. As the restructuring
   paper on June 20, 2022 indicates, field teams were being deployed at that time to carry out the pilot
   activities. This was around less than a year before project closing, which is quite late for a mechanism that
   is meant to address grievances arising during project implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM)

   The project used existing FM arrangements through the Project Financial Management Unit (PFMU) which
   was managing fiduciary services for World Bank operations at the time. The FM arrangements were
   therefore considered adequate at the time of approval. There were, however, delays in implementation in
   part related to late payments. The FM rating was downgraded between October 2018 and April 2019 due
   to inadequate records in the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP), late appointment
   of evaluation panels, and delays in approval of workplan and budget. A series of trainings on FM were


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Liberia Land Administration Project (P162893)



   delivered which addressed some of the issues. The team informed IEG (on September 12, 2023) that
   external audits were carried out with unqualified results. The Financial Management was rated as MS at
   project closing.

   Procurement

   The project included an 18-month procurement plan to be managed by the PIU, however, procurement
   staff needed to be hired and this process was delayed. As with FM, the procurement rating was
   downgraded in 2018 due to high staff turnover, late appointment of evaluation panels, slow processing of
   payments, and other delays and shortcomings related to following Bank systems. The ICR states that
   trainings were delivered, LLA’s procurement manager was seconded to the PIU as a short-term solution,
   and an international procurement specialist was recruited. The procurement was rated as MS at project
   closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                 IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               Efficiency was rated modest
                                                                               given lack of adequate economic
Outcome                          Satisfactory        Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               analysis, and shortcomings in
                                                                               implementation efficiency
                                                                               Moderate shortcomings in
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory        Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               quality at entry and supervision
Quality of M&E                   Modest              Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons

The inability to put in place a functioning GRM at the start of implementation could decrease
the likelihood of timely citizen engagement around land administration, particularly in an
environment with a history of land conflicts. The project GRM did not record any grievances, and this
could be because it was established quite late during implementation. Translating a national law to
operational policies and regulations without appropriate citizen engagement measures at the design
stage could leave concerns unidentified and unaddressed.


                                                                                                 Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Liberia Land Administration Project (P162893)



Institutional development programs and pilot schemes may not adequately capture results
and lessons without a holistic M&E system. The project did not have a robust system to
triangulate evidence from various sources to inform management and provide evidence for results.
While it is difficult to measure the long-term outcomes of a capacity development effort, the pilot
schemes were introduced to reflect lessons and results in more depth. The project ICR reflected on
time-saving and an increase in the number of land registrations, but it did not include detailed
assessments and did not reflect how the pilot schemes will lead to scale-up at the national level.

The following additional lessons are derived from the ICR with some modifications in language:

A broadly defined project design and incremental approach allows for flexibility in contexts
of legal transition. The ICR also reflects on challenges caused by lack of clarity, including lack of
disbursements in the first two years and insufficient remaining time to generate and incorporate
lessons learned from pilot activities and policy documents. It could be useful if sufficient time is
allocated to adjust to changes and reflect preliminary results.

Long-term engagement and a streamlined, coordinated approach among partners enhance
the potential for sustainability of the newly established land agencies in fragile
contexts. While donor coordination was not visible initially, toward the end of the project, there was
a more formal and coordinated approach through an established platform led by the LLA's Project
Director. However, it’s unclear if the Bank’s capacity building support to the LLA and local
departments will continue through follow-up operations.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a good overview of the project, presents a reconstructed ToC, discusses changes through
restructurings, and uses multiple sources of information to substantiate the results achieved. The report is
concise and consistent in terms of information presented across various sections. It notes areas where data
was not available and discusses shortcomings in results indicators. There were some areas where information
was missing in the ICR, for example on the number of grievances received and addressed through the GRM,
the type of training certification issued by the project, and whether the project was compliant with the
anticipated safeguards triggers. The ICR drew on some data beyond the project RF to capture outcomes
achieved, for example using LLA data on land registration numbers and timelines. The ICR mentioned pilots
carried out in four communities and reflected briefly on findings, but detailed lessons learned were not shared. It
was also unclear how the four communities were selected and what their significance was in terms of national
scale-up. The ICR is balanced in assessing results and shortcomings. Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated
Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 17
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Liberia Land Administration Project (P162893)



Substantial




                                                                             Page 17 of 17
