     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID 19 School Sector Response (GPE) (P174268)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023580

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P174268                                     COVID 19 School Sector Response (GPE)

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Bangladesh                                  Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-B3874                                    31-Dec-2021                                          14,007,084.05

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Oct-2020                                 31-Dec-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             14,800,000.00                                    14,800,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              14,390,000.00                                    14,390,000.00

 Actual                                          14,007,084.05                                    14,007,084.05




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Diana Goldemberg             Salim J. Habayeb             Eduardo Fernandez               IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                           Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Grant Agreement (page 3) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 17), the project
   objectives were as follows:

           To strengthen the basic school system's institutional capacity to respond to, and recover from, the
            COVID-19 crisis; and



                                                                                                     Page 1 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID 19 School Sector Response (GPE) (P174268)



         To build resilience to face future crises from pre-primary to secondary levels.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Engaging in Systemic Response (Appraisal: US$ 3.46 million; Actual: US$ 2.82 million): This
   component aimed to provide technical assistance to implement immediate response interventions. Activities
   included support to remote learning by developing and disseminating educational content, deploying
   communication campaigns, and ensuring readiness for school re-opening.

   Component 2: Supporting Education Systems Recovery (Appraisal: US$ 8.06 million; Actual: US$ 8.01
   million): This component focused on recovery strategies for once schools re-opened. Activities included
   support to: establish school health protocols, maximize re-enrollment at pre-primary and primary levels,
   assess student learning loss, and support recovery through teacher professional development programs.

   Component 3: Building System Resilience (Appraisal: US$ 1.97 million; Actual: US$ 1.96 million): This
   component aimed to support the Ministry of Primary and Mass Education (MoPME) and the Ministry of
   Education (MoE) in responding to and recovering from future shocks.

   Component 4: Project Management, Results Monitoring and Communication (Appraisal: US$ 1.31 million;
   Actual: US$ 1.22 million): This component aimed to support project management and build results
   monitoring and evaluation (M&E) capability.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost

         The project cost at appraisal was US$ 14.800 million. The actual cost was US$ 14.007 million.

   Financing

         The project was financed entirely by a Global Partnership for Education (GPE) grant of US$ 14.8
          million, of which US$ 14.007 million was disbursed. The grant was allocated from the GPE COVID-
          19 Accelerated Funding Window designated to support governments in their efforts to mitigate the
          impact of COVID-19 on their education systems and to help recovery.

   Borrower Contribution

         There was no planned Borrower contribution.



                                                                                                   Page 2 of 12
                                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                       COVID 19 School Sector Response (GPE) (P174268)



                                      Dates

                                           October 20, 2020: Board approval.
                                           October 26, 2021: The Project was restructured to extend the closing date from December 31, 2021
                                              to December 31, 2022 to compensate for the lag in project effectiveness and implementation delays.
                                           February 01, 2022: Second restructuring approved to repurpose allocations between activities.
                                           October 20, 2022: Third restructuring approved to drop communication and outreach activities
                                            planned under the project and cancel the associated amount (US$ 0.41 million). These activities
                                            were deemed no longer necessary, as the GoB already had similar activities in place.
                                           December 31, 2022: The Project closed.



   3. Relevance of Objectives

               Rationale
               Even before the COVID-19 pandemic, Bangladesh grappled with out-of-school children issues and low and
               unequal learning outcomes. At the time of project appraisal, all schools had been closed since March 2020,
               disrupting the learning activities of around 38.6 million students, with a wide range of expected impacts on
               students, teachers, and households.

               The project objectives were highly relevant to the Government's COVID-19 Response and Recovery Plan
               for Education, developed to mitigate risks and safeguard achievements in the basic education sector. They
               were also fully aligned to the Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY16-20 (extended to FY21)
               – especially with objective 2.1 of "improved equity in access and quality of education" – and to the CPF at
               closing (for FY23-27) pillar of developing inclusive and resilient human capital. The interventions envisioned
               in this project aimed to build on and complement two existing programs in basic education – the Fourth
               Primary Education Development Program (PEDP4) and the Secondary Education Development Program
               (SEDP) – each supported by a World Bank PforR (P162619 and P160943).

               The project was not conceived as only an emergency short-term response; instead, in line with the
               Government's COVID-19 plan, it also included a medium-term set of interventions to recover learning
               losses and build additional resilience for future crises. Therefore, the project's objectives remained relevant
               once schools re-opened in September 2021.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                                   Page 3 of 12
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   COVID 19 School Sector Response (GPE) (P174268)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To strengthen the basic school system's institutional capacity to respond to the COVID-19 crisis.

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective was clear. The project envisaged to implement immediate response
activities, including developing and disseminating remote learning content, supplemented by distributing
printed learning packages to hard-to-reach students. These activities were likely to lead to the intended
outcome of supporting learning continuity during the school system shutdown from March 2020 to September
2021.

Outputs

• 125 primary- and 152 secondary-level teachers received training on creating digital learning content (lesson
content mapping, script development, content preparation, and delivery skills).

• 35 grade-subject programs with complete and appropriate digital content for Grades 1-10 were developed,
achieving the target of 35 programs. Each grade-subject covered the curriculum for the whole academic year
through four mediums—television, radio, online, and mobile.

• 150,933 hard-to-reach children were provided with physical learning materials/packages, exceeding the
target of 150,000 hard-to-reach children. These packages included play-based materials, practice books, and
teacher guides.

Outcomes

• 3,259,281 children were supported with inclusive distance learning, or 12% of children in the relevant age
group in the program area, exceeding the target of 2,500,000 (or 9% of children). The gender disaggregation
targets were equally overachieved.

However:

• The Project did not respond immediately to the pandemic as intended. Although it was originally designed
to disseminate remote learning during school closures, due to implementation delays, the project only
successfully achieved its targets after schools re-opened (ICR, p. 15). Nevertheless, the Government used
the remote learning content to support learning recovery efforts after schools re-opened (ICR, page 15).

Achievement is rated Substantial, as support to inclusive distance learning was achieved, and there are close
linkages between response and recovery aspects.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 12
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   COVID 19 School Sector Response (GPE) (P174268)



To strengthen the basic school system's institutional capacity to recover from the COVID-19 crisis.

Rationale
The theory of change envisioned as activities: supporting the implementation of a Safe School Re-Opening
Plan through school subgrants; training teachers on remedial education; and administering student learning
assessments. These activities and related outputs would plausibly contribute to children returning to schools.

Outputs

• 19,965 primary schools re-opened following the implementation of the Safe School Re-opening Plan (31%
of primary schools). The target of 20,000 was almost fully achieved (percentage-wise, the target of 31% was
achieved).

• 62,703 children (1.6%) in program areas whose learning was assessed to evaluate learning losses during
school closures, exceeding the revised target of 60,000. The original target of students assessed was
reduced from 350,000 to 60,000 during the second restructuring to incorporate a change in implementation
modality whereby trained assessors assessed each student on a one-to-one basis.

• 2,950 (0.9%) teachers were trained in remedial education, distance learning strategies, and formative and
summative assessment practices, exceeding the target of 2,000 (0.6%).

Outcomes

• 4,113,296 children who were enrolled in grant-supported pre-primary and primary level government schools
before the COVID-19 pandemic have returned to schools (39.4% of children). This surpasses the target of
3,240,000 (31%).

Achievement is rated High due to surpassing of outcomes targets in re-enrollment after school reopening.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To build resilience to face future crises from pre-primary to secondary levels.

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective was clear. The project activities included mainstream Remote
Learning System guidelines, standards, and institutional capacities to assure sustainability and to develop
emergency operation procedures for the secondary school system. The intended outcome is better preparing
the education system to continue learning during future shocks.

Outputs




                                                                                                 Page 5 of 12
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                COVID 19 School Sector Response (GPE) (P174268)



                            • 34,939,822 students benefited from direct interventions to enhance learning. The target of 35,900,000 was
                            almost fully achieved.

                            • The Project has contributed to developing a Sustainability Plan for the Remote Learning System, and
                            remote learning activities are included in the primary education program. This represents a partial
                            achievement of the target to develop the Sustainability Plan for RLS and include it in Government's regular
                            program, since it was only accomplished for the primary level, not yet for the secondary level.

                            • Standard Emergency Operation Procedures for junior secondary school system prepared. The target was
                            modified during the second restructuring – narrowing from the basic school system to junior secondary. This
                            modification reflects the Government's request to limit support to junior secondary schools since a standard
                            emergency operation procedure was already prepared and in place for the primary education sector.

                            Outcomes

                            • Remote Learning System is functional and partially integrated into the basic education school system. This
                            is a partial achievement of the target of full integration.

                            Achievement of this objective is rated Substantial due to the project's contribution to making the system more
                            resilient in the event of future crises.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is rated Substantial due to Substantial achievement of the first objective to support the
                            response to school closures, High achievement of the second objective to support schools reopening, and
                            Substantial achievement of the third objective to build resilience to face future crises.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   At project appraisal, the economic analysis (PAD, p.30-31) presented a cost-benefit analysis integrated into the
   education programs under implementation in primary (PEDP4) and secondary (SEDP). The rationale was that
   this grant was interpreted as a contribution to these projects, explicitly meant to support the Government's
   contingency plan and fund activities to mitigate and recover from COVID-19. Expected benefits arise from an

                                                                                                                             Page 6 of 12
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      COVID 19 School Sector Response (GPE) (P174268)



increase in basic education completers who earn higher wages, higher wage premiums due to increased quality
of education for all students, and lower resource wastage due to a reduction in dropouts. Costs include public
investments, private investments, and opportunity costs to households. Using a discount rate of 12 percent, this
resulted in an estimated internal rate of return as 14% for primary and 18% for secondary interventions. At
project completion, the updated cost-benefit analysis estimated an IRR of 16%, comparable to the appraisal
estimates (ICR, p.19).

Other indications of the efficient use of project resources include quick preparation given the pandemic context
and cost savings from leveraging in-house capabilities and partnerships. For example, the Remote Learning
System development was largely led by government technical experts and teachers rather than fully outsourced,
and a partnership agreement with government television and radio resulted in airtime provided for free. The
World Bank task team also used the in-house technical expertise of the EdTech team to provide global expertise
and guidance that informed the project design at no additional cost. Moreover, the school subgrants-based
scheme used the Government's existing system instead of hiring a specialized agency or service provider.

Nevertheless, the project required a 12-month extension to accommodate delays in its effectiveness, turnover of
project leadership, and slow procurement processes during the project's first year. The project had three Project
Directors resulting in difficulties in continuity and delays in decision-making and approvals (ICR, p. 24). Staff,
including the Project Director, were assigned to the project as “additional charge” to their regular jobs.

The efficiency of the project investment is rated Substantial based on high economic returns and cost-efficient
project design, but with some implementation inefficiencies that moderately reduced overall project efficiency.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     100.00
 Appraisal                                                 14.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     100.00
 ICR Estimate                                              16.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project's overall outcome is rated Satisfactory based on High relevance of objectives, Substantial efficacy,
and Substantial efficiency. These ratings indicate that there were only minor shortcomings in the project's
preparation, implementation, and achievement, producing an overall outcome rating of Satisfactory.



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID 19 School Sector Response (GPE) (P174268)



a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional development outcomes are likely to be sustained, as one of the project's stated goals - which
was adequately pursued - was to build resilience in the education system for future shocks. The processes
for developing remote learning materials have been established, and the materials have been developed and
are ready for deployment at any time. Moreover, most of the activities conducted under this project are
continuing under the Government's sector program.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project had an ambitious timeline of 18 months, as stipulated by the grant conditions. In a short
  period, the team prepared a well-designed project that responded to the Government's immediate
  needs while building on and complementing the two ongoing basic education programs (PEDP4 and
  SEDP). The Project's Results Framework was adequate, and the M&E arrangements were appropriate
  and ambitious. The implementation arrangements envisioned were designed to ensure smooth
  coordination between the two education ministries (MoPME and MoE). The PAD included a
  comprehensive risk assessment of the project design and incorporated mitigation measures. The project
  design leveraged the strength of specialized partner agencies for implementation, including UNICEF for
  consensus building and coordination, the University of Dhaka for teacher training, and the Bangladesh
  Bureau of Educational Information and Statistics (BANBEIS) for subgrant compliance monitoring.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 27), the project benefitted from having the same Bank team from design to
 closure, and from field-based TTLs who were available to provide timely on-the-ground supervision
 support. The Bank team proactively responded to the initial implementation delays due to PIU staffing
 challenges and provided flexible adjustments given the constantly changing environment at the height of
 the COVID-19 pandemic. Weekly progress review meetings with time-bound action plans were conducted
 between the project and World Bank teams as well regular meetings between the project and partnering
 agencies. These consistent meetings ensured that the project appropriately responded to the country’s
 needs, and were the basis for the team carrying out three project restructurings to fine-tune and expedite
 implementation. Because this was a GPE grant, there were additional reporting requirements and
 bureaucratic steps in approving the project restructurings, and the project team ensured timely compliance

                                                                                                 Page 8 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID 19 School Sector Response (GPE) (P174268)



 and coordination. The Aide Memoires were detailed and candid with descriptions of the progress,
 challenges, and recommendations across each activity. Changes in ratings were frequent and used in the
 ISRs to flag critical issues that required management attention and urgent action.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E framework was simple and straightforward, given the short-term nature of the project. Indicators
 were relevant, clearly defined, and measurable, including a focus on girls and hard-to-reach children.

 M&E was well-embedded institutionally. M&E relied on the existing monitoring arrangements of the
 government in addition to third-party assessments. A monitoring system was established by the M&E
 section of the PIU that was responsible for monitoring, reporting, and evaluating project activities. The M&E
 design included (a) weekly and six-monthly progress reports to track implementation progress, including
 status and progress of planned activities, and fiduciary and social safeguard compliance; (b)
 implementation of studies and assessments to evaluate performance; (c) access to administrative data to
 inform school selection and indicators; and (d) monitoring through announced and unannounced field visits.
 The data sources for the Results Framework included annual school census, evaluation reports, and
 administrative data provided by the PIU and DPE.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) implemented the M&E plan to collect and report key data, despite
  school closures and travel restrictions due to the COVID-19 pandemic. There were three detailed
  progress reports to update the Results Framework, two rounds of school surveys to assess compliance
  and collect feedback, and a tracking survey on how students assessed remote learning. Moreover, a
  large-scale assessment of students' learning was conducted to inform remedial measures after schools
  re-opened. Regarding the school sub-grants, the PIU delivered virtual and face-to-face orientations on
  the sub-grants implementation manual and conducted announced and unannounced field visits to ensure
  compliance monitoring of implementation activities (ICR, p. 24).



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (p. 25) stated that the Project's M&E was used to inform supervision. The progress reports
  helped facilitate mission dialogue, the subgrant compliance reports were used to select schools to


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID 19 School Sector Response (GPE) (P174268)



  provide a refresher trainer, and the student assessment informed the preparation of the next sector
  program.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated as having a moderate environmental and social risk, with the main potential issues
   relating to disinfectant storage, use, and disposal in schools, and the risk of excluding intended
   beneficiaries from distance learning. Both risks were appropriately addressed during implementation by
   developing a protocol for school cleaning products and enforcing compliance, and through a comprehensive
   stakeholder consultation process implemented to ensure inclusivity, particularly for students in remote
   areas.

   An Environmental and Social Management Framework was developed and complied with, including an
   Environmental and Social Code of Practice. A stakeholder consultation process was also implemented to
   ensure inclusivity, particularly for those in remote areas. A gender sensitivity training module was delivered
   to 500 school teachers and administrators. The project was assessed as being compliant with the
   Framework. The overall Environmental and Social Safeguards performance was Satisfactory (as also
   recorded in the Operations Portal).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: According to the ICR (p.26), the project required significant support from the
   World Bank to comply with FM requirements, with significant delays. Nevertheless, the unaudited interim
   financial reports were submitted and were of acceptable quality. The final audited financial statements are
   due on December 31, 2023.

   Procurement: According to the ICR (p. 28), initially, the project encountered significant procurement
   delays due to a lack of the GoB procurement staff assigned to the project and frequent turnover of
   leadership, magnified by the COVID-19 shutdowns. The delays led to one ISR instance of a Moderately
   Unsatisfactory rating. With measures taken to strengthen the procurement capacity (a full-time
   procurement consultant, training of the project's officials on procurement, targeted implementation support
   by the task team), significant progress was made by June 2022, with most of the contracts awarded and
   the rating upgraded to Satisfactory for the last six months of implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 12
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       COVID 19 School Sector Response (GPE) (P174268)



   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   High                  High

Quality of ICR                   ---                   High


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (pages 29-30), adapted by IEG:

        Extensive collaboration and consultation with all stakeholders facilitate the
         development and delivery of remote learning content. The close involvement of all
         government stakeholders from the design stage facilitated ownership and sustainability of
         these efforts, with content delivery continuing even after project closure.
        Decentralizing support services through a school subgrant scheme can expedite
         implementation. The shift from an intervention in which a centralized agency manages the
         implementation to a decentralized subgrant scheme empowered schools and resulted in a
         comparatively faster implementation process. An area for improvement is that all schools
         received the same amount for the subgrants; instead, it may make sense for the subgrant
         amount to reflect the size of the student population.
        Effective project leadership is central to implementation. The prolonged absence of
         effective project leadership during the first year of project implementation adversely affected
         the implementation of the project. High-level project performance reviews and sustained
         communication among the Government, implementing agencies, project units, and the World
         Bank task team may be a means to bring greater attention to this issue.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID 19 School Sector Response (GPE) (P174268)




The ICR provided a thorough overview of project preparation and implementation. The ICR was results
oriented, internally consistent, reasonably concise, and compliant with guidelines. The quality of evidence and
ICR analysis were adequate and aligned with the PDOs. The ICR was candid, and offered several useful
lessons derived from the specific experience and findings of the project.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 12
