     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Skills Development Project (P145309)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023566

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                    Project Name
 P145309                                       UG-Skills Development Project

 Country                                       Practice Area(Lead)
 Uganda                                        Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-56120                                   31-Aug-2020                                            97,329,298.00

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Apr-2015                                 31-Dec-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             100,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                              100,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                           98,640,828.00                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Denise A. Vaillancourt      Judyth L. Twigg               Eduardo Fernandez                IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                           Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As stated in the June 24, 2016 Financing Agreement between the Republic of Uganda and the International
   Development Association (IDA) (Schedule 1, p. 6), the objective of the project was "to enhance the capacity of
   institutions to deliver high quality, demand-driven training programs in target sectors.” The design document
   presents the same statement (PAD, pp. v, 8 and 32). While not specified in the formal PDO statement, the
   targeted sectors were: (i) agriculture with a focus on agro-processing; (ii) manufacturing; and (iii) construction.



                                                                                                      Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Skills Development Project (P145309)



   The PDO did not change throughout the project’s life. However, some PDO-level indicators and targets were
   revised as a part of the project’s restructuring, approved on July 29, 2020, responding to delays in civil works
   and delays caused by the COVID pandemic. Because the ambition of some of these indicators was reduced,
   this ICRR undertakes a split rating methodology. The split is being done only for the first objective, since the
   ambition of Objective 2 did not change at restructuring.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  29-Jul-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Original Components:

   Component 1: Institutionalizing systemic reforms in skills development (original estimate: $5.00
   million; actual cost: $5.03 million).

   Subcomponent 1.1: Establishing Sector Skills Councils (SSCs) and developing the foundations of a
   Skills Development Authority (SDA), including: establishment and initial operation of three SSCs in
   priority sectors (agriculture, construction, manufacturing); training of SSC members; studies on training
   needs; exchange of experience and best practice and development of standards; and support to the
   development of organizational plans, systems, and procedures for the eventual establishment of the Skills
   Development Authority, including technical assistance to develop, test, and implement systems for
   management, monitoring and evaluation, and financial management.

   Subcomponent 1.2: Alignment and strengthening of the assessment system, including: technical
   assistance and operating costs to support the SSCs to determine appropriate mechanisms and institutions
   to support competency-based assessment, in line with occupational standards determined by the SSCs;
   and support to existing institutions (Directorate of Industrial Training and Uganda Business and Technical
   Examinations Board) to coordinate with the private sector to align standards for assessment and
   certification with the needs of the industry).

   Subcomponent 1.3: Establishment of a Management Information System (MIS) for the Business,
   Technical and Vocational Education Training (BTVET) subsector, including technical assistance to
   support Government of Uganda’s (GoU’s) Reform Task Force in this endeavor, with data from at least all
   public institutions compiled by project’s end. The system was to be developed and housed at the Reform
   Task Force and transitioned to the SDA, when operational.



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  UG-Skills Development Project (P145309)



Subcomponent 1.4: Communication and marketing for the BTVET sub-sector, including financing of a
consultancy firm to provide technical assistance to actively rebrand the subsector through enhanced media
communications and direct engagement with stakeholders. The communication campaign sought to (i) raise
awareness of the programs in target sectors, including the Skills Development Matching Grant facility
(under Component 3); (ii) generate awareness in communities and in primary and secondary schools for
enhancing women’s enrollment in centers of excellence and network institutions; (iii) mobilize training
institutions and other providers to participate in project activities; and (iv) disseminate information on the
program’s strategy, results, and lessons. Mobilization activities were to be carried out by target institutions
and include student admission counseling and seminars for potential students and their parents.

Component 2: Improving quality and relevance of skills development (original estimate: $62.2
million; actual cost: $62.12 million).

Subcomponent 2.1: Establishment of Four Centers of Excellence (CoEs) in three targeted Uganda
Technical Colleges (Lira, Elgon, and Bushenyi), and in Bukalasa Agricultural College. Support aimed for
CoEs to forge partnerships with internationally recognized twinning partner institutions. Specific areas of
focus included: improvements to institutional governance; enhanced equity; design and adaptation of
demand-driven, competency based curricula and assessments to meet international standards; training for
faculty and staff, including development of training and learning materials; upgrading of physical
infrastructure (buildings, modern workshops, and classrooms with the latest equipment, machinery, and
multi-media facilities); and strengthening of CoEs’ management and monitoring mechanisms.

Subcomponent 2.2: Support to public Vocational Technical Institutes (VTIs), covering support of up to
12 competitively selected VTIs to strengthen their capacity to respond to labor market needs and
opportunities, including delivery of short-term training courses, and to improve the quality of training offered;
and support to selected VTIs in the introduction of new short and long competency-based courses within
one occupational area (construction, manufacturing, or agri-business) and in partnering them with one of
the supported CoEs, in line with trade of specialization.

Subcomponent 2.3: Twinning arrangement for establishment of Centers of Excellence and
Vocational Technical Institutes (VTIs): recruitment of technically qualified institutions, selected through an
international competitive process to act as twinning partners to help selected colleges grow into CoEs
through four-year partnerships.

Component 3: Employer-led short-term training and recognition of prior learning (original estimate:
$18.0 million; actual cost: $22.58 million): Financing of a grant facility mechanism (Skills Development
Facility/SDF) that would facilitate collaboration between training providers and enterprises/employers. Four
different Windows were to address, respectively: (1) skills shortages in the formal sector (cooperation
between formal medium and large enterprises and training providers); (2) self-employed and workers in the
informal sector, micro and small enterprises, master craftspeople, and cooperative members to improve
their skills to enhance their competitiveness; (3) private training institutions seeking to develop new
innovative models for training delivery, concepts, and programs responding to an identified need; and (4)
initiatives by private sector/industry seeking to develop a system for certification of skills and competencies
acquired through informal and non-formal means.

Component 4: Project management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) (original estimate: 11.8
million; actual cost: $8.91 million), including: (i) project management (establishment of project
coordination unit within the Ministry of Education and Sports (MoES) and implementation units within each


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Skills Development Project (P145309)



   CoE; and strengthening of project coordination unit in the Private Sector Foundation of Uganda to support
   implementation of the SDF); (ii) project M&E (baseline studies, mid- and end-term tracer studies, employer
   satisfaction surveys, mid-term review and annual performance audits); and (iii) capacity building for
   implementing units.

   The original project also included an additional $3.0 million for contingencies.

   Revisions to Components

   The components were not revised. However, GoU’s 2016 decision not to establish any additional
   government authorities affected the original intention of Component 1: to support the establishment of the
   Skills Development Authority (SDA) and the Reform Task Force on an interim basis. An alternative
   arrangement to the SDA ultimately took shape. A TVET Council ended up serving as the major body
   representing employers and guiding skilling reforms. This change required the development and adoption of
   a new TVET Policy, which the project supported through significant technical assistance and wide
   consultation with stakeholders (employers, public sector, civil society, local communities, and development
   partners). Approved by Cabinet in January 2019, the Policy provided legal ground for establishing the TVET
   Council and implementing skilling reforms. This was captured in the July 2020 restructuring.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Cost. The total actual cost of the project at closing was $98.64 million, or 99 percent of the $100 million
   cost estimated at appraisal. As detailed in Section 2.d, the actual costs of Component 1 were very close to
   the original estimates. The actual cost of Component 3 (employer-led short-term training and recognition of
   prior learning) was 125 percent of the original estimate, attributed to the successful uptake and
   implementation of the SDF, while the cost of Component 4 was 75 percent of the original estimate.

   Financing and Borrower Contribution. The project was 100 percent financed by an IDA credit in the
   amount of SDR 71.1 million ($100 million equivalent). No contribution from the Borrower was planned or
   provided.

   Key Dates. The project was approved on April 22, 2015, and became effective one and one-half years later
   on October 28, 2016. Following the May 30, 2019, mid-term review, the project was restructured on July 29,
   2020, to accommodate delays in civil works and procurement and delays due to COVID restrictions. The
   original closing date of August 31, 2020, was extended twice (in July 2020 and August 2021), adding a total
   of two years and four months to the project implementation period.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The PDO was highly relevant to current country conditions. Uganda’s Third National Development Plan
(NDP III) (2020/21 – 2024/25) highlights a number of challenges to the provision of a qualified labor force to
fill the country’s needs for economic growth and productivity. Uganda’s large and rapidly growing population
(41.6 million in 2020, growing at 3 percent) has resulted in a youthful age structure. Almost half (49.3

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Skills Development Project (P145309)



percent) are under the age of 15 years, culminating in a high dependency rate. The country is failing to
invest sufficiently in this young population to exploit its potential contributions to the size and skills level of
its labor force. Per capita expenditure on education is low and declining. If the youth bulge is not well
planned for through balanced investments in social and economic policies, the potential demographic
dividend will be missed. Moreover, there is a mismatch between skills required for labor markets and
knowledge produced by training institutions. There is an urgent need for skilled, technical, and hands-on
manpower for the economy. In short, Uganda’s NDP III asserts that, unless concerted effort is made to
exploit the potential demographic dividends arising from a youthful population, the unemployment problem
will continue to increase and the urgent need for skilled, technical, and hands-on manpower for the
economy will continue to be unmet.

The PDO was also highly relevant to the current development priorities of the country. According to
Uganda’s NDP III (2020/21 – 2024/25), drastic action is required to address the serious skills shortage in
the country. To this end, the NDP III includes two strategic areas of focus. First, an integrated Human
Resource Development Planning approach has been adopted to: (i) build up the skills base and education
requirements needed for employment, employability, and sustainable growth; (ii) expand the pool of
entrepreneurs, business leaders, managers, and professionals with the ability to contribute to problem
solving, the creation of new products and services, and the growth of their enterprises; and (iii) streamline
national education and training systems responsive to human resources needs and trends. A Five-Year
National Human Resource Development Plan serves as a tool to determine the demand for and supply of
human resources by quantifying the skills and education qualifications needed in Uganda in the short,
medium, and long terms, in consideration of national, regional, and international contexts. Second, GoU
prioritizes skills and vocational development to address unemployment, especially among youth. To this
end, it is working to align the current Skilling Uganda Strategy with national and sectoral human resources
plans in order to develop a comprehensive strategy to address the gaps in a coherent manner through
existing or new vocational and tertiary institutions. Priority is given to the building of capacities of existing
vocational and tertiary institutions to start or expand programs that produce graduates with the required
skills, while at the same time reducing intakes for courses that no longer address the needs of Uganda’s
economy. In short, skills development initiatives under NDP III aim at providing Ugandans with knowledge,
skills, and values for employment, job creation, and productivity in the NDP III growth areas (industry and
agriculture).

The fourth strategic objective (of five) articulated in Uganda’s NDP III is to enhance the productivity and
social wellbeing of the population. To this end, the third of four key areas for investment cited in the NDP III
aims to increase the generation of a more skilled, better motivated, and healthier workforce for all sectors of
the economy, but particularly for the industrial sector, as well as a modernized agricultural sector. The
theory of change highlights the goal of increased labor productivity with a view to increasing
competitiveness and achieving a better quality of life for all. Among the key results articulated in NDP III are
improvements in: labor productivity, especially in industrial and agricultural sectors; labor force participation
rate; and employment/population ratio.

The PDO was also highly relevant to the Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Uganda
for the Period FY16-21, which was extended by one year to FY22 in line with the Bank’s
recommendation to defer development of new CPFs in the aftermath of COVID. Objective 5 under the
CPF seeks to improve the business environment through: improved financing; enhanced transparency and
accountability of land tenure and acquisition; expanded access to credit for small and medium-size
enterprises; improved access to power; and (most relevant to this project) the development of skills
demanded by the labor market. A progress indicator under the CPF that tracks the participation of

                                                                                                          Page 5 of 24
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      UG-Skills Development Project (P145309)



               employers in the skills training programs is reflective of the project’s strategy to involve employers in the
               design, delivery, and evaluation of skills development training. The Uganda Performance and Learning
               Review of the FY16-21 CPF noted the continued relevance of all strategic objectives under the CPF, which
               were continued during the extended year of FY22.

               This was the first World Bank-financed project in Uganda focused on national skills
               development. Nevertheless, the Bank's engagement in TVET brought considerable value added. Its
               rich body of knowledge and experience in skills development, in many countries in Africa and
               elsewhere in the world, benefited the design and implementation of the project and, more broadly,
               the implementation of Uganda’s Skilling Strategy. Moreover, the Bank’s long involvement in a wide
               range of sectors in Uganda, combined with its support to capacity building in Uganda across many projects,
               allowed for cross-sectoral synergies on approaches to skills development and institutional
               development. Also, as noted in the PAD (p. 102), at the time of project design, the Bank had recently
               assumed the Chair of the Education Development Partners Working Group on BTVET, responsible for
               coordinating efforts of development partners in line with Uganda's Skilling Strategy.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To enhance the capacity of institutions to deliver high quality training programs in target sectors (original
                             outcome targets)

                             Rationale
                             This objective involved a combination of interventions that focused on improving the governance of the
                             BTVET sector and of training institutions, and linkages with the private sector. Key outputs/intermediate
                             outcomes included: the establishment of SSCs to assess and respond to the need for skills in targeted
                             sectors; the development of occupational standards and competency-based training courses; the creation of
                             CoEs with a network of VTIs with quality training programs initially supported by twinning institutions; and
                             private sector participation in the centers of excellence governing councils. Improvements to governance at
                             the sector-wide level and at the level of training institutions all sought to enhance training quality through: the
                             establishment of national occupational standards in key sectors, the involvement of the private sector to
                             enhance the relevance of the training, better coordination and collaboration between training providers and
                             the business community representing labor market demands, studies to assess and strengthen training skills
                             assessment capacity, a strengthened information system for expanded and improved labor market
                             information and monitoring, centers of excellence established at selected TVIs supported by international
                             twinning arrangements to develop and model training quality and the sharing of quality enhancements with a
                             network of TVIs, the development of new, high-quality competency-based skills training courses, teacher
                             training, and investments in the physical facilities of selected institutions. Taken together, these interventions

                                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-Skills Development Project (P145309)



were logically and plausibly connected to achievement of the objective to increase institutional capacity to
deliver high-quality training programs.



Outputs and intermediate results

Institutionalizing systemic reforms in skills development

      The project supported critical work needed to transform the subsector, which culminated in the
         following outputs:
               o Development and approval of a TVET policy;
               o Formation of a TVET Technical Working Group to prepare for the establishment of the
                  proposed TVET Council;
               o Creation of the TVET Council with half of the representation from the private sector and half
                  from government;
               o Establishment and functioning of a TVET secretariat; and
               o Draft of a TVET bill, which is being processed to institutionalize TVET reforms, including the
                  formal establishment of the TVET Council.
        Other preparatory activities included stakeholder consultations, and development of draft TVET
         Council operational manuals and a draft TVET Council strategy and operational framework.
        A diagnostic study was conducted to assess the existing TVET assessment systems and bodies
         (Directorate of Industrial Training and Uganda Business and Technical Examinations Board) and to
         inform priorities for systems strengthening for assessments. This study continues to inform a new
         Bank-supported skills operation.
        A management information system (MIS) for BTVET was established and is fully operational, fully
         achieving the original, unchanged target. The MIS is being used by MoES to collect basic data for
         the BTVET sector. Seventy-five trainers and end-users were trained on the data input aspects of the
         system. The follow-on skills development operation will further strengthen the MIS, ensuring the
         inclusion and expanded dissemination of more labor market information.
        A total of five SSCs were constituted in priority sectors, as detailed in the Uganda Vocational
         Qualifications Framework (UVQF), fully achieving the original, unchanged target of five. In
         addition to the two baseline SSCs in tourism and oil, three additional SSCs were created in
         agriculture, construction, and manufacturing. These SSCs are responsible for determining needed
         skills for targeted sectors. Thirty-nine members were trained by twinning institutions in leadership skills
         and occupational standards. In addition, an online benchmarking exercise, held remotely between the
         SSCs and the National Skills Development Corporation of India during COVID-19 travel restrictions,
         provided recommendations on how to strengthen SSCs, including the need to ensure that each
         economic sector has a functional SSC, and the creation of sub-SSCs under umbrella SSCs for highly
         specialized skills. SSC members are now able to conduct occupational standards profiling and
         develop occupational standards.
        A total of 8,168 students benefited from direct interventions to enhance learning, exceeding the
         target of 5,132. Of these students, 2,969 (or 63 percent) were female, exceeding the target of 1,283
         (or 25 percent of 5,132). These students include those enrolled in the new competency-based courses
         as well as those who benefited from internships. This achievement was made possible thanks to the



                                                                                                      Page 7 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  UG-Skills Development Project (P145309)



      upgraded learning facilities (project-supported institutions and staff development). This corporate
      indicator was added in 2018.

Improving quality and relevance of skills development

     A total of 25 competency-based training courses were developed and validated by the Sector Skills
      Council by 2020, exceeding the original, unchanged target of 18. These courses were used by
      VTIs in the delivery of their training programs. They were based on a labor market survey, which
      informed institutions on skills sets employers were seeking, thereby ensuring that graduates would be
      employed upon completion of their training. Fifty-six instructors were trained on these courses by
      master trainers. The project also supported the development of a competency-based assessment tool
      and provided capacity building training for 516 assessors, who assessed the first cohort of TVET
      students in the agriculture TVET program.
     Four targeted Centers of Excellence (CoEs) were established by 2020, each one with an Industrial
      Advisory Committee constituted and functional, ensuring strong representation by employers in
      governance, fully achieving the target of four. All four CoEs’ Industrial Advisory Committees have
      full membership from industry and are chaired by the CoEs’ governing councils.
     A total of 148 teachers were trained. Seventy-three teachers were newly recruited (and also among
      the 148 who were trained), exceeding the target of 60. Twelve of the new recruits (or 16 percent)
      were female, falling slightly short of the target of 20 percent. This corporate indicator was added
      in 2018.
     The project management information system was made fully operational, meeting the target.



Outcomes

     National Occupational Standards were developed for 72 relevant trades/occupations in target sectors,
      far exceeding the original, unchanged target of 18. Initially, 25 occupational standards were
      developed by the SSCs, with support from the twinning institutions. Based on a needs assessment for
      the manufacturing and agricultural sectors carried out by the SSCs and MoES in 2021, an additional
      47 were developed: 37 for agriculture and 10 for manufacturing.
     A total of 3,811 new intakes were enrolled in the targeted training programs, not achieving the
      original target of 5,131 (74 percent achievement). Of these new intakes, 25 percent were female,
      fully achieving the original target of 25 percent.
     One hundred percent of entrants enrolled in the targeted short courses completed these courses,
      exceeding the original, unchanged target of 85 percent. A tracer study reported that the agriculture
      sector respondents indicated the relevance of short courses, with 59 percent of the 1st cohort, 70
      percent of the 2nd cohort, and 80 percent of the 3rd cohort respondents reporting that they could
      effectively apply their newly acquired skills in less than one month. (This study was unable to capture
      many respondents from the construction and manufacturing sectors, largely because of delays in
      offering short courses due to civil works and equipment procurement challenges). Moreover, 100
      percent of employers interviewed for the study in all three sectors indicated that they were satisfied
      (very satisfied or satisfied) with graduates from all three cohorts that they employed upon completion
      of the short courses.
     Because of delays in effectiveness and delays in implementation (including civil works and student
      recruitment), the target of 80 percent of entrants enrolled in targeted certificate courses completing

                                                                                                Page 8 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-Skills Development Project (P145309)



       those courses was not met. This outcome indicator was dropped during the July 2020
       restructuring.
      For the same reasons as cited above, the target of 90 percent of entrants enrolled in targeted diploma
       courses completing those courses was not met. This outcome indicator was dropped during the
       July 2020 restructuring.

Even though three of the five original PDO targets (on student intakes, and completion of certificate and
diploma programs) were not met by the project’s end, the efficacy of achieving Objective 1 (to enhance
institutional capacity to deliver high quality training programs in target sectors) is assessed to be substantial,
considering the key institutional capacities strengthened under the project and quality enhancement
interventions. Collaboration with the private sector has culminated in the modernization of training curricula in
key trades. The four CoEs are now able to develop strategic plans and operational, budget, and human
resource development plans, and offer competency-based training of high quality in a range of skills
demanded in the manufacturing, construction, and agriculture sectors of Uganda. The institutional twinning
model supported CoEs on quality aspects (curriculum, industry linkages, and faculty development). The
operationalization of partnerships between the CoEs and the 14 VTIs has created a strong foundation for the
networking of Uganda Technical Colleges and Vocational Technical Institutes centered on ongoing
improvements in training quality and relevance in priority sectors. Investments in the physical facilities at
TVET institutions, teacher recruitment and training, functional SSCs, and strengthened partnerships between
TVET institutions and industry have all supported quality improvements to training programs.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To enhance the capacity of institutions to deliver high quality training programs in target sectors (revised
outcome targets)

Revised Rationale
Outputs and intermediate results

These are the same as reported under the original outcome targets.



Outcomes

The first three outcomes listed under Original Objective 1 apply here as well, since targets for these indicators
did not change during restructuring. The remaining two outcomes listed under original Objective 1 do not
apply here as they were dropped during restructuring. One new indicator and target, assessed below, was
added at restructuring:

      The ICR (p. 22) reports that at project closing (December 2022), only 48 percent of students
       supported for internship, placement, and industrial training (895 of 1,871 targeted students) had

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-Skills Development Project (P145309)



         completed their internships, falling short of the 85 percent target by almost half. The ICR (p. 22) also
         reports that the government informed the Bank that by the end of April 2023, a total of 554 more
         students had been supported for internships. In an email of October 28, 2023 to IEG, the task team
         updated this data, stating that an additional 635 students completed the required internship training
         by April 2023, and noting that the internships for this cohort had been delayed by the closure of the
         TVET institutions during the pandemic. This brings the total number of students completing internships
         to 1,530 (or 82 percent achievement of the 1,871 target).

The overall efficacy in achieving revised Objective 1 is assessed as high, given the high achievements in
sector reform and governance and improvements in quality and relevance of skills training, outlined in this
section and summarized at the end of the original Objective 1 assessment, and the surpassing of three of four
outcome targets.



Revised Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To enhance the capacity of institutions to deliver demand-driven training programs in target sectors

Rationale
This objective was to be achieved by stimulating and responding to demand for relevant training through two
major interventions: the development of employer-led short-term training; and the development and piloting of
a grant facility mechanism, the Skills Development Fund (SDF). Focused on six key sectors (agriculture;
construction; manufacturing and auto mechanics; transport and logistics; information, communication and
technology; and tourism), the SDF was to support training and internships through four funding windows to
improve training relevance, and productivity and competitiveness in the formal and informal sectors. Key
outcomes were the number of collaboration agreements signed between enterprises and training
providers, and employers’ rating of the competency of trained employees. Taken together, these interventions
were logically and plausibly connected to achievement of the objective to increase institutional capacity to
deliver demand-driven training programs.



Outputs and intermediate results

        The project established the governing mechanism of the SDF, which was multi-sectoral, and involved
         development partners, various ministries (Finance, Planning and Economic Development; MoES),
         government departments, companies, and institutions, as well as a Grants Approval Committee with
         representation from MoES, BTVET, and firms. This mechanism was successful in developing
         partnerships with these actors and stakeholders.
        The SDF strengthened the Directorate of Industrial Training (DIT)’s assessment and certification of
         skills acquired through the skills upgrading programs. The DIT-issued certificates provided evidence of
         skills acquired and were used to seek employment in and outside of Uganda.


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 24
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
UG-Skills Development Project (P145309)




  From a 2015 baseline of 44, 992 collaborative agreements between enterprises and training providers
     were signed and activated, more than one and one-half times the target of 598.
    A total of 885 grants were approved during the life of the project from all four SDF windows combined,
     exceeding the PAD’s expectations of 474 grants. The large number of grants awarded was partly
     due to: (i) a robust communications campaign informing employers and employees of the SDF; (ii)
     somewhat less costly projects; (iii) reduced training costs, conducted within the grantees' localities;
     and (iv) in-kind contributions (venue, meals, land for demonstration) for agriculture projects, allowing
     for more personnel to be trained.
    SDF Window 1, designed to address skills shortages in the private sector (medium and large
     enterprises), culminated in:
           o Short-term training achievements, including: 13,794 staff/employees and other workers trained
              across six priority sectors; 4,234 trainees assessed and certified by DIT; an estimated 2,000
              new jobs created; 7 DIT assessment centers established in six districts; new products brought
              to market; certification of 17 companies’ products by the Uganda National Bureau of Standards
              for export after skilling training, which improved the quality of training; and
           o Internships achievements, including: 75 companies awarding grants for internships; 2,903
              students placed for internships (of which 2,692 were completed); and 75 percent of those
              completing internships finding jobs, 12 percent self-employed, and approximately 20 percent
              retained by their host companies.
    SDF Window 2, designed to provide foundational skills to the self-employed (informal sector),
     culminated in: 514 organizations/associations receiving grants to skill their members; 56,217
     individuals enrolled for the skilling, of whom 49,062 (87 percent) completed the training (47.4 percent
     were female, 314 were persons with disabilities, and 714 were refugees); 94 districts (62 percent)
     reached, thanks to an effort in 2019 to target and reach more vulnerable districts; assessment and
     certification by DIT of 11,132 trainees, with DIT certificates providing the evidence of recognition of
     skills acquired with no prior learning/formal education; and the accreditation of five organizations as
     DIT assessment centers.
    SDF Window 3, designed to incentivize private training institutions to develop new innovative models
     for training (innovative skills training), culminated in: 16 grants awarded to 8 public and 3 private
     training institutions and 5 companies for skills enhancement in welding and fabrication, plumbing,
     building, weaving, aquaculture and silk production techniques, cyber security, advanced digital skills,
     and tourism; 9 training curricula developed and approved by the National Council for Higher
     Education; enhanced capacities of 130 trainers and assessors in universities and technical institutes;
     1,052 people trained on new/innovative courses established (welding and fabrication, plumbing,
     building, tailoring, information and communication technology, art, and design) and delivered at
     various institutions; the identification of Kabasanda Technical Institute as a new CoE because of
     capacities gained under the project; and new specialized skills acquired by staff, students, and
     company/organization staff in the areas of computer numerical control (automated control of machines
     and tools by means of a computer or certain software) and cyber security.
    Considered the most successful element of SDF, due to its higher remuneration, increased job
     security, and reduced costs for international certification, SDF Window 4, designed to fund
     private/industry organizations to develop a system of certification for skills acquired through informal
     means (recognition of prior learning), culminated in: 10 organizations receiving grants, including five
     government vocational training institutes to be accredited for international certification, two private
     institutions for national DIT certification, and 3 companies to train beneficiaries in specialized skills
     required in manufacturing, heavy-goods vehicles, and oil and gas; the accreditation of four institutions
     by City & Guilds of London (a Royal Chartered Institute providing skills development training and

                                                                                               Page 11 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  UG-Skills Development Project (P145309)



     accreditations) and two others accredited for the Engineering Construction Industry Training Board
     (ECITB) (UK); the setting up of three master craft guilds by USSIA/MAMZA Consulting Firm,
     accredited by Cambridge International College, UK; the assessment, retraining and certification of 187
     trainers across 10 institutions and companies; and the assessment and certification of 7,237 trainees,
     the majority of whom retained their current employment, while others got new jobs after
     certification. The international accreditation of the target VTIs helps students to access courses
     reviewed by international bodies. Moreover, the project enhanced collaboration between the target
     colleges and these international assessments/assessment bodies, making the assessment and
     accreditation easily accessible (because of in-country presence of the assessment and certification
     process) at highly subsidized rates.
    From a 2015 baseline of 35 percent, almost all (96 percent) of trained employees were rated by their
     employers as both competent and efficient on the job, far exceeding the target of 75 percent.



Outcomes

    A project-supported study of the SDF activities revealed strong satisfaction of firms with trainees’ skills
     acquired under Windows 1 and 2. In an October 28, 2023 email to IEG, the task team clarified data
     presented in Table 3 of the ICR (p. 24) as follows: One hundred percent of firms were satisfied or
     very satisfied with: improvements of the trainees in the use of tools and equipment; trainees’
     application of skills acquired to improve work outputs; and trainees’ underpinning knowledge of the
     work process. Of all the firms benefiting from Window 2, 95 percent of firms were satisfied or very
     satisfied with improvements in the proper use of tools and equipment; 92 percent were satisfied or
     very satisfied with trainees' application of skills acquired to improve work outputs; and 94 percent were
     satisfied or very satisfied with trainees' underpinning knowledge of the work process.
    The SDF study also documented employers’ opinions that the training provided under the SDF had a
     positive impact on the employees’ productivity, interpersonal and technical abilities, teamwork, job
     confidence, and work motivation.
    Ninety-five percent of trainees in supported firms were satisfied with the skills they acquired,
     exceeding the target of 70 percent. A breakdown of satisfaction levels by economic sector and
     business size showed strong and consistent satisfaction across this range: 90 percent for
     construction; 92 percent for agriculture; 87 percent for manufacturing; 92 percent for large firms; and
     89 percent for small, micro, informal enterprises. Additionally, most of the grantees interviewed,
     especially those in manufacturing and construction, indicated that SDF-sponsored training helped
     them reduce operational costs and waste of raw materials and offered trainees an opportunity to learn
     new ideas to increase company outputs.
    Almost all trainees were satisfied with the skills they gained: 98.6 percent of the trainees under
     Window 1 were satisfied or very satisfied; and 99.5 percent of trainees under Window 2 were satisfied
     or very satisfied. Both Window 1 and Window 2 trainees were also satisfied or very satisfied with the
     training methods. Overall, trainees reported that the training (i) helped them better handle their jobs;
     (ii) improved their understanding of their jobs; (iii) improved their skills and enabled them to
     demonstrate their abilities; (iv) enabled them to respond more quickly to emerging situations and
     make decisions; (v) helped them to work more efficiently; and (vi) made them feel more secure in their
     jobs. Self-reporting by trainees provides interesting perspectives but would not be sufficient as an
     outcome indicator on its own. In the case of this project, these data provide a complement to data on
     the levels of satisfaction of employers/firms on the quality of training.

                                                                                                 Page 12 of 24
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                UG-Skills Development Project (P145309)




                                    A total of 82,247 people benefited from job-focused interventions, exceeding the target of
                                     75,132. Of these beneficiaries, 38,985 (or 47 percent) were female, essentially achieving the target
                                     of 48 percent. This corporate indicator was added in 2018.
                                    Ninety percent of the 238 employers who received funding under Window 1 participated in skills
                                     training programs, up from a (2018) baseline of 82.5, fully achieving the target of 90 percent.
                                    The 2021 SDF study showed that (i) 61 percent of a sample of employers benefiting from SDF
                                     (Windows 1 or 2) reported that they increased their budget for training, up from the baseline of 43
                                     percent of all SDF grantees who were implementing the project in September 2017; and (ii) 91 percent
                                     of these same grantees/employers had reported that they increased their time allocation for skills
                                     development in 2021, up from the baseline of 77.5 percent of all SDF grantees who were
                                     implementing the project in September 2017.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy in achieving the project's original objectives is rated as substantial overall. Efficacy in
                            achieving the original Objective 1 is substantial given strong performance in reform implementation and
                            capacity building for improved governance and quality assurance, but with moderate shortcomings, as three
                            of the five PDO indicators were not achieved (on student intakes and completion rates of courses).

                            Efficacy in achieving Objective 2 is high, given that all targets were exceeded or fully achieved.

                            The task team, in their October 28, 2023 email exchange with IEG, confirmed that the sector-wide outcomes -
                            - of enhanced capacity of institutions to deliver high quality training programs in target sectors and improved
                            capacity of institutions to deliver demand-driven training programs in target sectors -- reported in the efficacy
                            section are largely attributable to the project, thanks to its comprehensive support to BVET sector reform and
                            governance focused on enhancing the quality and relevance of training, the creation of centers of excellence,
                            and the establishment of the SDF to incentivize and support increased involvement of employers in the
                            design and delivery of demand-driven training, new innovative skills training, and advances in acquiring
                            international certifications and assessments. While the BVET sector receives substantial support from a
                            dozen or so development partners (as reported in the PAD at the time of design), this support is largely
                            focused at the level of individual institutions. Since the Bank is chair of the Education Development Partners
                            Working Group on BTVET, the project provided a framework for improved coordination of partners'
                            contributions to Uganda's Skilling Strategy. In the absence of the project, it is unlikely that major advances in
                            the reform and governance of the sector would have been achieved.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating


                                                                                                                                 Page 13 of 24
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             UG-Skills Development Project (P145309)



         Substantial

 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Overall efficacy in achieving the project's revised objectives is rated as high, given that both Objective 1
         (revised outcome targets) and Objective 2 were highly achieved.

         The same assessments of project attribution and the counterfactual of no project, reported under the overall
         efficacy of the project against the original outcome targets, apply here.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         High



 5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency was assessed to be strong. A cost-benefit analysis undertaken during appraisal
indicated a high internal rate of return (IRR) of above 14 percent. The IRR for investments in the CoEs was
estimated at 7.5 percent, while the rate for investments in VTIs was significantly higher, at 41.5 percent,
essentially because of the much larger number of graduates, which compensated for the lower gains per
graduate in terms of future earnings, and the much lower investment in VTIs. The IRR for employer-led short
courses was estimated at 32.6 percent, lower than the returns to the vocational institutes component, because
of lack of certainty that the employer-led fund would be sustained post-project. Taken together, project
investments were estimated to culminate in an overall IRR of 14.5 percent. The appraisal analysis also explored
two scenarios. First, without the investment in reforms, a drop in monthly wage gain was assumed, which would
bring the IRR to 12.2 percent. Second, delays in project implementation were assumed to have negative effects
on costs, benefits and consequently, IRRs. The consolidated IRR under this scenario was calculated at 12.9
percent.

The analysis undertaken at project closing only considered investments in CoEs and VTIs (Component 2) and
employer-led short-term training (Component 3), and did not factor in the reform elements (Component 1). While
it was unclear how many cohorts of beneficiaries were assumed at the appraisal stage, the ICR’s analysis
modeled benefits accrued to observed beneficiaries over the life cycle of the project (from 2015 to 2022) and an
additional four cohorts of BTVET students benefiting from Component 2. The ICR (p. 65) stated that this was a
conservative assumption that the project infrastructure and systems in place will yield immediate future benefits
to the next few cohorts of students, with the only additional costs being recurrent and teacher costs (modeled
after the appraisal analysis). The last beneficiaries were assumed to enter the labor market in 2027. Future
cohorts were assumed to be the same size as the observed beneficiary cohort.

With these assumptions and additional, reasonable assumptions itemized in the ICR (p. 65) on timeline,
discount rate, inflation, years in labor market, exchange rate, training completion rate, and employment rate, the
economic analysis showed a positive net present value (NPV) and an IRR well in excess of the discount
rate. Overall, the end-of-project analysis estimated a NPV of $266.2 million and an IRR of 18.4 percent.


                                                                                                             Page 14 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       UG-Skills Development Project (P145309)



Implementation efficiency was challenged with significant delays in effectiveness and early
implementation, exacerbated in 2020 by the COVID pandemic. First, there was a long delay of 1.5 years
between project approval and effectiveness. It took 18 months to declare the project effective following its
approval in April 2015. The April 2016 ratification by the Ugandan Parliament was completed one year after
approval (two months after national elections in February). The credit agreement was signed in June 2016 14
months after approval. Effectiveness was declared in October 2016.

Second, the project implementation period was longer than planned: six years and two months versus the
originally envisaged five-year implementation period. Delays in civil works, procurement, and other
implementation activities (quality investments, course designs, student recruitment) caused the project to be
restructured, lowering its ambition: (a) one outcome target (new intakes in the targeted training programs) was
reduced by almost half; (b) one outcome target (proportion of entrants who completed targeted diploma courses)
was dropped because, with delays in civil works and student recruitment, there would not be sufficient time to
complete the two- to three-year duration of these courses prior to project closing; and (c) one outcome target
(proportion of entrants who completed targeted certificate courses) was dropped. A new indicator (proportion of
students supported for internships as specified in the competency-based courses) was added in its place,
though it measured a different type of outcome. Over and above the delays in declaring the project effective and
delays during implementation, the international travel restrictions that began in January 2020, and a national
lockdown announced in March 2020, significantly affected the speed of project implementation, interrupting
capacity building activities, stopping training at the targeted institutions, triggering the students and staff to return
home, interrupting civil works at Bukalasa and Bushenyi institutions, inhibiting MoES supervision visits, closing
soil and materials testing labs, and stopping all procurement activities nationally in March 2020.

Nevertheless, the project was successful in overcoming many of these challenges, succeeding in the
full (99 percent) utilization of project funds and the full achievement of the PDO. Two extensions added
28 months to the implementation period (from the original closing date of August 31, 2020, to the actual closing
date of December 31, 2022) to allow completion of project activities. Restructuring kept the project focused on
PDO achievement and effectively accommodated the setbacks caused by implementation delays, including
those affected by COVID.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?               Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                          100.00
 Appraisal                                                    14.50
                                                                                           Not Applicable
                                                                                          94.90
 ICR Estimate                                                 18.40
                                                                                           Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


                                                                                                          Page 15 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG-Skills Development Project (P145309)



6. Outcome

Outcome Rating

                                 Without restructuring         With restructuring
Relevance of PDO                 High
Efficacy
                                 Substantial
Objective 1                                                    High
                                 (with moderate
                                 shortcomings)
Objective 2                      High

Efficiency                       Substantial
                                 Moderately Satisfactory (if
                                 moderate shortcomings in
Outcome ratings                                              Highly Satisfactory
                                 achievement of 1 or more
                                 obj)
Numerical value of outcome
                                 4                             6
ratings
Disbursement                     $48.48 million                $50.16 million
                                 49 percent                    51 percent
Share of disbursement
                              .4915                         .5085
Weighted value of the outcome
                              1.96                          3.06
rating (row 2 x row 4)
                              Satisfactory
Final outcome rating
                              (1.96 + 3.06 = 5.02, rounding to 5)




The split ratings methodology, undertaken for the assessment of this project, culminates in an overall Outcome
rating of Satisfactory, based on a Moderately Satisfactory outcome rating for the project as originally
conceived, and a Highly Satisfactory outcome rating for the project under the revised outcome
targets. The PDO was found to be highly relevant to the current skills development challenges in Uganda, as
well as to the country’s national development priorities and the Bank’s Country Partnership Framework
(FY2016-2021, extended through FY2022). Objective 1 under the original outcome indicators/targets (to
enhance the capacity of institutions to deliver high quality training programs in target sectors) was substantially
achieved. Two PDO targets were surpassed, and three were not met, but there were high achievements in
supporting BTVET reforms and strengthening the governance and capacities of the subsector, CoEs, and TVIs,
all with a view to improving the quality and relevance of skills development training. Objective 1 under the
revised outcome indicators/targets (supporting the same PDO statement as the original, but with reduced
targets and modified indicators) was highly achieved. Targets were exceeded for three outcome indicators


                                                                                                    Page 16 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG-Skills Development Project (P145309)



tracking national occupation standards produced, new intakes enrolled, and completion rates of entrants in short
courses. Although one new outcome indicator (completion of internships) was almost (82 percent) achieved, the
high achievement of the three other PDOs and high achievements in reform and capacity building justify a high
rating. Objective 2 (to enhance the capacity of institutions to deliver demand-driven training programs in target
sectors) was highly achieved. Outcome targets were highly or fully achieved. Nearly all trainees in supported
firms were satisfied with the skills they acquired, substantially more people than planned benefited from job-
focused interventions, and 90 percent of employers participated in skills training programs, meeting the
target. The project’s overall efficiency at closing is rated as substantial. Economic efficiency was assessed to
be strong. While implementation efficiency was challenged with significant delays in effectiveness, and then with
civil works and procurement delays during implementation, exacerbated by the COVID pandemic, the project
was successful in overcoming many of these challenges. Project restructuring in July 2020 and two extensions
of the project’s closing date by a total of 28 months enabled the full (99 percent) utilization of project funds and
the substantial and high achievements of Objectives 1 and 2.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Project activities have been institutionalized throughout the system, particularly within MoES, SSCs, CoEs,
and Vocational Technical Institutes. The SDF, which facilitated a strong connection with the private sector,
has also been institutionalized. Institutional strengthening at the central and institutional levels effectively
mitigated the original capacity risks identified by: (i) scaling up opportunities for employer-led short-term
training and certification in the formal and informal sectors; (ii) strengthening selected TVET institutions for
improved service delivery of training programs in priority economic sectors; and (iii) enabling delivery of skills
development at scale through adequate implementation of initiated policy and institutional reforms. The
government now has a foundational MIS system that, with additional support from the new Bank-supported
project (P178016), will lead to further labor market information and the ability to conduct labor market and
employer surveys to better monitor progress of employment-related interventions. This information will then
be used to develop employment policies, improve training, and understand the nature of the job market. All
of these show promise for institutional sustainability and continued strong government ownership. The
technical quality and success of training programs, earning high satisfaction rates of employers and
trainees/employees alike, bode well for continued and strong stakeholder support. The new Bank-supported
project (P178016) will play a significant role in continuing the support and build on the successes of this
project. SSCs have been institutionalized and going forward will be funded under the proposed TVET
Council. The four pilot CoEs are now models for future development of the system and will be further
supported under the new Bank-supported project to become mentors for VTIs offering similar TVET courses
at the certificate level. The adequate financing of the governance structures (national level, CoEs, SSCs,
vocational technical institutes) and of the SDF will be critical to the sustainability of outcomes.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance


                                                                                                      Page 17 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Skills Development Project (P145309)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project preparation process took great care to closely align the design with Uganda’s Vision 2040,
  the second National Development Plan (FY15-19), and the World Bank's 2011-2015 Country Assistance
  Strategy. The PDO was specific, and the design was well thought out and clearly expressed in a detailed
  results framework. The technical design of the project was innovative and reform-oriented, drawing from
  globally recognized approaches for developing effective TVET interventions and aligned with international
  best practice, while at the same time pitched to country needs and context. The design also took into
  consideration recommendations from peer reviewers and lessons learned from other education projects
  implemented in Uganda and other Bank-supported skills development and TVET projects. Government
  and other stakeholders were closely involved in the design thanks to a broad consultative process. There
  were some issues with the choice of outcome indicators (Section 9 on M&E), but the M&E design
  (including evaluation studies) and implementation produced the data and evidence needed to assess the
  project’s outcome.

  The risks were properly identified, including weak governance and implementation capacity of institutions,
  challenges with multiple implementation units, limited monitoring capacity, and insufficient demand by the
  private sector. The mitigation of these risks was effectively reflected in project design, including: clearly
  defined roles and responsibilities for all implementing units documented in the project operations manual;
  a multi-sectoral steering committee to support implementation; inclusion of strong private sector
  involvement in the grant committee and CoE advisory boards; an MIS for BTVET and the targeted
  institutions; and provisions for strengthening fiduciary capacity (financial management and
  procurement). The preparation team included relevant technical specialists and safeguards and fiduciary
  specialists. Safeguards and fiduciary aspects were well prepared during the design process, including
  assessments of existing capacities and relevant support through training, technical assistance, and
  recruitment of specialists.

  Institutional arrangements were well thought out, embedded within government structures for
  strengthening ownership and prospects for sustainability of outcomes. Implementation arrangements
  included a Project Steering Committee, with MoES serving as the secretariat, and two implementing
  agencies: (1) MoES (through a Project Coordinating Unit/PCU1) was responsible for implementing
  Components 1 and 2; and (2) the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, responsible
  for implementing Components 3 and 4, delegated the Private Sector Foundation of Uganda to be the
  executing agency for Component 3 through an existing PCU (PCU2). Four CoEs were responsible for
  implementing Subcomponent 2.1, with project support and twinning arrangements, and Subcomponent
  2.2 was to be implemented by 12 selected VTIs.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision missions were conducted on a semi-annual basis. They were properly staffed with education
 specialists as well as fiduciary and safeguards staff and consultants. The team actively supported the
 government in project implementation. Whenever implementation challenges arose, the Bank’s team
 worked with the government to find appropriate solutions to maintain the integrity of project design. The 18-

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Skills Development Project (P145309)



 month delay in project effectiveness led to implementation delays in key activities: hiring needed MoES and
 Private Sector Foundation of Uganda consultants; finalizing the project operational manual; launching
 procurement activities including twinning arrangements, civil works, and equipment; establishing indicator
 baselines; and implementing institutional reforms under Component 1. The Bank prepared an issues paper
 prior to the mid-term review (MTR) to address these delays and challenges, and participated in a retreat
 with MoES and the PCUs to develop an action plan to improve implementation. The Bank’s proactivity to
 restructure the project in July 2020, at the government’s request, led to the completion of the project
 activities, the full use of available funds, the achievement of the PDOs, and the institutionalization of many
 of the new structures, sector governance arrangements, and activities supported under the project. Post-
 restructuring, monthly meetings with the PCUs were held to ensure that procurement issues were resolved
 quickly and that implementation was on track. In short, there was strong and continuous technical support
 and capacity building from the Bank’s team throughout implementation that led to a strong turnaround in
 project implementation, even in the face of more delays caused by COVID restrictions in 2020.

 The supervision teams were consistent in their reporting on financial management, procurement, and
 safeguards progress during supervision missions and were diligent in working with MoES/PCU and other
 implementing agencies to build their capacities in these areas. Safeguards compliance was monitored
 regularly. Bank missions systematically documented progress in aide-memoires, back-to-office reports, and
 other internal reporting, all of which kept the World Bank management informed of progress and informed
 the ICR's analysis. Through both the institutionalization of governance and quality assurance activities and
 structures, and the design of a follow-on project, and in the face of continued strong ownership of
 government, the Bank has ensured adequate transition arrangements post-project.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PDO statement was clear. The project’s theory of change/results chain, as laid out in ICR’s Figure 1
 (p. 9), was logical and detailed, laying out a clear pathway of a very ambitious undertaking of reform and
 institutional development, with a view to improving the quality of skills development training and its
 responsiveness to the needs and demands of the labor market. Each of the well-developed components
 was complementary to the others, and together they contributed synergistically to the outputs and
 outcomes. Of the four original outcome indicators chosen to measure quality, only one provided a true
 measure of quality (National Occupational Standards developed for relevant trades/occupations in target
 sectors), while the others focused on training delivery capacity (intakes and completion of courses). There
 may have been opportunity for more quality measures, such as the quality assurance practices
 institutionalized in the SSCs, CoEs, VTIs, and their impacts on the quality of training. While not specified in
 the results chain, the outputs and outcomes of the four Windows of the SDF were reported in the ICR


                                                                                                     Page 19 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Skills Development Project (P145309)



 (Annex 1b) and provided considerable information and insight on project results. Intermediate results
 indicators captured critical measures.

 Since data for the subsector were very limited at the project’s outset and scattered across different MoES
 units, the design allowed for project baseline data to be collected after effectiveness and to be gender-
 disaggregated. MoES was responsible for overseeing data collection for the project. The PAD identified the
 primary data sources (national level, target institutions, and MIS). The Private Sector Foundation of
 Uganda was to establish a monitoring system for the SDF, including a study to evaluate the SDF grants,
 grantee activities, and trainee and employer satisfaction. The M&E design also included efforts to improve
 the education MIS within the BTVET subsector.



b. M&E Implementation
  Early monitoring of the results framework was difficult because the M&E consultant had not aligned the
  M&E criteria with the PAD. Once the M&E methodology for collection of data, along with clear definitions,
  methods of measurement, and sources, were established, reporting of data improved. The establishment
  of baselines during the early years of the project opened the door for full reporting starting in June
  2018. From that point on, performance indicators were tracked regularly, and the results framework was
  updated on a timely basis for supervision missions, including the MTR. In addition, the full M&E system
  developed by the Private Sector Foundation of Uganda was able to track regularly the SDF grants, in
  terms of both financial and program achievements. An SDF evaluation was undertaken, which drew on
  data generated by the SDF M&E system to assess the effectiveness of the SDF. The project also
  supported a tracer study for the graduates of short courses. Moreover, the CoEs and MoES were trained
  on how to conduct tracer studies for future graduates. Also, along with the development of the BTVET
  MIS, MoES managers and the targeted CoEs and VTIs were trained in utilization of the system.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data were made available to the various actors and stakeholders and were used to track project
  progress, inform supervision missions, and identify and address bottlenecks. Although still at the
  embryonic stage, MoES and other institutions are using MIS data for planning, budgeting, and decision-
  making for the subsector. M&E data were critical in informing the July 2020 project restructuring and the
  preparation of the ICR. The tracer study was used by MoES and the Bank in the design and
  development of the new Bank-supported project (P178016), aiming to build on successes in the use of
  demand-driven short courses to improve employability of trainees and increase employer satisfaction
  with employees’ skills. The SDF study has also been used by the government to scale up the SDF under
  the follow-on operation. Shortcomings in the choice of outcome indicators notwithstanding, data from the
  project M&E, SDF M&E system, and MIS data, combined with the project-financed studies’ results,
  provide good evidence of the achievement of project outcomes.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial



                                                                                                 Page 20 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Skills Development Project (P145309)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category B, partial assessment. OP/BP 4.01 on “Environmental Assessment”
   was triggered due to the potential adverse environmental and social impacts associated with civil works,
   under Components 1 and 2, that were likely to be small-scale and site-specific. In addition, OP/BP 4.11,
   “Physical Cultural Resources,” was triggered because civil works could have affected known and unknown
   physical cultural resources in the area. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was
   prepared to guide the development of site-specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)
   and Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs). The safeguards instruments were cleared and
   disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop on February 4, 2015.

   Environmental and social safeguards performance was monitored consistently during project
   implementation, and detailed reporting was provided in the ISRs and aide-memoires. Construction site-
   specific ESIAs and ESMPs were developed during implementation. A Code of Conduct was also developed
   by the PCU to guide the behavior of contractors and their workers to safeguard communities, women,
   children, and other vulnerable groups, including protecting them against gender-based violence, violence
   against children, sexual exploitation and abuse, and the spread of HIV/AIDS. The CoEs developed gender
   action plans to ensure gender inclusiveness and gender awareness.

   During implementation, two accidents occurred that required MoES/PCU to prepare an Environmental and
   Social Incidence Reporting Toolkit for each incident, which were submitted to the Bank. MoES also
   prepared a Root Cause Analysis report and a Safeguards Corrective Actions report. Each case was closed
   with an agreed compensation for the injured parties.

   During most of the implementation period, safeguards ratings hovered between moderately satisfactory to
   satisfactory, with two exceptions. In 2017, the rating was downgraded to moderately unsatisfactory due to
   lack of land title verification for civil works activities, which was rectified by the PCU. In 2022, the rating was
   downgraded a second time to moderately unsatisfactory because of challenges related to implementation of
   the grievance redress mechanism (GRM) (described below). The subsequent (and final) rating was
   upgraded to moderately satisfactory because the GRM plan had been updated, and the final construction
   sites did adhere to the environmental safeguards requirements.

   MoES established a GRM comprised of the following tiers: (i) project site level; (ii) college/institute level; (iii)
   district level; and (iv) village level, where the CoEs/VTIs were located. A GRM was also created by the
   Private Sector Foundation of Uganda for lodging complaints related to the SDF, with procedures for lodging
   complaints uploaded on the SDF website. Both MoES and the Private Sector Foundation of Uganda
   reported on grievances, but detailed and consistent reporting of GRMs proved to be challenging.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM) was rated as moderately satisfactory throughout the life of the project. There
   were two designated accounts: one for MoES, and one for the Private Sector Foundation of
   Uganda. Throughout the project implementation period, the PCUs’ FM performance was evidenced by: (i)
   timely and satisfactory submission of interim financial reports of an acceptable quality on a regular basis;

                                                                                                        Page 21 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Skills Development Project (P145309)



   (ii) submission of the required audits to the World Bank, in accordance with the Financing Agreements, in
   which auditors’ opinions were unqualified (clean); and (iii) effective implementation of recommendations
   made by the external audit and Bank supervision missions. The PCUs prepared annual financial
   statements. The Private Sector Foundation of Uganda developed a robust Grant Management Information
   System that was used to monitor grant expenditures. The final audit report was due on October 31,
   2023. Capacity development workshops were designed and delivered by the Bank’s FM specialists to train
   FM staff of the PCUs on FM exigencies.

   Procurement. The Bank’s procurement team conducted procurement performance rating assessment
   missions on a regular basis throughout much of the implementation period, and consistently rated project
   procurement as moderately satisfactory. Between August 2016 and November 2017, however,
   procurement was rated moderately unsatisfactory due to delayed processing of procurement packages, a
   result of the delayed project effectiveness and long delays in submitting evaluation reports shortly after
   effectiveness. Bank procurement staff provided training to the PCUs on the procurement process, which
   led to improved performance and an upgrade to moderately satisfactory from that point on through to
   closing. The PCUs' migration to the World Bank’s Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement
   (STEP) took place in 2017. Procurement plans were updated regularly and submitted to the Bank as
   required. The PCUs had adequate personnel in charge of procurement with the necessary skills to
   undertake the procurement process, with clearly defined responsibilities and well-documented delegation
   of authority.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons




                                                                                                 Page 22 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       UG-Skills Development Project (P145309)



The following lessons are a subset of the six lessons presented in the ICR, slightly reworded by IEG
to be more succinct:

        Supporting a paradigm shift in the TVET sector from a supply-driven to a demand-
         driven system requires a holistic and transformational project design that is relevant
         to the country’s context and development goals. In this case, project design included all
         the needed components and activities to help reshape and transform the TVET system in
         Uganda, including: the creation of an autonomous body (TVET Council) with strong private
         sector participation to inform policies within the sub-sector; SSCs to ensure relevant training
         for industrial sectors; creation of model CoEs that could be replicated within the system; and
         a robust SDF that could provide support for quality training on which enterprises could rely.
        Strengthening structured linkages between skills development and industry is
         essential for ensuring labor market relevance for trainees and employers. The success
         of the SDF and the development of high-quality training programs were directly linked to the
         real demands of the labor market. This was achieved through the inclusion of a robust
         communications campaign that provided information on the SDF so that enterprises and
         employees knew the SDF was available. Additionally, the short courses, delivered by newly
         trained trainers and based on competency-based courses developed under the project, were
         developed with strong industry/enterprise input and collaboration.
        Close engagement of relevant government structures in project implementation is
         important for ensuring alignment of project activities with the day-to-day government
         business and priorities in skills development. The project’s involvement of key relevant
         directorates and departments in the day-to-day implementation of the operation helped build
         capacity of civil services, enhanced ownership, ensured timely decision-making linked to key
         interventions, and facilitated the sustainability of results through the gradual mainstreaming
         of key activities in planning and budgeting.
        Communication and marketing of skills development training and its potential for
         improving employment prospects are critical for influencing the public in general, and
         youth specifically, on the value of technical and vocational education. The project
         developed a new and robust communication and marketing strategy that informed young
         people of the new competency-based curricula and the opportunities for certification within
         the TVET subsector. This strategy succeeded in reaching and attracting young people to
         access skills development training under the project and will be expanded under the follow-
         on project.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. The ICR drew on data from the results framework monitoring/project M&E system, the
BTVET MIS, and various studies supported under the project to assess its impact.


                                                                                                    Page 23 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG-Skills Development Project (P145309)



Quality of Analysis. The ICR effectively linked evidence to findings. It did a notable job describing the
complex but effective reforms in the TVET sector and the institutional strengthening support that involved a
wide range of actors and stakeholders (government and private sector) and succeeded in achieving both
objectives of quality and relevance/demand-driven nature of training. A shortcoming in the quality of analysis
was the improper application of the split rating methodology (explained below under “Adherence to guidelines”
section). While the PAD reported that 13 development partners were providing about $120 million in support of
BVET in Uganda at the time of project development (pp. 85-86), and that the Bank had recently assumed the
chair of the Education Development Partners Working Group on BVET (p. 102), the ICR did not assess the
project's attribution or the counterfactual of no project in the context of significant support from other partners.

Quality of Lessons. Lessons were based on evidence and analysis. They appropriately reflected specific
experiences and findings for the project that are of broader interest to other countries attempting to improve the
quality and relevance of TVET.

Results Orientation. The ICR was systematic in assessing and linking the various elements of the results
chain, showing how activities contributed to outputs, intermediate outcomes, and final outcomes.

Internal Consistency/Adherence to Guidelines. The ICR was internally consistent, with each section
supporting and reinforcing a storyline of reform and capacity building. It adhered to guidelines, with one
important exception. The ICR correctly opted for a split rating methodology. However, the application of the
methodology was not in keeping with the Bank’s Guidance on the preparation of Implementation Completion
and Results Reports (ICRs) for Investment Project Financing (IPF). The Guidance specifies that split ratings
require the assessment of two ratings of the project’s Outcome (based on sub-ratings assigned for relevance,
efficacy and efficiency): one that assesses efficacy against the original objectives or outcome targets at project
closing; and one that assesses efficacy against the revised objectives or outcome targets at project
closing. Instead of the two efficacy ratings assessing achievements at closing against, respectively, the original
objectives and targets, and the formally restructured objectives and targets, the ICR assessed efficacy of two
phases of the project: what was achieved up to the time of restructuring; and what was achieved by the
project’s closing.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 24 of 24
