     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GA-Wildlife &human-elephant conflict mgt (P157249)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023695

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P157249                                     GA-Wildlife &human-elephant conflict mgt

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Gabon                                       Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A3107                                    31-Dec-2021                                           9,055,017.77

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 02-Sep-2016                                 31-Jan-2023

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              9,055,046.00                                    9,055,046.00

 Revised Commitment                               9,055,046.00                                    9,055,046.00

 Actual                                           9,055,046.00                                    9,055,017.77




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Alejandra Eguiluz           Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the ”Wildlife & human-elephant conflict management” project, as
   stated in the PAD (page 7, PAD1693), is identical to the project goal stated under Schedule I of the GEF
   Grant Agreement 2016 (Annex II of the document) that is, “to reduce elephant poaching and human-elephant
   conflicts in the target zones.”

   The PDO will be parsed, for this review and as done in the ICR, as follows:


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GA-Wildlife &human-elephant conflict mgt (P157249)



         To reduce elephant poaching in the target zones
         To reduce human-elephant conflicts in the target zones




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Support to the National Ivory Action Plan implementation (at appraisal: US$1.14
   million; at closing: US$1.14 million). This component focused on developing the national tools and
   measures for elephant management through the implementation of the National Ivory Action Plan (NIAP).
   The NIAP entailed (i) increasing knowledge on elephant populations, their movement and Human-Elephant
   Conflict (HEC ), (ii) strengthening enforcement of wildlife protection laws; and (iii) communication and public
   awareness about elephant poaching/ivory trafficking and its negative impacts. The improved HEC
   knowledge were to help the Government and communities to identify the most effective means to reduce
   Human-Elephant Conflict. Strengthened law enforcement aimed at contributing to poaching reduction
   thereby reducing elephant migration into areas that may contain human settlements. The communication
   and public awareness campaigns helped communities understand the long-term negative implications of
   elephant poaching.

   Component 2: Support for integrated landscape management and mitigation of human-elephant
   conflicts (HEC) (at appraisal: US$5.88 million; at closing: US$5.88 million). This component aimed at
   enhancing surveillance inside the target zones (four national parks) through the implementation of the
   National Parks Agency (ANPN )-designed parks’ management plans, involving all stakeholders. The design
   called for the two implementation agencies (ANPN and the National Parks Agency and Directorate General
   for Fauna and Protected Areas (DGFAP)) to increase surveillance and develop management plans for
   elephant corridors to reduce poaching. Corridor management planning would provide an essential element
   to reducing HEC through land use planning that would ensure that human settlements were outside the
   identified corridors. The component also focused on strengthening the Local Management Consultative
   Committees’ (CCGL) capacity to co-manage local resources and provide communities with opportunities for
   enhanced livelihood. New HEC mitigation techniques were to be tested and evaluated to provide workable
   and sustainable options to communities. Women would benefit from HEC protection due to expected
   increases in farm yields, along with small infrastructure improvements that would alleviate daily tasks and
   improve access to local markets. There is a discrepancy between the PAD and what was encountered
   during implementation. In the PAD women were anticipated to be the main beneficiaries, as it was believed
   that more women than men were living in the area. This turned out not to be the case; more men than
   women lived in the area and hence the percentage of male and female beneficiaries changed.

   Component 3: Transboundary parks co-management (Mayumba-Conkouati) (Gabon-Congo) (at
   appraisal: US$1.20 million; at closing: US$1.20 million). This component focused on enhancing the co-
   management of the transboundary areas of the Mayumba National Park (Gabon) and Conkouati National
   Park (Congo) for better surveillance of elephant movements across the Gabon and Congo border. Activities

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GA-Wildlife &human-elephant conflict mgt (P157249)



   under this component looked to enhance Gabonese patrols and rehabilitate surveillance outposts on the
   Gabon side of the border; as well as facilitate information exchange and mixed patrols (Gabonese and
   Congolese) across the border.

   Component 4: Project coordination, monitoring and evaluation (At appraisal US$0.84 million; at
   closing: US$0.83 million). This component aimed at providing overall project management and
   coordination with other donor projects that included similar activities in different areas of the country. The
   four national parks targeted by the project; were Moukalaba Doudou, Loango, Mayumba and Waka, all
   located in the southwest quadrant of the country. The project was to complement a similar project financed
   by the French Development Agency ("Agence Française de Développement", AFD), which focused on the
   national parks in the northeast of the country, as well as projects financed by the United States Fish and
   Wildlife Service (USFWS ) and the World Wildlife Fund (WWF), which both had on-going anti-poaching
   activities in some of the project’s target zones.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. At appraisal the overall project cost was US$ 9,055,046. Actual project cost was US$
   9,050,000. The project disbursed 99.9% of the budget at appraisal.

   Financing. The project was financed by a grant from the Global Environment Fund (GEF)(TF-A3107),
   in the amount of US$ 9,055,046.

   Borrower Contribution. There was no borrower contribution.

   Dates: The project was approved on September 2, 2016, and became effective four months later, on
   January 4th, 2017. The mid-term review took place in June 2020, although it had been planned for
   September 2019. The ICR does not report on the reason for this delayed MTR. The original closing date
   was December 31st, 2021 and the actual closing date was January 31st, 2023, i.e. a 13 month extension.

   A restructuring was approved on the 2nd of October 2021, in order to extend the closing date by 13 months
   to allow time for achievement of the results (only 46% of the funds was disbursed by MTR in June 2020).
   The extension aimed at the following: (i) enable finalization of the construction of the surveillance antenna in
   Doussala at the Gabon/Congo border; (ii) organizing the Mayumba - Conkouati cross-border park workshop
   in Pointe Noire; (iii) undertaking surveillance and anti-poaching missions in the four parks and on the
   border; and (iv) installing the electric fence in the Waka park.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at appraisal

Gabon is a resource-rich country, endowed with extraordinary biodiversity and rich deposits of
manganese and iron ore. It is the fifth-largest oil producer in Sub-Saharan Africa and one of Africa’s few
middle-income countries. The country’s growth rate was approximately 2.1 percent at the time of appraisal

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GA-Wildlife &human-elephant conflict mgt (P157249)



(in 2016) but dropped over the next year to a low of .05 percent before experiencing a steady rise until the
Covid-19 pandemic hit in 2020. One of Africa’s most urbanized countries, Gabon, has more than 85 percent
of its population living in urban areas. Despite being a middle-income country, about a third of Gabon’s
population lives in poverty. In rural areas, the poverty rate is double that found in urban areas
(approximately 60 vs 30 percent).

Gabon’s natural resource wealth was threatened, with wildlife populations declining and forests illegally
exploited. Elephant populations were targeted for their ivory. In 2016, forest elephants were declining at
about 9 percent per year. Elephant poaching was particularly problematic in the Northeast, where Gabon
shares borders with Cameroon and the Republic of the Congo. The poaching problem can be addressed
through the corridors the elephants create as they move away from the poaching practices. The French
Development Agency (AFD) covered the Northeast, and this project covered the Southwest. Gabon’s
elephants attempted to migrate away from poaching areas, and as rural human communities continued to
expand, elephant and human populations were increasingly coming into contact, creating Human-elephant
conflict, as elephants damage crops and villages and sometimes kill people. Farmers were not protected
against crop loss, and their approaches to elephant deterrence were ineffective.

Given the species mobility across jurisdictions, it was decided at appraisal that the following two institutions
would be required to coordinate their activities to fulfill their respective mandates within the context of the
project: the National Parks Agency (ANPN) and the Directorate General for Fauna and Protected Areas
(DGFAP), which is within the Ministry of Forest, Environment, Natural Resources, overseeing biodiversity
protection outside the national parks.

Consistency with Country Strategy

In 2009, the government launched a new economic vision (Emerging Gabon (2009-2025) aimed at
modernizing and diversifying the country’s economy and transforming it into an emerging one by 2025. The
strategic plan (Plan Stratégique Gabon Emergent—PSGE) was built on three pillars (industrial Gabon,
Green Gabon, and Gabon Services). At appraisal, the PDO was falling within the overall purview of Gabon
Vert in its approach to better understanding and managing some of Gabon’s important biodiversity,
potential support to wildlife tourism, and enhancing food security within communities by reducing Human-
Elephant conflict (ICR, page 6).

At appraisal, the PDO was also aligned with the international strategies Gabon adheres to, such as the
Global Partnership on Wildlife Conservation and Crime Prevention for Sustainable Development (GWP)
and the GEF-6 Strategy. The ICR does not provide information on alignment with these strategies at
closing.

Consistency with Bank Strategies

The PDO contributed to the Bank’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity
through its interventions that impact sustainable agricultural development and increase rural incomes (once
elephants are guided back to their natural corridors). It is also aligned with the CPS for Gabon. The
Performance and Learning Review (PLR) (report # 95842-GA, March 9, 2016) extended the Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) from FY2012-2016 to FY2012-2018. The PDO aligns well with the PLR’s third
pillar on “Human Development and Environmental Sustainability,” contributing to its fifth outcome of
“improved transparency and sustainability in natural resource management.” As stated in the CPS (para.
77), the Global Environment Facility (GEF) resources will continue to support the conservation of biological


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 17
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       GA-Wildlife &human-elephant conflict mgt (P157249)



diversity in Gabon through investments in selected national parks and the strengthening of the
management of the parks network, other protected areas, and production forests, and other ecosystems.
(PAD, page 4).

The current CPF for Gabon (FY22-FY27, report 174105-GA) prioritizes increasing private investment in
non-oil sectors and recognizes the importance of developing a blue and green economy to help reduce
climate risks, halt the loss of natural capital and the country’s rich biodiversity. Promoting blue and green
jobs in key sectors such as fisheries, forestry, and ecotourism are expected to support long-term reduction
in poverty and increased employment. The PDO’s focus on reducing the poaching of elephants directly
links to the need to protect the country’s biodiversity and natural capital, particularly for the possibility of
building an eco-tourism sector. The PDO is well aligned to two of the CPF’s “priorities of intervention,” i.e.,
“increased private sector investment in non-oil sectors” (forestry being one of them) and “stronger
governance in service delivery” (for which better management of parks contributes). A range of recent
issues have put additional pressure on food security in the country, and the project PDO’s focus on
reducing elephant poaching and HEC is also expected to have an effect on safeguarding farms and crops,
contributing to improved access to food both directly within farming communities and in the larger markets
(ICR page 13).

The project supported Objective 2 of the GEF 6 Biodiversity Strategy: to reduce threats to globally
significant biodiversity and continues to be relevant to Objective 1 of the current GEF 8 Biodiversity
Strategy - To improve conservation, sustainable use, and restoration of natural ecosystems (ICR page 21).

Previous Bank experience

The ICR mentions that the Bank had built on the past experiences of GEF-funded projects focused on
biodiversity and wetland protection, but without specifying further (ICR, page 60). It also states that
experiences with HEC mitigation techniques in South Asia and East Africa were reviewed for possible
replication in Gabon (ICR, page 68). The project team also ensured coordination with the GEF-funded
Sustainable Management of Critical Wetland Ecosystems (P143914), which became effective about a year
prior to this project and had one overlapping target zone.

PDO's level of ambition

The PDO was pitched at an appropriate level. Both the objectives were interlinked. The objective “To
reduce human-elephant conflicts in the target zones ”is a consequence of the first objective, “To reduce
elephant poaching in the target zones,” as the reduction of HEC is linked to and depends on the reduction
of elephant poaching. The ICR also reported on the project's impact on improved livelihoods as a long-term
impact.

Overall, the relevance of objectives is rated as High.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

                                                                                                          Page 5 of 17
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  GA-Wildlife &human-elephant conflict mgt (P157249)




EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To reduce elephant poaching in the target zones

               Rationale
               Theory of Change (ToC)

               The PAD did not outline the project’s ToC, but the ICR reconstructed it (pages 8 and 9). The activities
               regarding training, hiring, setting up of databases and management tools (inputs), the increased resources on
               patrols and surveillance posts (inputs), the increased resources for the lab (input), and the activities to
               support community livelihoods (inputs) were expected to contribute to better management of the corridors
               (output) and the increased capacity of institutions of communities (output) to manage and protect the land
               used by the communities. These outputs ultimately lessen poaching pressure on elephants (outcome) and
               fewer occasions for HEC (outcome).

               The ToC follows a clear logic, having as its ultimate goals reduced poaching and reduced HEC. The ICR also
               reported on important outcomes that involve improved livelihoods (increased incomes from crops, improved
               access to roads, markets, and schools) as a consequence of the reduced poaching and reduced HEC, even
               though these were not reflected in the Results Framework.

               Outputs

                     403 people were trained in wildlife crime prevention (disaggregated by type of trainees), exceeding the
                      target of 310. These were police officers, eco-guards, customs staff, Water & Forests staff, Judiciary
                      staff, Gendarmerie, and Navy Officers.

                     100% of the targeted zone was covered by wildlife patrols, achieving the target of 100% coverage.

               The project scored 82 in the Protected Area Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool (PAMETT), exceeding
               the target of 74. PAMETT is an open-source, widely-used system for assessing protected areas' health,
               ecosystems, and biodiversity. A baseline data set was established at the beginning of the project and
               assessed regularly. The score measures the effectiveness of the overall management of the parks, observing
               criteria such as staffing, budgets, legal status, threats, incursions, planning, and conservation. This
               contributes to the improved management of the elephant corridors and their surveillance.

                     The project reached 14,223 annual person-days of patrolling in national parks, not achieving the target
                      of 26,564. The achievement of the indicator was affected by the two suspensions of disbursements
                      from the Gabon portfolio in 2021 (the Government’s lapsed loans led to the suspension of
                      disbursements by the Bank twice from mid-March to mid-July 2021 and again from December 2021 to
                      March 2022).
                     65 annual awareness-raising campaigns were undertaken by the Local Management Consultative
                      Committee, far exceeding the target of 8.
                     18 operators in the target zones had a management plan for wildlife under implementation, achieving
                      the target of 18. A surface of 766,427 ha was brought under enhanced biodiversity protection,

                                                                                                                Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GA-Wildlife &human-elephant conflict mgt (P157249)



       exceeding the target of 701,000 ha (area of the National Parks of Moukalaba-Doudou, Loango, and
       Mayumba). A protected area is considered under enhanced biodiversity protection when its PAMETT
       score reaches 75% or more (characteristic of a highly functional management system). The adequate
       management of the 18 private concessions and the increased protected surface is part of achieving
       an integrated landscape management approach, leading to reduced poaching.
      60% of the border area was covered by patrols, exceeding the target of 50%. The target was
       exceeded due to acquiring field equipment, vehicles, and motorcycles.
      The project reached 58 joint patrols in the national parks of Mayumba (Gabon) and Conkouati
       (Congo), exceeding the target of 50 joint patrols.

Outcomes

The following are the outcome-level indicators for PDO1.

      The proportion of illegally killed elephants (PIKE) in targeted national parks was reported to be 0% at
       completion, exceeding the target of 10%. It is calculated by dividing the number of illegally killed
       elephants by the number of deceased elephants. This PDO indicator was met in 2021, the year
       before project completion, with only 8 illegally killed elephants. However, in 2022, in the final year of
       project implementation, zero illegally killed elephants were achieved,

      15 corridor management plans (i.e., 5 plans for each of the 3 corridors) were developed, achieving the
       target of 15. Corridor management planning is essential to reducing HEC through land use planning,
       ensuring human settlements are outside the identified corridor. A plan is considered developed when
       it has undergone the following stages: (1) ToR consultancy, design of the scientific protocol and
       installation of camera traps; (2) data collection, analysis, and interpretation; (3) identification and
       mapping of corridors; (4) threat assessment, specifics for each corridor, draft management plan,
       submission for internal consolidation; (5) validation of the report.

The project achieved the objective of reducing the proportion of illegally killed elephants. There were
shortcomings in the achievement of the indicator related to annual person-days of patrolling. The
achievement of the objective is rated as substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To reduce human-elephant conflicts in the target zones

Rationale
The Theory of Change for this objective is the same as for the first objective, given that the reduction of
elephant poaching (Objective 1) is expected to lead to the reduction of HEC (Objective 2).




                                                                                                    Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GA-Wildlife &human-elephant conflict mgt (P157249)



All outputs reported under the first objective are also valid for the second objective, given that they lead to
reduced poaching, which in turn leads to a reduction in human-elephant conflict, as it is the poaching that
diverts the elephants from their natural corridors, bringing them to areas populated and causing human-
elephant conflict.

Outcomes

      47 incidents of human-elephant conflicts were reported in the target zones, exceeding the target of
         107.
        70.5 % of the target beneficiaries were satisfied with the project interventions, achieving the target of
         70%.
        The ICR states that only 45.3% of female target beneficiaries were satisfied with the project
         interventions, not achieving the target of 80%.
        The number of direct project beneficiaries was 5,285, exceeding the target was 4,150.
        The percentage of female beneficiaries was 47.4% at closure, not achieving the target of 60%. The
         target was high at appraisal, as it was anticipated that more women than men would live in the
         targeted areas. This turned out not to be the case.

The target for the main indicator under this objective, measuring the number of reported incidents of human-
elephant conflicts was exceeded at closing. The ICR notes that between 2017 and 2020, reported incidents of
HEC were recorded above the desired targets given that the project registered complaints that were
received across the country rather than just in project targeted parks. The data was corrected in 2021 when
only 79 out of the107 target were registered.

The ICR reported on the following additional achievements, not captured in the Results Framework
and hence without target values:

      Additional agricultural income to households due to reduced HEC was about 80,000 FCFA per month
         (or about US$134), which represents close to a 40% increase in monthly income in these areas (ICR,
         page 55, data reported by the PIU)
        The purchase of a river barge helped certain communities to access markets, medical services and
         the school. The barge allowed the transport of crops, equipment, and vehicles across the river.
        The rehabilitation of roads improved park patrolling and facilitated communities’ access to larger
         markets and to potable water (page 20, ICR).
        The project facilitated a participatory process of selection of an electric fence aiming at mitigating
         HEC. The fence proved efficient, and the participatory process empowered the local population and
         promoted ownership.
        In Doussala, the construction of the surveillance post provided direct employment for local community
         members while the water boreholes drilled at the site provided the nearby community with potable
         water.

 The ICR did not provide a satisfactory explanation as to why the level of satisfaction for women was low. The
ICR notes that this may be due to the two activities that could not be completed particularly adversely affected
women (i.e., the 150 km road rehabilitation in Waka Park; two hydraulic pumps aimed at supporting the local
population). The road would have provided women with greater access to markets and the pumps would have
particularly supported women who are generally responsible for water collection.


                                                                                                      Page 8 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                GA-Wildlife &human-elephant conflict mgt (P157249)



                            The rating is Substantial with minor shortcomings on the outcome indicators, regarding the women’s level of
                            satisfaction.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall rating is Substantial, given that the project substantially achieved both the objectives.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   An economic analysis was not conducted at the design stage. Thus, the economic analysis of the project at
   closing has no reference for comparison. Nevertheless, the efficiency of selected interventions was analyzed,
   and their cost was compared with the average of GEF projects.

   For PDO 1 (to reduce elephant poaching in target zones), according to the reports by the CITES Monitoring
   Illegal Killing of Elephants (MIKE) Program, the number of elephant carcasses, as well as the number of illegally
   killed elephants, was reduced during project implementation from 51 and 47 in 2016 respectively to 20 and 5 in
   2020. Considering that the 2020 poacher prices for raw tusks were between US$79-98 per kg, the benefits of
   the prevented killings were between US$36,972-86,632, with at least US$308,880 to US$583,440 of avoided
   trades (or benefits), taking the reference of market prices elsewhere, like e.g., in China, Vietnam and Kenya.
   (ICR page 21).

   For PDO 2 (to reduce HEC in target zones), the additional estimated agricultural income to the household due to
   reduced elephant intrusions in crops is about 80,000 FCFA per month (approximately US$134). According to the
   Anker Living Wage Reference Value for rural Gabon in 2021, the average monthly income is FCFA 200,770
   (equivalent to US$ 369) with a 95% confidence interval ranging from FCFA 185,077 to FCFA 217,738. Thus, a
   monthly income increase of FCFA 80,000 is considerable for the rural population. The cost of the local
   interventions on prevention of the HEC is US$1.0 million, and the NPV is estimated at US$ 0.76 million with a
   discount rate of 6 percent (ICR, page 23).

   Cost-effectiveness. The project area under enhanced biodiversity protection at the time of project closure was
   738,387 ha, with a cost-effectiveness of about $12 per ha, which is compatible with similar GEF projects and
   with the average cost. According to the GEF Independent Evaluation Office report (“Evaluation of GEF Support


                                                                                                                                    Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GA-Wildlife &human-elephant conflict mgt (P157249)



to Sustainable Forest Management, GEF/E/C.62/02 May 25, 2022), the average cost per ha in medium-sized
protected areas projects was slightly above $11 per ha.

Operational and administrative efficiency

Several obstacles delayed the implementation of project activities: there was a delay in the setup of the PIU, a
temporary suspension of disbursements (the Government’s lapsed loans led to the suspension of
disbursements by the Bank twice from mid-March to mid-July 2021, and again from December 2021 to March
2022), the freezing of the designated account, some institutional changes and the COVID19 pandemic. Also,
some of the activities proved to be more challenging to implement than expected (like, e.g., the cross-border
patrolling with Congo, given the needed collaboration with the patrols of a bordering country), and the lack of
availability of funds, when needed, stalled other activities (some critical infrastructures like water pumps and
roads). The extension of 13 months allowed for most results to be achieved by project completion.

Despite the lack of an economic analysis at appraisal, sufficient data is presented to assess the project's cost-
effectiveness. Efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The Substantial Relevance, Substantial Efficacy and Substantial Efficiency give an outcome of Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



                                                                                                     Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GA-Wildlife &human-elephant conflict mgt (P157249)



The following risks to development outcomes are identified:

Financial risk: The project’s operational costs are significant and critical to maintaining the patrolling team
functioning and financing the fuel and equipment maintenance. The continuation of the good results on
reduced killings of elephants very much depends on the patrolling efforts, and it is unclear to what degree the
government would be able to take on the financial responsibility. This puts one of the main project outcomes
at risk.

Political/institutional risk: Some patrolling improvements have taken place thanks to the institutional
collaboration among border countries to patrol jointly or coordinately (i.e., the participation of Congolese
rangers). Should the current cooperative relation change, the collaboration for this activity would be at risk.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank preparation team identified key donor partners such as AFD, USFWS, the EU, and WWF
  Netherlands and ensured collaboration and coordination with projects underway, to ensure
  complementarity. The team also ensured coordination with the GEF-funded Sustainable Management of
  Critical Wetland Ecosystems (P143914), which became effective about a year prior to the Wildlife
  Management and Human-Elephant Conflicts Project (GeFaCHE) and had one overlapping target zone.
  The need for coordination and synergy in project activities was translated into specific tasks assigned to
  the project coordinator to be accomplished early in the project.

  Particular attention was paid to ensuring local participation to understand the best issues regarding
  implementing environmental and social safeguards. Work with local communities, including indigenous
  populations (the Indigenous Peoples Plan was developed and shared with local communities). The
  design allowed for pilot activities, such as methods to deter elephants from destroying crops and moving
  through human settlements, to be tested in the early stages of the project (fence designs). This approach
  contributed to seeking buy-in among stakeholders. The design allowed for the identification of the best
  adaptable technology in a participatory way, helping ensure ownership on the part of beneficiaries.

  The World Bank team identified most risks appropriately during the preparation phase and mitigation
  measures were put in place, particularly those related directly to HEC (e.g., soliciting farmer feedback on
  HEC mitigation approaches). Mitigation measures to ensure good cooperation between the two
  implementing agencies, DGFAP and ANPN, consisted of getting their full involvement during preparation,
  assigning one agency as overall coordinator and ensuring field activities were completed jointly and in a
  complementary manner based on each agency’s mandate. A validation workshop was held in early 2016
  organized and implemented by the two implementing agencies These measures proved successful in
  ensuring strong cooperation throughout the project.

  Overall, the quality at entry is rated as Satisfactory.




                                                                                                      Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GA-Wildlife &human-elephant conflict mgt (P157249)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project struggled during implementation, but close communication with and support to the PIU
 allowed the problems to be resolved. In particular, difficulties arose in cross-border surveillance that
 needed to engage the Congolese rangers and ensure the necessary co-financing for the joint patrols. The
 Bank supervision team worked closely with the PIU to establish consultations with Congolese authorities to
 improve this area. The detailed analysis of progress during the MTR (June 2020) provided the basis for
 deciding to extend the project by 13 months.

 Where possible, regional experts were employed to support the ease of supervision. The fact that there
 was only one main TTL during project preparation and implementation facilitated a strong and trusting
 relationship with the PIU. The WB also ensured that training was provided throughout the project period –
 both early interventions on operations and ongoing training on safeguards – to ensure the PIU could meet
 the changing operational and reporting needs. The coordinating work of the Project Steering Committee
 ensured ongoing collaboration among the two main national institutions involved ( ANPN and DGFAP).

 Overall, the quality of Supervision is rated as Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PDO-level indicators are adequate to measure the PDO. The project was designed to use existing
 data sources and tools that were in use for wildlife and park management at that time: the SMART
 reporting tool and the Protected Area Management Effectiveness Tracking tool (PMETT). Data from
 administrative records, such as complaints of elephant destruction submitted to DGFAP, chief
 conservators’ reports of destruction by elephants, and reports of training providers, would also be used.
 Field surveys would capture the perception of satisfaction with project interventions. Project and activity
 records were established to estimate direct project beneficiaries.

 Practical aspects of measuring, monitoring, and verifying results were considered and laid out in the results
 framework. It was planned that the project would not use a dedicated/stand-alone M&E system and that the
 M&E function would be assumed by ANPN, which had the overall responsibility and coordinating role in
 M&E for the project. The ANPN would ensure monitoring and facilitate data collection, analysis, and



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GA-Wildlife &human-elephant conflict mgt (P157249)



 presentation of project results and communicate these to the task team. A dedicated and qualified M&E
 officer was in place (PAD, page 18).

 The M&E design contemplated that several users would benefit from the M&E system: decision-makers in
 ANPN and DGFAP as well as stakeholders outside of the Government sector in park and wildlife
 management, including local and international NGOs, development partners, and the international
 community (PAD, page 14).



b. M&E Implementation
  There were no significant M&E issues during implementation and monitoring reports were regularly
  shared with the task team. An M&E specialist was hired and performed satisfactorily throughout the
  project. The ability to monitor the project was enhanced by increasing the budget for supervision, given
  the long distances between sites and the longer than usual time required for field supervision. In addition,
  field missions involved key personnel, safeguards, financial, etc. in addition to the M&E specialists to
  ensure a range of issues could be identified in the field. Finally, data collection was enhanced by
  collaborating with ANPN and DGFAP as they collected the key data on PIKE, PAMETT, etc. in the field.

  Regarding the PDO indicators on number of beneficiaries (and percentage of which female) and their
  level of satisfaction; although the M&E design had foreseen field surveys to capture this information, the
  MTR that took place in June 2020 revealed a lack of available data for the first 3 years of the project.
  Conversations with the team revealed that the survey results came too late in project implementation for
  the team to be able to react to them.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E system was used for regular reporting on project progress and helped to identify difficulties
  with implementation on several occasions, allowing the PIU and WB team to develop appropriate
  solutions. For example, delays caused by a suspension of disbursements (GoG loans issue) and other
  supply chain issues caused substantial problems with the construction of the Doussala surveillance post
  (antenna). Through close monitoring, the project team was able to identify where bottlenecks were in the
  supply and deal with these and other issues (such as quality of transport).

  The databases and maps developed and maintained for the project on HEC events, elephant
  movements, elephants killed by poaching and the genetics data developed through the laboratory
  contributed to the effectiveness of surveillance activities, reduction in incidences of wildlife-based crime
  and contributed to the state of knowledge regionally regarding efforts to reduce wildlife crime throughout
  the region. The team collaborated with on-the-ground implementing agencies to ensure close tracking
  of implementation as well as important field-level data. Beyond the day-to-day monitoring of the project
  activities, the M&E system also provided important information for future projects in this country and
  region through its work in corridor and wildlife mapping, strengthening of the natural resource database
  and enhancing genetics data.




                                                                                                     Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GA-Wildlife &human-elephant conflict mgt (P157249)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a category B project under the World Bank’s environmental and social
   safeguards policies. The anticipated impacts were small-scale, site-specific, and could be mitigated. The
   project triggered four World Bank safeguards policies, namely: OP/BP 4.01 “Environmental assessment”
   and OP/BP 4.04 “Natural Habitats”; OP/BP 4.12 “Involuntary Resettlement” and OP/BP 4.10 “Indigenous
   People”. The project complied with the four policies.

   The project prepared the Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and disclosed it in-
   country on March 18, 2016, and on the Bank Infoshop website on March 21, 2016. Process Framework and
   Indigenous Peoples Action Plan were disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop in March 2016.

   There were difficulties in validating environmental assessments in a timely manner due to a lack of staff and
   budget at the Directorate General for the Environment. However, despite these delays, the team identified
   issues early and created solutions (involving a safeguards specialist on field missions). The entire PIU team
   was also trained in the Bank’s new Environmental and Social Framework during the project implementation
   period, so staff could better understand its implications for the project. Finally, the PIU was responsive to
   staff and beneficiary needs during the COVID-19 pandemic, developing and implementing a COVID-19
   contingency plan to ensure their safety.

   Infrastructure works required environmental and social impact assessments, which were duly prepared. The
   following works were involved: the rehabilitation works linking Mourindi to Doussala for the access of the
   neighboring communities east of the Moukalaba-Doudou Park (40 km), the construction of the Doussala
   surveillance antenna, and the construction of two hydraulic boreholes. For the latter, works were finalized
   and delivered in September 2022; safeguards policies were complied with as the work site remained clean,
   and occupational safety and health and hygiene measures were rigorously respected. Waste from the
   construction site was well managed.

   A plan for vulnerable populations was prepared, and all its activities were planned and budgeted. A
   Grievance Redress Mechanism was developed in a timely manner and remained functional throughout
   project implementation. World Bank environmental and social safeguards specialists provided PIU training
   on environmental and social safeguards and trained technicians from the ANPN and the General
   Directorate for the Environment and Nature Protection (DGEPN). Safeguard missions were conducted to
   support implementation during the project's lifetime, and mission findings were recorded in the Aide
   Memoires.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: The project initially encountered challenges with the setup of the financial
   system until the integrated project management software was in place. Also, the Government’s financial

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GA-Wildlife &human-elephant conflict mgt (P157249)



   constraints led to the suspension of disbursements by the Bank from mid-March to mid-July 2021. At the
   beginning of 2022, the project ensured that the interim financial reports and non-audits were prepared and
   submitted by the agreed-upon deadlines in the financing agreements. They were all deemed acceptable by
   the World Bank. The provisional audit reports were submitted on time by the end of each fiscal year. The
   PIU recruited staff and contractors, e.g., auditors, to undertake the necessary reports and get back on
   track after delays. The financial management system was sound and ensured effective monitoring of
   activities and available resources until project closure. The Bank team had a senior FM specialist based in
   the World Bank office in Yaoundé, Cameroon, who carried out regular implementation support missions.
   The ICR provides no information about independent audits and whether there were any qualified opinions.

   Procurement: The procurement performance was consistently rated as Satisfactory. No irregularities were
   observed. All procurements under the TF were under the post-review category, except the PIU personnel
   recruitment that the Bank previously reviewed. All the planned procurement activities were accomplished.
   Before the grant closure, contracts (goods, works, services) under the project were completed on time, and
   payments to contractors and documents were updated/uploaded in systematic tracking in the STEP.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The genetics laboratory that was enhance during the project to track elephants through the analysis of the
   ivory (thanks to an integrated management information system) has been operating after project closure. It
   has become the regional center of excellence for genetic assessment from ivory samples and the
   main database of elephants across the region. Both Nigeria and Cameroon have requested the services of
   this lab. It is key in the fight against elephant poaching, as it enhances compliance with the international
   conventions. The genetic analysis of the ivory informs regional intelligent networks and are used
   as credible evidence in investigations of cases and legal proceedings. The lab is also a very good example
   for multiple donor groups collaborating and pooling their resources.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                       IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons


                                                                                                  Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GA-Wildlife &human-elephant conflict mgt (P157249)



The following are the IEG lessons:

Planning the surveys and tracking tools early in the implementation may help measure
beneficiary satisfaction as a project outcome. In this project, the surveys to assess satisfaction
took place too late (towards the project's end), and no time was left to react, resulting in low results
for women's satisfaction.

Pooling resources and finding synergies with other donors may contribute to the
sustainability of outcomes. From the design phase, this project counted on ongoing projects that
were synergetic in their interventions. The pooling of resources for the lab has proven successful in
reaching sustainable outcomes and providing a platform for future cooperation in the same area.

The following are the most relevant lessons extracted from the ICR (rephrased):

Clear delimitation of roles and responsibilities during the design phase may contribute to
effective inter-agency cooperation during implementation. In this project, despite the challenges
of inter-agency cooperation and past difficulties, ANPN and DGFAP worked well together to ensure
the implementation of activities in their respective zones of responsibility. From the outset, the
project emphasized the full participation of both agencies, which improved overall project ownership
and interventions.

The use of a specific gender methodology during implementation may contribute to ensuring
the success of a project that has a strong gender focus and goals. The project did not meet its
targets regarding female beneficiaries' satisfaction and had issues reaching them in remote
areas. Further efforts and tools can help to engage with communities more deeply in remote areas.
This can be done regularly by social specialists. Activities could be adapted to the challenges at play
in these communities. Time, budget, and staffing needs for more challenging areas must be
assessed carefully, and help from local NGOs could be sought to improve the adaptation of gender-
focused interventions.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. The ICR presents a complete analysis of evidence, thoroughly assigning the relevant
indicators of the RF to the respective project objectives and explaining clearly the nuances of results between
both. The quality of evidence is substantial, based on the satisfaction surveys, MTR, and ICR mission.

Quality of Analysis. There is a clear link between the narrative, the ratings, and the evidence. The ToC is made
explicit and depicted graphically in detail. The economic efficiency is analyzed comprehensively, despite the
lack of economic analysis at the appraisal that could serve as a reference. The safeguards and M&E
components are exceptionally detailed, and key information is provided when presenting the key factors during
preparation and implementation. The ICR reports candidly on the shortcomings of the project. A weakness is

                                                                                                      Page 16 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GA-Wildlife &human-elephant conflict mgt (P157249)



the lack of adequate explanation of the low results on some PDO-level indicators (female beneficiaries and their
level of satisfaction).

The ICR is results-oriented. The discussion on achievements adequately balances reporting on the
achievement of outcome indicators and what the project achieved. It provides a transparent, accurate, and
substantiated set of observations regarding the RF and each indicator.

Furthermore, the ICR provides comprehensive coverage of the implementation experience. It follows the
guidelines and seeks to triangulate data to reach conclusions (using the survey assessments and the
independent evaluations). The lessons are clear and well-explained with concrete project examples.

Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated as Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 17
