     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Rio Bogota Environ Infrastructure (P111479)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023555

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P111479                                     CO Rio Bogota Environ Infrastructure

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Colombia                                    Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-79850                                  30-Jun-2016                                       235,533,415.29

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 14-Dec-2010                                 30-Sep-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           250,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            235,533,415.29                                              0.00

 Actual                                        235,533,415.29                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Wendy Schreiber Ayres       Vibecke Dixon                 Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement dated July 15, 2011 (page
   5) was to assist the Borrower to transform the Rio Bogotá river into an environmental asset for the Bogotá
   Distrito Capital metropolitan region by improving water quality, reducing flood risks, and creating multi-
   functional areas along the river.

   For the purpose of this ICRR analysis, the PDO will be parsed as follows:


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Rio Bogota Environ Infrastructure (P111479)



   “To transform the Río Bogotá river into an environmental asset” is a longer-term objective. The three sub-
   objectives that will be assessed in this ICRR are:

        1. To improve the water quality (of Río Bogotá)
        2. To reduce the flood risks; and
        3. To create multi-functional areas along the river.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Upgrading and Expansion of the Salitre Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP) (cost at
   appraisal US$335 million, of which US$200 million International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
   (IBRD), actual cost US$433.10, of which US$235.53 million IBRD). This component financed the upgrade
   and expansion of the Salitre WWTP from a 4 cubic meter per second primary plant to an about 4 cubic
   meter per second secondary plant to treat, convey, and discharge the wastewater from the Salitre, Torca
   and Jaboque micro-basins to the Río Bogotá and potentially the Distrito de Riego La Ramada.

   Revised component 1. Under the first restructuring, undisbursed project funds were added to component 1
   to reflect the increased cost of the turnkey contract for the WWTP to US$409.37 million.

   Component 2: Flood Control and Rio Bogota Environmental Restoration Works (cost at appraisal
   US$140 million of which US$41 million IBRD, actual cost US$193.7, none of which from IBRD ). This
   component supported measures to reduce flood risk and establish multifunctional zones along the Río
   Bogota, including river dredging, embankment construction, restoration of riparian habitats, meanders, and
   wetlands, land acquisition, assistance for involuntary displacement of people, landscape design, and
   establishment of parks.

   Revised component 2. Under the first restructuring, undisbursed project funds from component 2 were
   reallocated to component 1, reducing its allocation to US$115.86 million.

   Component 3: Environmental and Water Studies (cost at appraisal US$7 million, all of which from IBRD
   actual cost US$4 million, none of which from IBRD). This component financed studies to assist in the
   environmental sustainability of the Río Bogotá, including the elaboration of: (a) an integrated water
   management plan for the Río Bogotá basin; (b) a biosolids master plan for the metropolitan region of
   Bogotá Distrito Capital; and (c) a river management plan for Río Bogotá.

   Revised component 3. Under the first restructuring, undisbursed project funds from component 3 were
   reallocated to component 1, reducing its allocation to US$3.54 million.


                                                                                                  Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CO Rio Bogota Environ Infrastructure (P111479)



  Component 4: Project Management and Administration (cost at appraisal US$5 million, of which US$2
  million from IBRD, actual cost US$9.8 million, none of which from IBRD). This component supported
  measures to strengthen the capacity of the Borrower for the day-to-day implementation of the Project,
  including (a) compliance with financial, environmental and procurement management, reporting
  requirements and monitoring and supervision activities, implementation of the Resettlement Action Plan
  (RAP) and Environmental Management Plan (EMP), (b) the carrying out of a public outreach campaign, (c)
  training, and (d) the provision of consultants’ services.

  Revised component 4. Under the first restructuring, undisbursed project funds from component 4 were
  reallocated to component 1, reducing its allocation to US$2.33 million.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


  Project Cost: The original total estimated project cost was US$487 million, of which US$250 million was
  from the IBRD. The actual cost was US$640.6 million, of which US$235.5 million was from the IBRD.

  Financing: The project’s cost was financed through an IBRD Credit of US$250 million.

  Borrower Contribution: The Borrower’s planned contribution to the project’s cost was US$237 million. The
  Borrower’s actual contribution was US$405.07 million.

  Restructuring:

  First Restructuring. The project was restructured on June 28, 2016 to extend the project’s closing date by
  18 months until December 2017, revise the results framework, reallocate funds from all undisbursed loan
  proceeds to component 1 to finance expenses for works and goods incurred under the El Salitre WWTP
  Turnkey Contract, and revise the implementation schedule and disbursement estimates to take account of
  the extension in the closing date. The proposed 18-month extension would allow the project to continue
  supporting the construction of the WWTP and complete all activities under components 2 and 3. This
  restructuring was part of a phased approach towards a possible longer extension, which was required by
  the duration of the WWTP turnkey contract, scheduled to be complete by September 30, 2021.

  Second Restructuring. The project was restructured on December 31, 2017 to extend the closing date by 12
  months from December 31, 2017 to December 31, 2018, revise the results framework, change the
  implementation schedule, revise the disbursement, and change the procurement procedures presented in
  the Loan Agreement to exempt the contracts procured with government funds from the Bank’s
  requirements. A decision on a possible further extension of the loan closing date was conditioned on the
  compliance with an agreed Action Plan for the 12-month period of the extension and requirements
  regarding the submission of the outstanding 2017 and subsequent financial audit reports.

  Third Restructuring. The project was restructured on December 19, 2018, to extend the closing date by 12
  months from December 31, 2018, to December 31, 2019, revise the results framework, and to change
  disbursement estimates.




                                                                                                 Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Rio Bogota Environ Infrastructure (P111479)



   Fourth Restructuring. The project was restructured on July 8, 2019, to extend the closing date by 24 months
   to December 31, 2021.

   Fifth Restructuring. The project was restructured on October 1, 2021, to extend the closing date by 12
   months to December 31, 2022, and revise the results framework. The extension was needed to make
   progress towards achievement of the PDO-level indicator targets related to wastewater treatment.

   Dates: The project was approved on December 14, 2010, and became effective on September 21, 2011.
   The project closed on December 31, 2022, six and a half years after the original closing date of June 30,
   2016.

   Split Rating. Although some of the PDO targets were reduced, (number of hectares of multi-functional
   areas along the Rio Bogota declined from 175 to 165 and water quality standards for total coliform were not
   pursued at project closure), the overall scope of the project remained the same as originally planned.
   Therefore, a split rating is not applied.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context at Appraisal

Prior to the project, the city of Bogota, with a population of 7.3 million in 2010, discharged all of its
wastewater into the Río Bogotá, of which only 20 percent received primary treatment. This resulted in high
levels of water pollution of the Rio Bogota. In addition, extensive wetlands had been lost to urbanization and
those that remained suffered from poor water quality. The loss of the natural floodplain left settlements built
near the riverbank at risk of periodic flooding. There was strong public support for measures to restore the
Rio Bogota, with 48 percent of residents in a survey stating pollution of the river as a major environmental
problem.

Alignment with Country Priorities

The PDO was well-aligned with Colombia’s environment and water and sanitation priorities as presented in
its National Development Plan for 2006–2010, which had, as one of its five pillars, environmental
sustainability (World Bank Country Partnership Strategy for fiscal 2008–2011, page 10). Specifically, the
project contributed to the government’s objective of improving integrated management of water resources.

The PDO was also aligned with Colombia’s National Development Plan 2019–22. This emphasized
“adopting measures to protect water sources and ensure their long-term sustainability, using a circular
economy approach. Further, the PDO is also aligned with the Plan’s focus on ensuring joint territorial and
sectoral responsibility for disaster risk reduction and adaptation to climate change and variability.

Alignment with Bank Strategy

The project’s objectives are fully aligned with the World Bank’s strategy as laid out in its Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) for the fiscal years (FY) 2016–2021, which specifies enhanced capacity for

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CO Rio Bogota Environ Infrastructure (P111479)



               natural resource management in target regions as one of its eight objectives. It states that under the CPF
               “the Río Bogotá Environmental Recuperation and Flood Control Project seeks to transform the highly
               polluted river into an environmental asset for Colombia’s metropolitan capital area by investing in the
               upgrading and expanding the Salitre wastewater treatment plant, reducing flood risks, and creating
               multifunctional recreational areas along the river. The integrated water management plan for the entire Rio
               Bogotá basin will aim to ensure water security to the different human activities and ecosystems in the
               catchment, through sustainable management of natural resources and the water infrastructure and disaster
               risk management” (Colombian CPF fiscal 2016–2021, page 20). The project sought to address the
               development problem of water pollution, flood risks, and lack of recreational and ecological value of the
               river’s riparian zone.

               The Bank’s 2015 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Colombia also highlighted as a key challenge for
               economic growth high pollution levels, particularly air pollution in Colombia’s largest cities and low levels of
               wastewater treatment, threaten both public welfare and economic growth (through negative impacts on
               competitiveness) (SCD 2015, page 12). It specifies as a priority taking action to reduce pollution. The
               project thus is fully aligned with the SCD and the CPF.

               Previous World Bank Experience

               The World Bank has a long history of supporting urban development and water supply and sanitation
               projects in Colombia. The Bank had supported five water sector operations in Bogotá, the most recent of
               which, Santa Fe I, closed in 2005. Under the Santa Fe project, the Bogota Water Supply and Sewerage
               Company made substantial progress toward the key policy objective of transforming itself into a commercial
               water utility with a corporate culture based on professional responsibility and accountability. It also started
               the process of restoring the urban wetlands that drain into the Río Bogotá.

               However, a shortcoming was the vagueness of the PDO formulation “To transform the Rio Bogotá river into
               an environmental asset”, as it is not clearly defined or specified what “environmental asset” means or what
               it is meant to achieve. The three sub-objectives are clear, (i.e., to improve the water quality(of Río Bogotá;
               to reduce the flood risks; and to create multi-functional areas along the river), but all three of them are at a
               relative low level in the results chain, especially the third one, which lingers between being a project activity
               and an output. And none of them directly addresses a development problem. The objective remained
               relevant, however, throughout the project implementation period and the causal chain between funding and
               outcomes was clear. Relevance of the objectives of the project is High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                                                                                                                      Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CO Rio Bogota Environ Infrastructure (P111479)



To improve the water quality of Rio Bogotá.

Rationale
Theory of Change

The project’s activities to achieve objective 1 consisted of (a) completion of designs for the upgrade and
expansion of the Salitre WWTP, and (b) construction of the upgrades and expansion of the WWTP. The key
output was the expanded and upgraded WWTP. In turn, this output would be expected to result in the
outcome of improved water quality of the Rio Bogota in the middle basin to Class IV water quality standards
for biological oxygen demand (BOD) and total suspended solids (TSS). However, during implementation the
Bank and government project teams realized that achieving the water quality targets would require
interventions beyond those the project was financing and revised the PDO indicator to measure the quality of
the effluent discharged from the WWTP. With this change, the causal pathways from inputs to outcomes were
valid and direct, and the outcomes achieved could be mostly attributed to the project’s interventions. The
activities, if completed, would be sufficient to achieve the objective of improved water quality.

The key assumptions for achieving the original water quality objective were that the wastewater interceptors
and Canoas Pumping Station, being constructed by the Bogota Water Supply and Sewerage Company, were
complete and operational by the time the upgraded and expanded WWTP was operational. The assumptions
were reasonable.

Outputs

      The design flow of the WWTP was expanded from 4 to 7 cubic meters per second, achieving the
       target of 7). This was the only output indicator relevant for this objective. It is sufficient to measure the
       primary output of the expansion of the treatment plant.

Outcomes

      The effluent discharged from the WWTP contained BOD levels of 20.81 milligrams per liter (mg/l),
       achieving the target of < 30 mg/l; and TSS levels of 19.02 mg/l achieving the target of < 30 mg/l.
      The effluent contained 10,462,000 MPN/100 milliliters (ml) of coliform, well above the target of < 1,000
       MPN)/100 ml.

This means that the Salitre WWTP meets effluent discharge targets for BOD and TSS as set out in the 2016
Restructuring Paper. The plant is capable of achieving the coliform target, but the plant was not pursuing this
at project closing because the planned diversion of treated wastewater had not been formally agreed to with
the members of the La Ramada agriculture district (ICR para 44). Even without this the plant was still
complying with the national regulatory requirements for water quality of WWTP effluents discharged directly
into rivers as mandated by the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development in Resolution 631 of
2015.

All expected outputs and outcomes achieved. Reducing the levels of BOD and TSS in the effluent discharged
to the river is likely to have improved the water quality of the Rio Bogota in the middle basin, thereby
achieving objective 1. Achieving this objective also contributed to the higher-level objective of transforming
the river into an environmental asset, by improving water quality critical for the return of fish and other aquatic



                                                                                                      Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CO Rio Bogota Environ Infrastructure (P111479)



animals and plants to the river and to allow the river to be used for recreational purposes. The efficacy of the
project in achieving this objective is Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To reduce flood risks along Rio Bogotá.

Rationale
Theory of Change

The project’s activities to achieve objective 2 consisted of (a) design, construction, and supervision of flood
control works, including dredging, embankment construction, restoration of riparian habitats, meanders, and
wetlands; (b) acquiring land for multifunctional areas and flood control works; (c) conducting public outreach
campaigns; and (d) resettling families living in flood prone areas along the riverbank. The key outputs were
(a) multifunctional areas along the river recuperated; (b) people living near the river support the project; (c)
families resettled away from flood-prone areas; (d) flood control works, and landscaping completed; and (e)
recreational park constructed.

In turn, these outputs would be expected to result in the outcomes of (a) the Rio Bogota achieves a flood
control protection standard of a 100-year return period, and (b) people experiencing reduced risk of flooding
as a result of the project. Overall, the causal pathways from inputs to outcome were valid and direct, and the
outcomes achieved could be mostly attributed to the project’s interventions.

Outputs

      A total of 69 kilometers of flood control works were constructed under the project for the Bogota
       metropolitan area, exceeding the target of 68 kilometers.

Outcomes

      Rio Bogota flood control protection standard of at least 100-year return period (that is, less than 1
       percent chance of overtopping every year), was achieved, matching the target.1,188,236 people were
       living with reduced risk of flooding due to the project, exceeding the target set of 125,387 people.

All expected outputs and outcomes achieved or exceeded. Nearly 1,200,000 people are now protected from
reduced risks of flooding due to the flood control works constructed under the project, thereby achieving
objective 2. Achieving this objective also contributed to the higher-level objective of transforming the river into
an environmental asset, and by incorporating ecological design into flood control works to create riparian
zones and maintain hydraulic connection with adjoining wetland areas. The efficacy of the project in achieving
this objective is rated Substantial.



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CO Rio Bogota Environ Infrastructure (P111479)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To create multi-functional areas along the river.

Rationale
Theory of Change

The project’s activities to achieve objective 3 consisted of (a) restoring the areas from which households
relocated as multifunctional areas; (b) recovering 15 hectares of wetlands, (c) planting approximately 93,000
native plant species; and (d) designing and establishing recreational areas and parks. Other activities
included (a) preparation of an integrated water management plan for the Rio Bogota basin, (b) development
of a biosolids masterplan for the metropolitan region of Bogota, and (c) preparation of a dynamic river
management plan for Rio Bogota.

The key outputs were (a) recreational parks established. Other outputs included (a) integrated water
management plan prepared, (b) biosolids masterplan produced, and (c) dynamic river management plan
prepared. These outputs were expected to result in the outcome of increased environmental and recreational
value of the Rio Bogota. Overall, the causal pathways from inputs to outcome were valid and direct, and the
outcomes achieved could be mostly attributed to the project’s interventions.

Outputs

        Multifunctional areas along the river were recuperated, as targeted.
        Recreational parks were established, as targeted.
        An integrated water management plan was prepared, as targeted.
        A biosolids masterplan was produced, as targeted.
        A dynamic river management plan prepared, as targeted.

Outcomes

      A total of 165 hectares were reserved as multifunctional areas along the Rio Bogota. This matches the
       revised target set out in the 2021 Restructuring Paper, but is slightly less than the original target of
       175 hectares.
      Six multifunctional areas along the Rio Bogota were recuperated. This matches the revised target set
       out in the 2021 Restructuring Paper, but is less than the original target of eight.

All expected outputs and outcomes were largely achieved. A total of six multifunctional areas covering 165
hectares were established. These serve as ecological habitats, recreational parks, and areas that provide
natural treatment of water runoff. Achieving this objective also contributed to the higher-level objective of
transforming the river into an environmental asset, through the role played by the multifunctional areas in
controlling inundation during heavy rains, providing critical habitat for biodiversity, and by creating public
spaces to enhance the Río Bogotá’s recreational value. Further, the preparation of the integrated water

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                CO Rio Bogota Environ Infrastructure (P111479)



                            management plan contributed to the river’s environmental sustainability by deepening understanding of
                            demands and sources of water along the middle basin and providing the basis for a tool to support decision-
                            making on water resources management. The efficacy of the project in achieving this objective is rated
                            Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale


                            Overall efficacy is rated Substantial, as all three objectives were rated Substantial. The project contributed to
                            the Project Development Objective of transforming the river into an environmental asset, by reducing the
                            levels of BOD and TSS in the effluent discharged to the river, thereby improving the water quality of the Rio
                            Bogotá in the middle basin, reducing flood risks and creating habitat for biodiversity and public spaces for
                            recreational use.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency


   Economic efficiency. An economic analysis was conducted at appraisal (PAD, page 12). The assumptions and
   methodology used in the cost-benefit analysis were appropriate. The benefits comprised (a) willingness to pay
   for an improved Río Bogotá environment with a string of multi-functional parks, and (b) reduction in damage
   from floods due to the project. To ascertain the willingness to pay for an improved environment along the river, a
   contingent valuation study was conducted in which over 1,000 households were interviewed. The survey
   indicated strong support for cleaning up the river and transforming it into an urban environmental asset. The
   average willingness to pay was estimated at around US$3 per household per month, generating 92 percent of
   the net benefits. The forecast wastewater tariff increases needed to sustain operation of the Salitre wastewater
   treatment plant, are estimated at around US$1.5 per household per month. The costs included the investment
   and the operation and maintenance costs of the WWTP, works to reduce flooding, and works to establish the
   multifunctional parks along the river. The net present value (NPV) of the investments was estimated to be
   US$249 million over a 40-year period using a discount rate of 10 percent, and the internal rate of return (IRR)
   was estimated to be 16.9 percent.


                                                                                                                                 Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CO Rio Bogota Environ Infrastructure (P111479)



The economic analysis was again updated at project completion, using the same approach used for project
appraisal, with costs and benefits discounted at 10 percent over a 40-year period (ICR, page 24–25). The NPV
of the investments was estimated to be US$46.6 million, and the IRR was estimated to be 9.45 percent. This is
substantially lower than the assessment at appraisal primarily due to the longer implementation period than
originally estimated.

Design and implementation efficiency. The project closing date was extended by six and a half years to allow
adequate time to complete the WWTP under the turnkey contract. However, at the time the project closed, the
WWTP was still not complete, with physical progress at 96 percent. Such delays reduced efficiency given the
opportunity cost of capital and the service fee that the borrower continued to pay on Bank loans.

Overall, the quantified long-term benefits exceed the costs. However, there were shortcomings in the planning
and design of the WWTP that delayed its construction and start of operation. The efficiency of the project is
therefore rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     100.00
 Appraisal                                                 16.90
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     100.00
 ICR Estimate                                              9.45
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

With high relevance of objectives, substantial efficacy, and modest efficiency, the overall rating is Moderately
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical risk is considered modest, despite the dispute between the borrower and the WWTP contractor
regarding technical issues with the plant that could lead to faster cost escalation and asset deterioration,

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CO Rio Bogota Environ Infrastructure (P111479)



potentially affecting the plant’s long-term sustainability, because these are likely to be resolved by the end of
2023. Moreover, the Bogota Water Supply and Sewerage Company is a technically and financially strong
enterprise capable of sustainably operating the plant.

Government commitment risk is considered low because The Bogota Water and Sewerage Company is a
technically and financially strong company, which is fully capable of sustainably operating the Salitre WWTP
regardless once disputes with the contractor are resolved and the plant handed over to the utility. Further,
reducing water pollution and improving the environment of the greater Bogota metropolitan region remain
strong priorities of the district administration and the national government, as demonstrated by their support
for the construction of the much larger Canoas WWTP, that will treat the remaining 70 percent of the city’s
wastewater.

Environmental risk from the inability to reuse the biosolids generated by the plant is considered modest
because the government is working on amending the regulation to update the biosolids regulatory framework
align and bring it in line with the most recent best practices in the field and enhance biosolids’ reuse
possibilities at the time of the project’s closing. The Biosolids Management Plan and the technical assistance
provided by the Bank have contributed toward addressing this crucial aspect for the sustainable
management of the Salitre WWTP and the future larger Canoas WWTP.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At project entry, the objective to assist the Borrower to transform the Rio Bogotá into an environmental
  asset for the Bogotá Distrito Capital metropolitan region by improving water quality, reducing flood risks,
  and creating multi-functional areas along the river was a high strategic priority. The project was based on
  a sound analysis of the sector background and the lessons learned from the World Bank’s multi-decade-
  long engagement and experience in the urban development and water and sanitation sectors in general
  and in Bogota, more particularly. The key lessons adopted in the project design included (a) incorporating
  nature-based solutions in the design of the flood control works by restoring meanders, placing the dikes
  as far apart as practically possible to create riparian zones, and maintaining hydraulic connections with
  adjoining wetland areas, which not only reduces flood risk, but also restores the ecological value of the
  riparian zone; and (b) including technical assistance to prepare a Biosolids Master Plan to assist the
  utility and the environmental authorities to address the medium and long-term challenges of biosolids
  management (PAD, paragraph 31–32). The project’s approach was straight forward, with its three
  objectives all contributing to improvements in river water quality and the ecological and recreational value
  of the river’s riparian zone. The technical aspects of the project were sound, with support for a turnkey
  contract to upgrade and expand the WWTP, incorporating nature-based solutions for flood control. The
  project activities were sufficient to achieve the project objectives. The project supported activities to turn
  the Rio Bogotá into an environmental asset and address the development problem of water pollution,
  flood risks, and lack of recreational and ecological value of the Rio Bogotá.

  Project implementation arrangements were appropriate, with the Regional Autonomous Environmental
  Agency of Cundinamarca (CAR), as the borrower (with a guarantee from the Republic of Colombia),
  responsible for all aspects of project implementation. As the Bogota Water and Sewerage Company
  would continue to operate the WWTP, CAR and the utility established a strong coordination mechanism

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Rio Bogota Environ Infrastructure (P111479)



  under the Convenio 171 Executive Committee to help address aspects of design, construction, and
  commissioning of the expanded and upgraded Salitre WWTP. Identification of most risks and mitigation
  measures were appropriate. Indicators and targets in the results framework were well-specified.

  With the Bank team’s close support and guidance during preparation, the CAR developed a thorough
  environmental analysis and a regional basin strategy, which supported its choice of technology, a two-
  plant approach, and water quality goals for the Río Bogotá. Further, the Project included citizen
  engagement activities and extensive consultation regarding environmental and social aspects. The
  diligent efforts of the Bank and CAR teams throughout the preparation phase enabled the Bank
  management to prepare a thorough response to the questions of the Inspection Panel investigating a
  2016 request for inspection, which focused on the chosen solution, the findings of the environmental
  assessment, and the consultation process followed. The Environmental Assessment, supported in part by
  a grant from the Bank, was considered the most comprehensive EA ever prepared for any wastewater
  project in Colombia. The Bank team provided effective oversight of the implementation of the
  Resettlement Action Plan, and no complaints were filed.

  There were some shortcomings, however. Although most risks were appropriately identified, procurement
  risk was rated moderate, because CAR had previous procurement experience under a project financed
  by the Inter-American Development Bank and considerable measures to mitigate procurement risk were
  identified. However, CAR had limited experience and capacity to procure a large design-build contract,
  resulting in a much longer procurement process than originally planned. The design-build contract was
  initially expected to be awarded in late 2014/early 2015, whereas it was actually awarded in April 2016,
  almost 18 months later (ICR, paragraph 75).

  Overall, the quality at entry is rated satisfactory, despite moderate shortcomings in the proactive
  identification of and resolution of challenges.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Throughout the project period, six task team leaders led project preparation and implementation, two of
 them based in Bogota, and four in Washington, DC. This is an unusually high number of TTLs for a project
 of this duration; TTL turnover was high. However, handover between task team leaders is reported to have
 been handled well to ensure continuity in client relationships and supervision. Exiting task team leaders
 generally remained part of the project team for at least six months after leaving the post, ensuring a smooth
 transition. Water specialists based in Colombia and elsewhere provided technical support throughout the
 project implementation period. Close supervision ensured that the implementation teams focused on the
 project’s objectives, such as reducing pollution, diminishing flood risks, and creating public parks along the
 riverbank for recreational use.

 A total of 22 implementation support missions were held during project implementation, approximately
 every six months. Aide Memoires and Implementation Status and Result Reports were of high quality and
 candid, thoroughly covering all key issues and providing practical recommendations on how to address


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Rio Bogota Environ Infrastructure (P111479)



 challenges, according to the ICR (para 113). The Bank team proactively revised the project’s performance
 ratings, in response to changes in implementation progress.

 Supervision of safeguard and fiduciary aspects of the project was appropriate. The Bank team was flexible
 and responsive to emerging needs of the client. For example, at the request of the government, the team
 quickly prepared restructuring papers to extend the closing date and reallocate funds for the WWTP to
 ensure the project met its objectives.

 The Bank team closely supervised implementation of the Inspection Panel’s recommendations, including
 by extending the project closing date only when satisfied that the recommendations were being
 implemented. Implementation of the recommendations helped to build social support for the Salitre WWTP
 project and prevent delays due to social opposition. By 2020, all nine actions had been fulfilled. The
 systematic reporting and fulfillment of these actions, in addition to the continuous dialogue with community
 organizations, prevented any delays in the Project’s implementation due to social opposition (ICR,
 paragraph 77).

 Overall, the quality of supervision is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The theory of change was sound, specifying how the key activities and outputs led to the outcomes as
 reflected in the results framework. While the project development objective to assist the Borrower to
 transform the Río Bogotá river into an environmental asset for the Bogotá Distrito Capital metropolitan
 region was vague, the three subobjectives identified; improved water quality, reduced flood risks and the
 creation of multi-functional areas along the river were more clearly specified. The indicators in the PAD
 were well-specified. The results framework was revised during the 2016 restructuring to (a) add the
 corporate results indicator “Direct Project beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender,” (b) to revise the PDO
 outcome indicator from one measuring water quality to one measuring the quality of the effluent discharged
 from the WWTP, as water quality is influenced by discharges from sources other than the WWTP, (c) to
 add an indicator on the number of people benefiting from reduced risk of flooding, and (d) to add an
 indicator on percentages of grievances addressed. Some targets were slightly reduced to reflect new
 information arising from ongoing contracts. Although many of the indicators were at the output rather than
 the outcome level, they were adequate to capture the contribution of the operation’s activities and outputs
 toward achieving the project’s objectives. The indicators presented in the 2106 Restructuring Paper were
 specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and time-bound, with baseline and target values specified for all




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Rio Bogota Environ Infrastructure (P111479)



 indicators. The proposed data collection methods were adequate for all indicators. Overall, the project
 implementing agencies had the capacity to implement the M&E arrangements.



b. M&E Implementation
  CAR’s performance with M&E was rated satisfactory in the Implementation Status and Results Reports
  throughout the implementation period. M&E data were collected and analyzed properly CAR’s M&E team
  also noted that the indicator regarding the quality of WWTP’s effluent needed to be revised to reflect the
  decision not to use the chlorination system until agreement was reached with farmers regarding the use
  of biosolids. The indicator was not formally revised, but the team reported on the parameters that could
  be attributed to the processes used at the plant.



c. M&E Utilization
  CAR and the Bank teams discussed the M&E data during each mission. They used the information to
  make adjustments in the project activities and implementation schedule, such as reallocating
  undisbursed funds from some project components to fill a financing gap for the WWTP and extending
  the project’s closing date.

  The M&E system as designed and implemented was sufficient to assess the achievements of the project
  in producing outputs that plausibly contributed to the PDO to assist the Borrower to transform the Río
  Bogotá river into an environmental asset for the Bogotá Distrito Capital metropolitan region by improving
  water quality, reducing flood risks and creating multi-functional areas along the river. The M&E system
  was adequate in capturing all aspects of the results chain. The M&E quality rating is Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal the project was assigned Environmental category A (full assessment), to ensure oversight of
   the preparation of specific environmental and social assessments carried out in the context of feasibility
   studies financed by the project. Five safeguard policies were triggered during preparation of the project:
   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Pest Management (OP 4.09),
   Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). The ICR stated that the project closed with a satisfactory
   overall safeguards rating and that environmental performance was consistently rated satisfactory
   throughout the project implementation period. An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared for
   both the construction and operation phases of the WWTP. The EMP for construction (2017) listed practical
   actions for mitigation, institutional capacity building, monitoring and reporting schemes, and budgets. The
   client implemented this EMP satisfactorily, and mitigation measures were incorporated into designs and

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CO Rio Bogota Environ Infrastructure (P111479)



  contracts. The client also implemented all mitigation measures detailed in the Environmental Assessment
  for construction. Implementation of the EMP for construction is assessed as adequate and satisfactory (ICR,
  para 91). The World Bank team provided technical advice for the EMP for operation, according to the ICR.
  CAR had a team covering all areas of environmental management for this project. It developed and
  implemented an Occupational Health and Safety Management system, which complied with the World
  Bank’s safeguards and national legislation. The project had a peak number of 2,063 workers on site in
  December 2019, with a total of 215 occupational health and safety incidents, including 213 minor incidents,
  two serious incidents, and zero fatalities (ICR para 91).

  The project was in compliance with the World Bank’s environmental safeguard policies covering the flood
  control and Río Bogotá environmental restoration works.

  Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04). This policy was triggered because a key objectives of the project was to
  help restore riparian habitats along the river, with particular emphasis on the important wetlands that remain
  in the project’s area of influence. The project was in compliance with this safeguard policy. Under the flood
  control and Río Bogotá environmental restoration works, the project financed restoration of 116 hectares of
  wetlands, which serve as buffer zones and also provide habitat for flora and fauna, improve water quality,
  create spaces for recreation. In addition, under this component, more than 93,000 mainly native species
  have been planted, initiating the restoration of the area of intervention. Construction of the WWTP did not
  negatively affect the few remaining wetlands or other natural habitats along the river.

  Pest Management (OP 4.09). This policy was triggered due to concerns related to potential exposure to
  vermin in the dike construction areas. The project was in compliance with this safeguard policy. The CAR
  has developed and implemented specific technical guidance measures addressing the use, management,
  and handling of any pesticides or other mechanisms for pest management in the Project-affected area.

  Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11). This policy was triggered to account for any chance finds of
  cultural or archaeological significance during the construction of the Project’s civil works. A relevant
  procedure was applied during construction and associated excavation. There were no cases during
  construction.

  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The project was in compliance with this safeguard policy. Prior to
  the start of works related to the environmental recovery, a Resettlement Action Plan was executed, resulting
  in the resettlement of 51 people to newly constructed houses on a nearby site owned by the municipality. As
  the residents owned the houses, they experienced a substantial improvement in their standard of living.
  During interviews three years following the resettlement, residents stated that the resettlement brought new
  opportunities for their development and for that of their children. No complaints were filed during and after
  the resettlement process.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  Financial Management (FM) was rated Moderately Satisfactory during the Project’s life, mainly due to
  delays in achieving the financial management (FM) covenants of submitting semiannual interim financial
  reports (IFR) and annual financial audit reports. The FM function was adequately staffed at the CAR during

                                                                                                  Page 15 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CO Rio Bogota Environ Infrastructure (P111479)



  the Project’s life. CAR’s internal control office identified no relevant issues. A designated account was
  opened with a commercial bank, and the disbursement letter was amended for this purpose. However, the
  account was not used for receiving advances from the loan account. In 2020, the World Bank’s Integrity
  Vice Presidency provided a declaration of ineligible expenses per US$14.5 million related to a contract on
  flood control works. This resulted in sanctions against five construction companies for engaging in
  fraudulent and collusive practices (ICR para 81). As of March 2022, CAR had reimbursed the Bank US$9
  million and the contractor had reimbursed US$5.5 million.

  The CAR implemented a new administrative and accounting system, which included project accounting.
  The Project IFRs took longer than expected to prepare. External audit reports were mostly delivered with
  delay due to internal issues affecting the execution of the contracting process. Most audit reports
  unqualified opinion for project accounting and financial reporting. The 2022/21 audit opinions for the project
  included a paragraph highlighting the extension of the term until March 12, 2023, for the execution of works
  contracts to be able to continue executing contracts for the WWTP.

  Procurement

  The Loan Agreement 7985-CO included a provision where the borrower undertakes to apply the Bank’s
  procurement procedures in utilizing all the Aporte Local required for financing and implementing the
  project, except for costs related to land acquisition, resettlement, and rehabilitation. Such a provision was
  removed in its entirety with the Amendment of the Loan Agreement dated December 21, 2017. The final
  procurement plan for the project included only three activities: (a) Construction of hydraulic adaptation
  works of the Bogotá River section (b) Detailed design, construction of works, supply and installation of
  equipment, commissioning and assisted operation of the optimization and expansion of the El Salitre
  WWTP; and (c) Salitre WWTP Project Management. No ex-post reviews were conducted, since all the
  activities were classified as subject to the Bank’s prior review. The three procurement activities above were
  awarded based on the conditions of the bidding/request for proposal documents. Investigations conducted
  by the World Bank’s Integrity Vice Presidency resulted in several sanctions and the declaration of
  misprocurement of the Contract 803/2012—Río Bogotá Flood Control Works in sections A, B, and C.
  Regarding the Project’s principal contract, PTAR Salitre, physical progress in September 2022 was 95.72
  percent and financial progress was 86.83 percent, as per information provided by the borrower. However,
  there were disputes between the borrower and the construction contractor in the contract’s final stage,
  resulting in the non-completion of project activities before closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The construction consortium (CEPS) in charge of upgrading and expanding the Salitre WWTP partnered
  with the Colombian association of concrete producers to implement the first diversity and inclusion policy
  for a water utility company in Colombia. In October 2019, the Gender Equality Program was officially
  launched with 400 participants, including workers from the WWTP, the surrounding community, women
  from the police force, and officials from local entities (ICR para 66).



d. Other
   ---


                                                                                                  Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Rio Bogota Environ Infrastructure (P111479)



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                Efficiency is assessed as
                                                                                modest rather than substantial,
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   due to the six and a half years
                                                                                project extension. This lowers
                                                                                the overall outcome rating.
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG derives the following lessons drawn from the ICR:

      Inadequate time in the implementation schedule for design-build contracts to allow for
       preparation of detailed designs, carrying out procurement processes, and engaging
       highly qualified advisory services supporting the client during procurement and
       contract management can result in delays in project implementation. Thoroughly
       preparing design and procurement documents will allow for smooth implementation. In
       addition, the reference design used in the bidding process should include at least 20 percent
       of the preliminary engineering with technical specifications, including key equipment. In
       addition, the advisory services during implementation should serve as project management
       consultancy with the capacity and ability to make decisions that help optimize the plant’s
       design as construction proceeds.

      Strong interinstitutional coordination mechanisms, close accompaniment and support
       throughout the design and implementation phase can help in working across the
       water resources management and water supply and sanitation subsectors in a single
       project. Entering into a legally-binding agreement—the Convenio 171—between CAR and
       the utility that specified the roles and responsibilities of each was critical in ensuring good
       coordination between these institutions throughout project preparation and implementation.
       The convenio’s strategic importance was such that any amendment, suspension, abrogation,
       repeal, or waiver that would have materially and adversely impacted, in the Bank’s opinion,
       the borrower’s ability to perform any of its obligations under the Bank’s legal agreement,
       would have been considered grounds for suspension of the legal agreement between the
       Bank and the borrower.

      Meaningful, deep, and continuous engagement with communities directly affected by
       construction works may help build support for projects and may prevent delays due to
       social opposition. The Bank’s and CAR team’s efforts to engage communities throughout
       project preparation and implementation helped to ensure that residents broadly supported
       the project, preventing potential delays that would arise with social opposition. That at least

                                                                                                  Page 17 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CO Rio Bogota Environ Infrastructure (P111479)



         40 percent of the labor force (both skilled and unskilled workers) for constructing the WWTP
         came from the local community also helped in generating support for the project.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project. The ICR is clearly written and is largely consistent with the
guidelines. It provides adequate details of the project’s activities, and it provides a good theory of change in
regard to the causal links and a full results chain.

The ICR, however, states in the table in annex 3 that the final cost of component 4 was US$26.3 million. It
states in paragraph 23 and in table 4 of the main text the actual cost of component 4 was US$9.8 million.
Furthermore, with its 40 pages of main text, the ICR is more than double and nearly three times as long as
stipulated in the guidelines. Despite these shortcomings, the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 18 of 18
