     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bhutan - DPC (P175758)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023743

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                                Operation Name
 P175758                                     Bhutan - DPC

 Country                                     Practice Area (Lead)
 Bhutan                                      Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-69280                                   30-Jun-2022                                          34,865,892.00

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 23-Jun-2021                                 30-Jun-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                               35,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                                35,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                            34,865,892.00                                            0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Alma Pekmezovic              Jennifer L. Keller           Gabriela Chamartin Escobar     IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The project development objective (PDO) of the Development Policy Financing (DPF) for Bhutan (the
operation) was to strengthen policies for economic resilience and environmental sustainability and enhance
programs to address the economic, social and health impact of COVID-19, (Project Document (PAD) p.
iii). The PDO was not stated in the Financing Agreement.


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bhutan - DPC (P175758)



For the purposes of this ICR review, the PDO is taken as:

      PDO 1: strengthen policies for economic resilience;
      PDO 2: strengthen policies for environmental sustainability; and
      PDO 3: enhance programs to address the economic, social and health impact of COVID-19.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The DPC was structured around two main pillars:

      Pillar 1: (i) Strengthening policies for economic resilience; and (ii) strengthen policies for environmental
       sustainability;
      Pillar 2: Enhancing programs to address the economic, social and health impact of COVID-19.

The pillars correspond with the three objectives of the operation.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The DPC operation consisted of a disbursement of USD $34.9 million and was approved on 23 June 2021. It
became effective on 24 June 2021. The operation closed on 30 June 2022 (as planned).


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Country Context and Background: The COVID-19 Crisis Response Development Policy Credit was
 developed against the backdrop of the global pandemic, which imposed both a health emergency and an
 economic crisis on Bhutan. Despite the prompt efforts of the Royal Government of Bhutan (RGoB) to control
 infections and alleviate economic repercussions, there was a pressing need to facilitate the COVID-19 vaccine
 rollout, create fiscal space to safeguard households and businesses, and set the stage for recovery.

 Prior to the pandemic, Bhutan had experienced robust economic growth, but the crisis resulted in 2.3 percent
 and 3.3 percent GDP declines in FY19/20 and FY20/21, respectively. Tourism and industrial sectors were
 severely affected, and nationwide lockdowns disrupted consumption and investment. Government
 interventions helped mitigate the impact on vulnerable populations, although fiscal deficits and rising public
 debt ensued due to increased spending and reduced tax revenue. The establishment of the National
 Resilience Fund and external grants provided some relief, while an expedited vaccination program aimed to
 stabilize the situation.

 In this context, the stand-alone crisis response DPC operation had a primary focus of alleviating the fiscal,
 economic, and social ramifications caused by the COVID-19 crisis. It was designed in accordance with the
 World Bank Group's (WBG) COVID-19 Crisis Response Approach Paper (June 2020), with direct emphasis on
 addressing four core pillars: i) preserving lives, ii) safeguarding the well-being of the impoverished and
 vulnerable, iii) fostering sustainable business growth and job creation, and iv) enhancing policies, institutions,

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bhutan - DPC (P175758)



and investments to facilitate a more resilient recovery. This operation sought to provide crucial financial
support to the RGoB as it grappled with the social and economic repercussions of COVID-19 while also
tackling Bhutan's underlying structural challenges on the path to a robust recovery.

Alignment with prior DPC series and Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY21-FY24: This
operation was conceived as a continuation of the preceding DPC series and closely aligned with the objectives
set forth in the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY21-FY24. It aimed to advance reforms related to
fiscal management and growth, building upon initiatives initiated in the earlier Strengthening Fiscal
Management and Private Sector Employment Opportunities DPC series. The operation was harmonized with
Bhutan's CPF goals, which focus on enhancing economic and environmental resilience and fostering human
capital development. Specifically, the operation bolstered economic resilience through support for the
implementation of the Goods and Services Tax (GST), efforts to enhance debt transparency, improvements in
debt management, the adoption of a new national tourism policy, and the establishment of a new credit
guarantee scheme. It also contributed to environmental resilience by promoting environmental standards and
low emission strategies within human settlement and industry sectors. Furthermore, the operation played a
role in advancing human capital development by facilitating the distribution of the second dose of COVID-19
vaccines through the COVAX facility and supporting initiatives to combat gender-based violence.

Alignment with the Sustainable Development Finance Policy (SDFP) (2020) and Bhutan’s Performance
and Policy Actions (PPA) Matrix: Additionally, the operation was in alignment with the SDFP and lent
support to actions outlined in Bhutan's PPA matrix. Thus, Bhutan’s 2016 Public Debt Policy mandates the
preparation of a debt management strategy to ensure that borrowing is consistent with sustainable debt level
targets. According to the 2016 Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) report, Bhutan
performed poorly on “transparency of government in relation to fiscal reporting” because key documents—
such as in-year budget execution reports—were not disclosed to the public. (PD, p. 14). As part of the FY21
PPAs, in alignment with the SDFP, the publication of quarterly fiscal accounts and debt reports (supported by
the DPC) was considered to play a crucial role in enhancing oversight over public spending and increasing
debt transparency.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

The operation consisted of three objectives and ten PAs. PAs 1-4 were in line with Objective 1 (to strengthen
policies for economic resilience); PAs 5-7 supported Objective 2 (to strengthen policies for environmental
sustainability), and PAs 8-10 supported Objective 2 (to enhance programs to address the economic, social and
health impact of COVID-19).

Table 1: Prior Actions and the indicative triggers (ITs)

 PDO1: Strengthen policies for economic resilience
 PA1: To strengthen domestic resource mobilization, the government enacted the new GST Act
 on January 16, 2020, replacing the previous sales tax with a value-added tax system set to be
 implemented from July 2021.
 PA2: To enhance debt transparency and management, The Ministry of Finance has published
 (i) quarterly fiscal accounts for Q1 FY2020/21 and Q2 FY2020/21 and (ii) quarterly debt reports

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bhutan - DPC (P175758)



with debt profile, cost and risk indicators (covering central government and central government-
guaranteed debt) for Q1 FY2020/21 and Q2 FY2020/21.
PA3: To strengthen the connection between borrowing and macroeconomic policy, the
Government adopted and publicly released a Debt Management Strategy for the fiscal years
FY2020/21-FY2022/23, which received approval from the Minister of Finance and outlined
specific objectives for both domestic and external borrowing, as well as a comprehensive
assessment of the preceding debt strategy, in accordance with the provisions of the Public
Debt Policy 2016.
PA4(i): To facilitate the recovery of Bhutan's vital tourism sector, the Cabinet approved a new
2021 National Tourism Policy, supported by the DPC, with an accompanying action plan
guiding its implementation.
PA4(ii): To support the recovery of the tourism sector, as part of PA#4, the Government
enacted the Tourism Levy Act 2020.
PDO2: Strengthen policies for environmental sustainability
PA5: To reduce greenhouse gas emissions and air pollution, the National Environment
Commission (NEC) has adopted the Environmental Standards 2020.
PA6: To identify suitable policy pathways to decouple economic growth from greenhouse gas
emissions, the Ministry of Economic Affairs has approved the Low-Emission Development
Strategy for the Industrial Sector.
PA7: To reduce greenhouse gas emission, the Ministry of Works and Human Settlement has
approved the Low-Emission Development Strategy for Human Settlements. In addition to these
efforts, the government has promoted the use of electric cars to address the pollution from the
transportation sector. Moreover, the government adopted a new Biodiversity Strategy and
Action Plan and a Biological Corridor to preserve biodiversity.
PDO3: Enhance programs to address the economic, social and health impact of COVID-
19
PA8: To support the flow of credit to cottage and small industries, (i) the Cabinet has approved
the establishment of the National Credit Guarantee Scheme (NCGS), and (ii) the Ministry of
Finance has approved a monitoring and evaluation framework for the NCGS.
PA9: The Ministry of Health has approved the National COVID-19 Vaccine Deployment Plan to
establish the institutional framework for effective COVID-19 vaccine deployment.
PA10: The National Commission for Women and Children (NCWC) has approved the Gender
and Child Protection Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan During COVID-19
Pandemic to address gender-based violence and provide child protection.

PDO 1: To strengthen policies for economic resilience.

PA1 was strategically designed to achieve greater economic resilience in Bhutan. Specifically, its primary
objective was to enhance economic resilience by implementing the Goods and Services Tax (GST), with the
aim of strengthening domestic resource mobilization.

Prior to the implementation of this action, Bhutan faced a situation where revenue earnings from the
hydropower sector were subject to volatility, and the anticipated decline in overseas development aid (ODA)
grants due to LDC graduation added further fiscal challenges. The GST reform was envisioned as a solution to
improve tax collection from the non-hydropower sector, providing an essential source of additional revenue.
This, in turn, was expected to contribute significantly to bolstering fiscal sustainability and


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bhutan - DPC (P175758)



macroeconomic stability in Bhutan. This low and volatile revenue collection significantly hampered the
government’s ability to respond promptly and adequately to economic shocks.

The approval of the rules and regulations for the GST, as outlined in PA 1, was regarded as a pivotal step in
fortifying domestic revenue streams, ultimately facilitating the diversification of Bhutan's resource base and
strengthening its economic resilience amidst external uncertainties and challenges. This situation underscored
the urgent need for a stable revenue source, making PA1 essential for Bhutan's economic stability and
resilience. In addition, by diversifying the revenue base, PA1 sought to create a stable and sustainable source
of income for the government. Rating PA1=Satisfactory.

PA2 aimed to enhance financial reporting in Bhutan, addressing several pre-existing challenges. Prior to its
implementation, Bhutan faced issues highlighted in the 2016 Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
(PEFA) report, particularly concerning the transparency of government. Key documents, such as in-year budget
execution reports, were not disclosed to the public. While the Royal Monetary Authority (RMA) published
quarterly debt statistics on external PPG debt, there was room for improvement in disclosing information on
domestic debt.

Although Bhutan had made strides in debt management, anchored by the 2016 Public Debt Policy, there
remained a need to strengthen risk assessments and public debt monitoring. The publication of quarterly fiscal
accounts and debt reports for Q1 FY2020/21 and Q2 FY2020/21, as outlined in PA2, was regarded as a step
toward enhancing oversight over public spending and increasing debt transparency. However, these one-off
measures fell short of a statutory requirement that would have institutionalized the regular publication of debt
reports. Rating PA2=Moderately Satisfactory.

PA3 represented an effort to enhance debt transparency and management. It entailed the publication of the
Debt Management Strategy (DMS) for the fiscal years FY2020/21-FY2022/23, which received approval from the
Minister of Finance. The DMS strategy included well-defined targets for both domestic and external borrowing
and involved a comprehensive review and assessment of the prior debt strategy, aligning with the guidelines
set forth in the Public Debt Policy of 2016.

Prior to the adoption of PA3, Bhutan did not have a DMS which contributed to it receiving a “Red” score on the
World Bank Transparency Heatmap of 2022. PA3 was one of Bhutan's Performance and Policy Actions (PPA)
under the SDFP. The adoption and publication of this DMS were intended to strengthen the connection
between borrowing activities and macroeconomic policy, thereby fostering a more coherent and effective
approach to managing the country's debt. However, coherence is a function of the content of the strategy not
the publication of a strategy. And while improved debt transparency has intrinsic value of its own, its direct link
to improved economic resilience in Bhutan is not clear. Rating PA3=Moderately Satisfactory.

PA4 was primarily designed to contribute to the recovery of the tourism sector, a vital component of Bhutan's
economy that had been severely affected by the pandemic. The prior action centered on the approval of the
Tourism Policy and the enactment of the Tourism Levy Act 2020, which were expected to play a pivotal role in
revitalizing the tourism industry. Prior to these actions, Bhutan for many years followed a ‘low volume, high
value tourism’ policy, with higher fee for non-regional tourists compared to regional ones (from India and
Bangladesh), indicating a preference for the former. The tourism policy led to issues such as overcrowding at
tourist sites, uneven distribution of tourism benefits, declining hospitality quality, revenue loss from regional
tourists, and limited revisitation rates.




                                                                                                     Page 5 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bhutan - DPC (P175758)



The new 2021 National Tourism Policy, supported by PA4, Part 1, was intended to address these challenges.
The policy envisages the establishment of regional tourist information centers as well as the establishment of
guidelines and standard operating procedures to regulate, among other things, vehicles used for tourism, the
management of tourism waste and the opening of new tourism sites, and the development of a statistical
system to better manage the sector (thereby also contributing to environmental sustainability. The policy's
implementation was guided by a comprehensive action plan, including the expansion of the pricing system to
regional markets through the Tourism Levy Act 2020 (PA4, Part 2). These measures were expected to create
the groundwork for sustainable growth in the tourism sector, promoting geographic and seasonal diversification.
They aimed to mitigate climate change by reducing the number of tourists, as concerns about air pollution in
certain areas were emerging. Rating PA4=Satisfactory

PDO 2: to strengthen policies for environmental sustainability.

PA5 was designed to address the emerging challenges of greenhouse gas emissions and air pollution in
Bhutan. Despite being a carbon-negative country, Bhutan had experienced an increase in greenhouse gas
emissions and pockets of air pollution. To combat these issues, the National Environmental Commission (NEC)
took action by approving the National Environmental Standards 2020 which set clear and comprehensive
environmental standards to regulate and reduce emissions and pollution, thus contributing significantly to
environmental sustainability. PA5 was part of a broader effort, along with PA6 and PA7 to directly enhance
environmental sustainability by reducing greenhouse gas emissions and air pollution. Rating
PA5=Satisfactory.

PA6 was designed to facilitate Bhutan's transition towards a more environmentally responsible industrial sector.
Prior to PA6, Bhutan recognized the need to chart a course for decoupling economic growth from greenhouse
gas emissions within the industrial domain. With the approval of the Low-Emission Development Strategy for
the Industrial Sector (LEDS), Bhutan aimed to institute policy measures that would promote low-emission
practices and environmental compliance. This was intended to mitigate climate change and reduce pollution,
particularly the presence of Particulate Matter (PM), i.e., PM2.5 and PM10, through the establishment of a low-
emission industrial system.

The strategy includes mitigation actions which were incorporated into the update to Bhutan’s Nationally
Determined Contributions (NDCs). To ensure the implementation of the identified mitigation actions within the
LEDS, the actions are expected to be integrated into RGoB’s annual performance agreements between the
Prime Minister and the line ministries. Additionally, they are expected to be incorporated into the work plans of
these line ministries through the regular budgeting process. Rating PA6= Moderately Satisfactory.

PA7 was designed to enhance environmental sustainability within Bhutan's human settlements. Prior to PA#7,
Bhutan recognized the imperative of reducing greenhouse gas emissions and promoting low-emission practices
within human settlements to mitigate climate change and reduce pollution, particularly PM2.5 and PM10. The
approval of the Low-Emission Development Strategy for Human Settlements signaled a step towards achieving
these goals. This strategy aimed to identify suitable policy measures that would foster environmentally
responsible practices within human settlements while strengthening environmental compliance monitoring.
Additionally, Bhutan's commitment to preserving biodiversity was reinforced through the adoption of a new
Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan and the establishment of a Biological Corridor. PA7 was a pivotal element
of Bhutan's comprehensive approach to environmental conservation and sustainability within human
settlements.




                                                                                                   Page 6 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bhutan - DPC (P175758)



The mitigation actions proposed under PA7 have been incorporated into the NDC, annual performance
agreements between the Prime Minister and the line ministries, as well as the work plans of relevant line
ministries through the regular budgeting process. Rating PA7=Moderately Satisfactory.

PDO 3: to enhance programs to address the economic, social and health impact of COVID-19.

PA8: Prior to PA8, Bhutan faced the challenge of providing crucial liquidity support to Cottage and Small
Industries (CSIs) and self-employed individuals grappling with adverse income shocks. These shocks
necessitated short-term assistance to enable these entities to maintain their operations and cover working
capital expenses while weathering the economic downturn. Recognizing the potential for lasting economic harm
if viable businesses were unable to operate due to short-term liquidity constraints, the RGoB acted by
establishing the National Credit Guarantee Scheme (NCGS).

PA8, Part 1, of the NCGS offered targeted support to the CSI sector through partial, individual guarantees that
covered 70 percent of the approved project loan amount. Initially accessible to clients of Bhutan's three largest
public sector banks, PA8, Part 2, focused on the establishment of a robust monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
framework developed with technical assistance from the World Bank. This framework was designed to assess
the program’s outcomes by monitoring key indicators such as project approval, employment generation,
geographical distribution, loan backing, and fiscal impact. This evaluation aimed to identify opportunities for
further impact enhancement and ensure the effective support of Cottage and Small Industries during economic
challenges.

Given the risk aversion within the banking sector towards supporting CSIs during the pandemic, PA8 played a
pivotal role in sustaining these industries, safeguarding their access to critical financing, and ultimately
contributing to the resilience and survival of Bhutan's cottage and small industries during these challenging
times. Rating PA8=Satisfactory.

PA9: As part of PA9, the Ministry of Health approved the National COVID-19 Vaccine Deployment Plan to
establish the institutional framework for effective COVID-19 vaccine deployment. The National COVID-19
Vaccine Deployment Plan, outlined logistical details, including a comprehensive framework for vaccine
allocation. Concrete actions under PA9 included the efficient administration of COVID-19 vaccines. The
institutional framework established played a critical role in efficiently administering vaccinations, addressing the
health impact of COVID-19 and contributing to the third PDO. The plan incorporated a robust vaccination
monitoring system, encompassing the collection and collation of immunization data. Various options for the
rollout of this system were provided. Rating PA9=Satisfactory.

PA10: This initiative was designed to address the gender-related impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. The
global pandemic's consequences, including lockdowns, economic hardships, and social isolation, led to what
has been termed a shadow pandemic of increased violence against women and children worldwide. Bhutan,
like many other nations, faced a surge in reported Gender- Based Violence (GBV), which had risen by a
staggering 36 percent since the onset of the pandemic. In response to this alarming trend, Bhutan's National
Commission for Women and Children (NCWC) approved the Gender and Child Protection Emergency
Preparedness and Response Plan. This plan marked a pivotal moment in Bhutan's commitment to addressing
the pressing issues of GBV and child protection amid the COVID-19 crisis. PA10 was strategically designed to
provide multifaceted support to survivors of GBV and to mitigate the impact of the pandemic on the incidence of
GBV. Rating PA10=Satisfactory.




                                                                                                      Page 7 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bhutan - DPC (P175758)



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

PDO 1 had 3 RIs, with RI1 associated with PA1, RI2(a) associated with PA2 and PA3, RI2(b) and RI2(c)
associated with PA2 and PA3 respectively, and RI3 associated with PA4.

PDO 2 had 2 RIs, with RI4 associated with PA5, and RI5 associated with PA6 and PA7.

PDO 3 had 3 RIs, with RI6 associated with PA7, RI7 associated with PA9, and RI8 associated with PA10
respectively.

Table 2: Results Indicators (RIs)


                                                                                Actual %
               Associated RI        Baseline         Target                     of       RI
 RI Name                                                           Actual
               PA         Relevance (2021)           (2022)                     targeted Achievement
                                                                                changes

 PDO 1: to strengthen policies for economic resilience

 RI1: Revenues
                                                     > BTN 5
 collected     PA1            S        0.00                        0.00         0%        Negligible
                                                     billion
 under GST


                                                     Info on loans
                                       Info on loans               Info on loans          Negligible
 RI2: Score in                                       contracted:
                                       contracted:                 contracted: n/a        (Info on loans
 the World                                           Green (Full
                                       Red (N.A.)                  Red (N.A.)             contracted)
 Bank Debt                                           information)
 Transparency
 Heatmap
 indicators on
               PA2, PA3       MS       Periodicity
 info on loans                                       Green                                High
                                       (Yellow),                   Green        n/a
 contracted,                                         (<Annual)                            (Periodicity)
                                       Annual
 periodicity,
 and debt
 management                                          Debt          Debt                   High (DMS)
 strategy                              Debt
                                                     management    management
                                       management                              n/a
                                                     strategy:     strategy:
                                       strategy: Red
                                                     Green (Yes,   Green (Yes,


                                                                                               Page 8 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bhutan - DPC (P175758)



                                     (No DMS      with targets    with targets            Overall:
                                     published)   for domestic    for domestic            Substantial
                                                  & external      & external
                                                  debt)           debt)



RI3: Share of
Sustainable
Development
Fee collected
from non-
                 PA4         MS      0.00         5.00            9.80           196%     High
MDPR
(minimum
daily package
rate) paying
leisure arrivals

PDO 2: to strengthen policies for environmental sustainability
RI4: Ambient
PM10 Air
Quality Level,
annual
average in the                       275.00
                PA5          S                    120             196.70         50.55%   Modest
Pasakha                              mg/m3
industrial town
(micrograms
per cubic
meter)

RI5: Number
of mitigation
actions
proposed by
the low-
emission
development
                PA6, PA7     MS      0.00         4.00            13.00          325%     High
strategies
incorporated
into the update
to Bhutan’s
Nationally
Determined
Contributions

PDO 3: to enhance programs to address the economic, social and health impact of COVID-19


                                                                                                 Page 9 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bhutan - DPC (P175758)




RI6: Number
of projects
from micro,
small, CSI and
medium-sized
companies       PA8          MS           0             150           214            142.67% High
benefiting from
the National
Credit
Guarantee
Scheme

RI7: Proportio
n of eligible
population that
has received PA9             S            0.00%         90            97.40          108.22% High
two doses of a
COVID-19
vaccine

RI8: Percentag
e of requests
for services by
GBV survivors
made under PA10              S            0.00%         75            81.90          109.20% High
the new
program that
are receiving
support


RI1: The RI linked to PA1 sought to measure the timely implementation of the Goods and Services Tax
(GST) Act, particularly focusing on whether the GST was implemented within one year of its approval,
which was stipulated to be by July 2021 according to the approved GST Act. The RI was relevant for
measuring the impact of PA1. (Relevance of RI1=S)

RI2, directly tied to PA2, measured Bhutan’s score on the World Bank Debt Transparency Heatmap
indicators. These indicators include: (a) information on loans contracted (RI2a), (b) periodicity (RI2b) and
(c) debt management strategy (RI2c). RI2a and RI2b focused on the publication of quarterly fiscal
accounts and debt reports, aligning with PA2’s goal of improving fiscal transparency and management,
and thereby contributing to the broader objective of strengthening policies for economic resilience (PDO
1). The Heatmap presents an assessment based on the availability, completeness, and timeliness of a
country’s public debt statistics and debt management documents. Its completeness assessment goes
beyond frequency of reporting, delving into the depth of reported information, and taking into
consideration aspects such as coverage of financial instruments and sectors, and the availability of data



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bhutan - DPC (P175758)



on recently signed external loan contracts. RI2a and RI2b are assessed as Moderately Satisfactory.
(Relevance of RI2a and RI2b=MS).

RI2c: The RI2 component associated with the publication of the Debt Management Strategy (DMS) was
linked to PA3, which required the Ministry of Finance to prepare and publish this strategic document. PA3
aimed to ensure that borrowing aligns with sustainable debt level targets and provides clear borrowing
guidelines. The relevance of this RI for measuring the impact of PA3 is significant. It directly assessed
whether the DMS, as published, met the requirements of the Public Debt Policy and provided the
necessary guidance for domestic and external borrowing. (Relevance of RI2c=S)

Overall relevance of RI2= MS

RI3: RI3 was designed to measure the share of Sustainable Development Fee (SDF) collected from non-
MDPR (minimum daily package rate) paying leisure arrivals. This RI was directly linked to PA4, which
included the enactment of the Tourism Levy Act of Bhutan 2020. The RI was relevant for measuring the
impact of PA4 which aimed to establish a sustainable tourism framework in Bhutan while generating
revenue through the SDF. The RI's focus on the share of SDF collected from non-MDPR paying leisure
arrivals directly assessed the effectiveness of the Tourism Levy Act and policy in achieving sustainable
tourism objectives. By monitoring the proportion of SDF contributed by regional tourists and other non-
MDPR paying leisure arrivals, it provided a direct measure of whether the enacted policies and fee
structures were successful in diversifying and increasing tourism revenue sources. This indicator was,
therefore and import but partial indicator of promoting sustainable practices. (Relevance of RI3=MS)

RI4: RI4 was not achieved. This RI was closely associated with PA5, which involved the adoption of the
Environmental Standards 2020 by the NEC. The relevance of this RI for measuring the impact of PA5 was
substantial. PA5's core objective was to improve environmental standards and reduce pollution in the
Pasakha industrial town. The adoption of the Environmental Standards 2020 was a significant step toward
achieving this goal, aligning with Bhutan's commitment to reducing greenhouse gas emissions and
enhancing air quality. The RI provided a quantitative measure of the impact of these standards on air
quality, particularly the reduction of PM10 levels, which are critical indicators of air pollution. (Relevance
of RI4=S).

RI5: The RI concerning the incorporation of mitigation actions proposed by the Low-Emission
Development Strategies (LEDS) into the update of Bhutan's NDCs exceeded the target of four, with a total
of thirteen mitigation actions integrated. This RI was closely linked to PA6 and PA7, which involved the
approval of the Low-Emission Development Strategies for the Industrial Sector and Human Settlements
by the Ministry of Economic Affairs and the Ministry of Works and Human Settlement, respectively. The
relevance of this RI for measuring the impact of PA6 and PA7 was significant. Both prior actions aimed to
formulate strategies that would lead to emissions reduction and sustainable development. However, in
using “measures” as the unit of account, the most impactful measures were not prioritized. (Relevance of
RI5=MS).

RI6: RI6 measured the number of projects benefiting from the NCGS that were initiated by micro, small,
cottage, and medium-sized companies. The target for this RI was set at exceeding 150 such projects.
This RI was directly linked to PA8 which aimed to support the flow of credit to cottage and small
industries, thus facilitating economic growth and development in Bhutan. The relevance of this RI




                                                                                                    Page 11 of 20
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Bhutan - DPC (P175758)



               for measuring the impact of PA8 would have been enhanced if it took into account the value of support
               provided, not just the number of projects supported. (Relevance of RI6= MS)

               RI7: The RI measured the proportion of the eligible population that had received two doses of a COVID-
               19 vaccine, with a target of achieving a vaccination rate of 90 percent for the second dose. This RI was
               directly linked to PA9 which established an institutional framework to effectively deploying COVID-19
               vaccines in Bhutan. The relevance of this RI for measuring the impact of PA9 was high and assessed the
               effectiveness of these efforts by monitoring the proportion of the eligible population that received both
               doses of the vaccine. (Relevance of RI7=S)

               RI8: The RI measured the percentage of requests for services by GBV survivors made under the new
               program that are receiving support, with a target of 75 percent. This RI was directly linked to PA10, which
               involved the approval of the Gender and Child Protection Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan
               During COVID-19 Pandemic by the NCWC. The RI provided a quantitative measure of success by
               monitoring the percentage of GBV survivors who requested services and actually received support under
               the plan. (Relevance of RI8=S)



   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To strengthen policies for economic resilience.

                Rationale
                RI1 on the amount of revenues collected under the Goods and Services Tax (GST) system had a baseline of
                0, and a target of at least BTN 5 billion, but actual collection remained at 0. The reason for this non-
                achievement was the delay in implementing the GST Act. The GST Act mandated implementation within one
                year of approval, by July 2021. However, this was delayed due to challenges in developing an integrated IT
                system for revenue administration. The government cited several factors contributing to the delay including
                the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and concerns arising from high inflation rates and an uncertain
                economic outlook linked to the pandemic and Russia's invasion of Ukraine. Achievement Rating: Negligible

                RI2a (Score in the World Bank Debt Transparency Heatmap - Info on Loans Contracted) measured the
                level of transparency in providing information on loans contracted. The baseline was initially "Red" (Not
                Available), and the target was to achieve a "Green" rating, indicating full information disclosure. This RI was
                partially achieved. Fiscal accounts were published for two quarters – there was no statutory requirement that
                they continued to be published quarterly. In the result, Bhutan's score in the World Bank Debt
                Transparency Heatmap of 2022 remained "Red." The lack of change was partly due to incomplete loan
                information provided by the authorities. Achievement Rating: Negligible




                                                                                                                 Page 12 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Bhutan - DPC (P175758)



RI2b (Score in the World Bank Debt Transparency Heatmap – Periodicity) assessed the frequency of
debt-related information publication. The baseline was “Yellow” (Annual), and the target was to attain a
“Green” rating, signifying a higher frequency than yearly. This target was achieved Bhutan’s score on the
World Bank Debt Transparency Heatmap of 2022 improved from “Yellow” to “Green,” indicating that the
publication frequency exceeded once a year. However, the PA only required publication of specific reports
rather than institutionalizing the regular publication of reports. Achievement Rating: Substantial

RI2c (Score in the World Bank Debt Transparency Heatmap – Debt Management Strategy) assessed
the publication of the debt management strategy (DMS) and its comprehensiveness, including targets for
domestic and external borrowing, cost assessment, risk assessment, and a review of previous strategies.
This RI was achieved. The Ministry of Finance (MoF) successfully prepared and published the initial version
of the DMS covering the years FY20/21-FY22/23. This DMS included clear targets for domestic and external
borrowing, a description of associated costs and risks, and a review of the previous DMS. As a result,
Bhutan’s score on the World Bank Debt Transparency Heatmap of 2022 improved from “Red” to “Green.”
However, it’s worth noting that the DMS had not been updated annually as specified in the strategy, but plans
for an update were in place, starting from August 2023. Achievement Rating: Substantial

In summary, Bhutan made progress in improving fiscal and debt transparency by publishing two specific
quarterly fiscal reports, and successfully releasing the initial version of the DMS. However, achieving a
"Green" score for information on loans contracted remains a challenge requiring ongoing efforts to meet this
target. Notably, there is no statutory requirement for the regular publication of quarterly reports which would
ensure that they continue to be published on a quarterly basis.

RI3 measured the proportion of SDF revenue collected from leisure arrivals who were not subject to the
Minimum Daily Package Rate (MDPR). The baseline for this indicator was set at 0 percent, with a target of at
least 5 percent. Bhutan was able to achieve the target of collecting at least 5 percent of SDF from non-MDPR
paying leisure arrivals, particularly regional tourists. During the period when tourism reopened in September
2022 and the subsequent months, Bhutan received a reduced number of tourists compared to pre-pandemic
levels. The revenue collected from SDF, both from international and regional tourists, amounted to US$8.6
million with US$0.78 million, or 9.8 percent, of this revenue from regional tourists. This was made possible
through the approval of the Tourism Policy and the enactment of the Tourism Levy Act 2020. The new
Tourism Policy resulted in the establishment of a regional tourist information centers, the establishment of
guidelines and standard operating procedures to regulate, among others, vehicles used for tourism, the
management of tourism waste, and the opening of new tourism sites, as well as the development of a
statistical system to better manage the sector. Achievement Rating: High

Overall, Objective 1 demonstrates some success, with achievements in some areas and the need for further
efforts in others. While progress has been made in several areas, there are significant challenges and gaps
that need to be addressed to fully meet the objective of economic resilience.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Bhutan - DPC (P175758)



To strengthen policies for environmental sustainability.

Rationale
RI4 measured the annual average Ambient PM10 Air Quality in the Pasakha industrial town, with a target set
at 120 micrograms per cubic meter. The baseline for this indicator was 275 micrograms per cubic meter. The
results indicator target of 120 micrograms per cubic meter was not achieved. During the fiscal year 2022/23
(from August 29, 2022, to June 13, 2023), the average Ambient PM10 Air Quality was measured at 196.7
micrograms per cubic meter. While this was an improvement compared to the baseline of 275 micrograms
per cubic meter, it fell short of the targeted level. Achievement Rating: Modest

RI6 assessed the integration of mitigation actions proposed by low-emission development strategies (LEDS)
into Bhutan's updated Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs). The baseline was 0, with the target of
incorporating a minimum of 4 mitigation actions into Bhutan's NDCs. The RI target was exceeded by
integrating a total of 13 mitigation actions proposed by the LEDS into the updated NDCs. These 13 mitigation
measures identified in the LEDS encompassed a combination of 8 short and medium-term measures, along
with 5 long-term measures. All the proposed mitigation measures were integrated into the updated NDC
Report for the year 2021. Achievement Rating: High

Overall, the assessment indicates modest progress toward achievement of RI4. On the other hand, RI6
demonstrates a high level of achievement, surpassing the target by integrating 13 mitigation actions into
Bhutan's updated NDCs. Overall, achievement of Objective 2 is assessed as moderately satisfactory,
considering the significant success under RI6.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Enhancing programs to address the economic, social and health impact of COVID-19.

Rationale
RI6 assessed the number of projects benefiting from the National Credit Guarantee Scheme among micro,
small, cottage, and medium-sized companies, closely linked with PA8. The baseline for this indicator was set
at 0, with a target of at least 150 projects. This target was exceeded, as a total of 214 projects received
approval under the NCGS. These projects, with a collective loan volume of Nu. 852 million, had a substantial
positive impact on employment and contributed to economic recovery during the pandemic. These projects
encompassed 13 micro projects (Nu. 5 million), 28 cottage industry projects (Nu. 21.3 million), and 173
projects within the small and medium industry category (Nu. 826.2 million). The NCGS-supported
projects also played a vital role in job creation, generating 1,747 employments, consisting of 1,380 regular
and 367 contractual positions. By December 2022, government-backed loans totaling Nu. 539 million were
integrated into the quarterly debt and budget reports. Furthermore, NCGS facilitated a total investment of Nu.
1076 million, leading to a gross capital formation of Nu. 692 million. It's noteworthy that the positive impact of
NCGS extended beyond Thimphu, benefiting a total of 18 Dzongkhags. Achievement Rating: High



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 20
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Bhutan - DPC (P175758)



                      RI7 (associated with PA9) targeted a specific minimum vaccination rate in Bhutan. The baseline for this
                      indicator was 0 percent, reflecting the absence of prior vaccination, while the target was to vaccinate 90
                      percent of the eligible population with two doses of a COVID-19 vaccine. This target was significantly
                      exceeded. Bhutan achieved a 100 percent vaccination rate among the eligible population, with 97.4 percent
                      of individuals receiving at least two vaccine doses. Public awareness campaigns also contributed significantly
                      to achieving this high vaccination rate. Achievement Rating: High

                      RI8 (associated with PA10) focused on GBV and child protection during the COVID-19 pandemic. The
                      baseline for this indicator was set at 0 percent, indicating the absence of prior data on GBV survivors
                      receiving support under the new program, while the target aimed for 75 percent of requests for services by
                      GBV survivors to receive support. This target was surpassed, with approximately 81.9 percent of requests for
                      services by GBV survivors receiving support through the “Gender and Child Protection Emergency
                      Preparedness and Response Plan During COVID-19,” as approved by the NCWC.

                      However, it’s important to note that some non-governmental organizations (NGOs), like Tarayana, reported
                      challenges stemming from Civil Service Reform changes that impacted their ability to receive support.
                      Achievement Rating: High

                      Overall, Objective 3 is rated as Satisfactory, with high achievement in several key areas and a positive impact
                      on mitigating the social and health impact of COVID-19.



                      Rating

                      Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Efficacy in achieving the objectives can be assessed as Moderately Satisfactory overall. For both Objective 1 and
Objective 2, the RIs had varied outcomes, resulting in a Moderately Satisfactory rating. On the other hand,
satisfactory achievements were made towards Objective 3.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory


      6. Outcome

      Rationale



                                                                                                                      Page 15 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bhutan - DPC (P175758)




With PA relevance assessed to be Satisfactory and efficacy judged to be Moderately Satisfactory, the Outcome
rating is Moderately Satisfactory


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Ensuring the continued success of achieved outcomes in the current DPC (most notably, those related to the
NCGS, fiscal transparency, and environmental sustainability) necessitates the availability of adequate
financial and human resources.

One critical risk arises from high staff attrition within the government, and the associated loss of technical
knowledge within implementing agencies. This attrition could potentially impact the continued successful
administration of NCGS projects, and the seamless continuation of environmental sustainability efforts,
specifically those related to air quality improvements and low-emission development strategies. Thus,
mitigating the risk of staff attrition is crucial to ensuring the effectiveness and continuity of the DPC-supported
reforms.

Another critical aspect is the absence of a statutory requirement for regular and ongoing fiscal report
publication. While improved financial reporting practices have been established, the lack of a legal
requirement poses challenges to sustaining these positive developments. The fact that there is no statutory
requirement for publication of fiscal reports comes with the risk that the practice will not be sustained. This
risk is especially relevant in the context of Bhutan's commitment to enhancing fiscal transparency and
improving its scores on the World Bank Debt Transparency Heatmap. Ensuring ongoing government
commitment, particularly in relation to the publication of the DMS and quarterly reporting, is imperative for
lasting benefits and sustained progress in this domain.

Lastly, the sustainability of reforms related to the GST hinges on the effective implementation of the GST
Act, which is essential for bolstering revenue collection. The delay in GST implementation was attributed to
challenges in developing an integrated IT system for revenue administration, compounded by external
factors such as the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and global uncertainties linked to the economy.

Despite these challenges, limited risks are associated with potential disruptions during upcoming
parliamentary elections. These considerations emphasize the necessity for continued efforts to secure the
gains made in economic recovery, vaccination coverage, and environmental sustainability.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


                                                                                                       Page 16 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bhutan - DPC (P175758)




This operation was developed and implemented as a response to a health emergency and emerging fiscal
challenges. It was prepared rapidly, taking just three months from concept to approval, despite the initial
uncertainty about the pandemic's evolution and the optimal government response. Nevertheless, it was
well-coordinated with other World Bank initiatives and well-integrated into the RGoB’s COVID-19 response
and recovery plans.

The operation received vital support from World Bank technical assistance, covering a wide array of areas,
including the establishment of the Bhutan Climate Fund, GST implementation, public financial
management strengthening, financial sector reforms, and debt management. Moreover, it drew upon
available analytical works, such as the Bhutan Development Update (2020) and Policy Notes, as well as a
Country Economic Memorandum, a Public Expenditure Review, and a Country Environmental
Assessment.

Incorporating lessons learned from the previous DPC operation (FY19), the Bank team focused on priority
reforms with the greatest impact, prioritized the enactment of legislative reforms over cabinet endorsement
or parliamentary submission, enhanced technical capacity building, and collaborated closely with the
Department of Macro-Fiscal and Development Finance (DMFDF), which effectively coordinated reforms
across various line ministries.

The Program Document (PD, p. 3) identified several substantial risks, some of which materialized. These
included macroeconomic risks linked to the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, potential
resistance from private sector stakeholders to some reforms, and substantial technical design and
institutional capacity risks due to the complexity of supported reforms and existing capacity gaps. Limited
technical capacity, exacerbated by the pandemic, a complex organizational structure, and weak
interagency coordination further challenged the achievement of the proposed PDOs.

Additionally, macroeconomic risk to the PDO arising from potential GST rollout delays due to the
government’s concerns about implementing a major tax reform during an economic recession was also
substantial. Mitigation measures were not always sufficient to address these identified risks. Risk
mitigation strategies included strong government ownership of proposed reforms, World Bank support for
implementation, a focus on capacity development, and efforts to enhance coordination among
implementing agencies.

The coordination with other development partners was adequate, with strong collaboration with UN
agencies, including UNDP, WHO, FAO, WFP, UNICEF, and others through the UNCT and Development
Partners Group. This collaboration facilitated regular exchanges on areas of engagement, preventing
unnecessary duplications. The Multi-Donor Trust Fund, supported by the EU and other development
partners, provided crucial technical assistance, particularly in debt management and public financial
management. Notably, Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) utilized the policy matrix of this
DPC for its budget support operation in Bhutan, further enhancing the collaborative approach between
development partners.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bhutan - DPC (P175758)




b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The Bank team primarily facilitated implementation support through technical assistance including i) GST
implementation and the associated social impact assessment, ii) debt management and Public Financial
Management (financed by Trust Funds as part of PPA implementation), iii) the establishment of the Bhutan
Climate Fund, and iv) the development of a monitoring and evaluation framework for the National Credit
Guarantee Scheme (NCGS). Collaborating closely with relevant ministries and agencies, such as the Ministry of
Finance (MoF), Ministry of Economic Affairs, Gross National Happiness Commission (GNHC), Royal Monetary
Authority (RMA), and other pertinent bodies, the World Bank team diligently monitored progress.

Despite the challenges posed by the pandemic and lockdowns, the Bank maintained frequent contact with the
authorities, particularly the Ministry of Finance, to oversee the program’s implementation. (ICR, p. 21). The TTL
emphasized continuous communication during the Covid-19 pandemic.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Overall, bank performance is assessed as Moderately Satisfactory, with commendable efforts in adapting to
evolving circumstances and providing technical assistance related to the establishment of the Bhutan Climate
Fund, the implementation of the GST, strengthening of public financial management, and debt management.
The complexity of designing and implementing a new GST tax system, especially during a pandemic, posed
challenges, and despite mitigation measures, these risks presented implementation challenges.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The operation had a positive impact on poverty, and social outcomes. Successful vaccine deployment curtailed
the COVID-19 pandemic, aiding economic recovery and poverty prevention. Support for small and cottage
industries, which largely employ marginalized communities, helped prevent job losses and kept individuals in



                                                                                                   Page 18 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bhutan - DPC (P175758)



these sectors above the poverty line. The NCGS-related initiatives generated 1,747 jobs, including 1,380 regular
and 367 contractual positions.




b. Environmental

A significant portion of the operation aimed to enhance environmental and climate outcomes, resulting in a positive
impact on the environment. The average Ambient PM10 Air Quality improved to 196.7 micrograms per cubic meter
from the baseline of 275.




c. Gender

The implementation of policies aimed at gender and child protection contributed to the reduction of gender-based
violence incidents during the pandemic. Approximately 81.9 percent of service requests from GBV survivors were
made under a new program designed to address gender-based violence and provide child protection during the
Covid-19 pandemic.



d. Other

n/a




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

Overall, the ICR report is well-constructed. It effectively encapsulates the primary goals of the operation and
provides a comprehensive background context. However, one potential improvement could have been the
numbering of the RIs for easier reference and clarity. Furthermore, the ICR does not present a theory of
change. Nevertheless, the ICR report successfully conveys valuable lessons learned from the operation,
contributing to its overall quality.



a. Rating

Modest

                                                                                                    Page 19 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bhutan - DPC (P175758)




11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreement/Comments
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                  Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                  Modest


12. Lessons

The IEG agrees with some of the lessons outlined in the ICR (p. 22-23) with important differences. Specifically,
IEG believes that the Bank, on an ongoing basis (including outside of the context of a crisis), needs to have a
clear and up-to-date sense of what is needed to make progress on critical reforms like the introduction of a GST.
When the Bank has done the advanced work and has clarity on next steps, emergency operations can provide
an opportunity to take a meaningful step along the results chain even if the full reform cannot be implemented in
the context of a stand-alone operation.

     1. Balancing the need for immediate fiscal support and long-term structural reforms during a crisis
        is challenging. This operation aimed to assist the government with both urgent fiscal support and
        vaccine rollout while progressing on critical structural reforms. Some reforms, like the GST
        implementation, required more time but the DPO provided the opportunity to take a meaningful step
        along the results chain. The lesson learned here is the importance of having a clear sense of priorities
        and next steps on critical longer-term reforms so that prior actions can be used to make a meaningful
        movement along the results chain.
     2. For complex reforms to succeed, a standalone DPC can balance ambition and reality if there is
        clarity on the results chain and next steps in a longer-term reform process. Reforms often need
        years of groundwork, and while Bhutan received technical assistance during the DPC, GST
        implementation remained elusive. Greater and earlier involvement in identifying IT system requirements
        could have been beneficial.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                   Page 20 of 20
