     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MM: Telecommunications Sector Reform (P145534)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023646

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P145534                                  MM: Telecommunications Sector Reform

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Myanmar                                  Digital Development


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53530                                31-Dec-2019                                         21,904,398.38

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Feb-2014                              30-Jun-2022

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         31,500,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                          24,951,870.14                                               0.00

 Actual                                      21,904,398.38                                               0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan               Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 4) and in
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 6):

   (a) improve the enabling environment for the telecommunication sector and, extend coverage in
   selected remote pilot locations, and



                                                                                                Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MM: Telecommunications Sector Reform (P145534)



   (b) establish priority e-government technological foundations and institutional capacity for the
   Recipient to embark on its public sector reform program".



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were four components (PAD, pages 8 - 10).

   1. Creating an enabling environment for connectivity. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$14.00
   million. The revised allocation was US$22.00 million. This component financed technical assistance (TA)
   activities and investments to support the Ministry of Communication and Information Technology (MCIT)
   and the Post and Telecommunications Department (PTD) for implementing a policy and regulatory
   environment for a pro-competitive telecommunication sector.

   Activities in this component: (i) TA to MCIT for developing a policy, legal and regulatory framework for the
   sector reform agenda; (ii) capacity building of MCIT, PTD and select members of the Parliament Standing
   Committee to ensure that Myanmar transitions from a monopoly to a competitive market structure; (iii)
   Investment support for implementing a Spectrum Management Control Center in Yangon connected with
   fixed monitoring stations at Yangon, Mandalay and other border areas; and (iv) TA for restructuring the
   Ministry of Post and Telecommunications (MPT) and convert it into a limited liability company through
   legislation. An activity - cross border spectrum monitoring system - was added with the project restructuring
   (discussed in section 2e)

   2. Extending connectivity to rural areas. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$10.65 million. The
   revised allocation was US$0.30 million. This component planned to strengthen the Government's capacity
   for developing a universal access strategy for providing internet services in remote rural areas.

   Activities in this component: (i) TA for developing a Universal Service Fund (USF), USF manual and USF
   implementation procedures; and (ii) a program subsidizing service providers for developing pilots for
   providing internet access in commercially non-viable remote areas.

   3. Enabling eGovernment Foundations. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$4.79 million. The
   revised allocation was US$7.14 million. This component planned to support the Government's charter in
   governance reforms for improving transparency and accountability.

   Activities in this component: (i) TA for developing Myanmar's first National Portal strategy for providing
   users with a single online platform for accessing services and information provided by the government; (ii)
   training programs for high-level officials and civil servants in ministries and agencies in e-government; and
   (iii) operationalizing an e-government delivery unit for implementing the e-government program.

   4. Project Implementation Support. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$2.06 million. The revised
   allocation was US$2.06 million. This component planned to provide operational assistance to the MCIT for

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MM: Telecommunications Sector Reform (P145534)



  day-to-day coordination, administration, fiduciary, environmental and social management, monitoring and
  evaluation. reporting and project audits.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated project cost was US$31.50 million. The actual cost was US$21.90 million.

  Project financing. The project was financed by an IDA credit of US$31.50 million. The amount disbursed
  was US$21.90 million. According to the clarifications provided by the team, the difference between the
  credit and amount disbursed was transferred to the Bank on December 6, 2022.

  Recipient contribution. Recipient contribution was not planned at appraisal. There was no recipient
  contribution during implementation.

  Dates. The project approved on February 6, 2014, became effective on May 27, 2014, and was scheduled
  to close on December 31, 2019. However, the project closed two and half years behind schedule on June
  30, 2022.

  There were three level 2 restructurings during the project lifetime.

  The Bank supported the following changes through the first project restructuring on June 17, 2018.

        The Bank funding for the rural pilots activity (component two) was reduced from US$10.00 million to
         US$3.00 million, as the Post and Telecommunications Department (PTD) decided to finance this
         activity through funds from mobile operators. The ICR notes that Government experienced an
         increase in funds mobilized under the USF due to the high growth in mobile subscriptions and the
         Government sought to use funds from mobile operators in lieu of the IDA credit. The USF obligated
         the mobile operators to pay 2% of their total revenues as the USF levy. Total revenue from mobile
         network operators in 2018 was estimated to be around US$1.6 billion (2% of this would be over
         US$30.00 million and enough to cover the costs of the rural pilots).
        The US$7.00 million from component two activity was reallocated to: (i) scale up the spectrum
         management system (component one activity); (ii) enhance the cybersecurity Government Core
         Network infrastructure (component three); and (iii) strengthen the enabling environment for
         connectivity and e-Government foundations (component three).
        The targets for key outcome indicators were raised as the project had met the target values (due to
         the two new telecom licenses granted at the project start).
        The closing date was extended by an year to December 31, 2020 for completing the ongoing
         activities.

  At Government request, the Bank extended the date for submitting audit reports from six months to nine
  months for clearing the audit backlog through the second project restructuring on April 5, 2020.

  The changes made through the third project restructuring on November 11, 2020 are:

        The closing date was extended by 18 months to June 2022 for completing the ongoing activities that
         were delayed due to the parliamentary elections in November 2020.
        Funds were reallocated between disbursement categories.
                                                                                                   Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MM: Telecommunications Sector Reform (P145534)



         The activity of rural pilots in Rakhine was terminated due to the conflict situation in the state. Due to
          the difficulties associated with inter-ministerial coordination, the activities associated with capacity
          building for senior level staff were dropped (component three activity).
         Results framework was adjusted by dropping two intermediate indicators.

   Following the military takeover on February 1, 2021, the Bank paused all disbursements in Myanmar.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Myanmar is the largest country in Southeast Asia with a population of 51.4 million and
one of the lowest population densities in the world. It is poor, with a poverty headcount of 26%. Myanmar
has a long history of violence and conflict under an autocratic leadership. Poor economic policies and weak
institutional capacity had resulted in lagging economic growth, social exclusion and disparities between
urban and rural areas. The World Bank classifies Myanmar as a fragile, conflict and violent (FCV) country.

Sector context. At appraisal, the telecommunication sector was a monopoly of the Myanmar Post and
Telecommunications (MPT). The cost of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) services was
prohibitively high for the average citizen. In 2012, less than 11% of population had mobile cellular
subscriptions (as compared to 98% and 129% in the neighboring countries of Laos and Cambodia
respectively). In 2013, only 1.2% of the population had access to internet services. The quality of ICT
services lagged behind that of peer countries (while many Association of South East Asian Countries
(ASEAN) had 4G networks in 2014, Myanmar had only 2G and 3G networks). Improving the regulatory
oversight, bridging the urban-rural digital divide and improving the institutional capacity to manage public
sector reforms was important to the government strategy.

Government strategy. The Government commenced reforms with the Myanmar National Comprehensive
Development Plan (2011-2030) (that was later succeeded by the Myanmar Sustainable Development Plan
(2018-2030)) aimed at removing economic distortions, developing the private sector and liberalizing the
telecommunication sector. The Government issued a telecommunication sector roadmap in 2013 aimed to:
(i) increase overall teledensity to 75-80% by 2015-2016; (ii) make the telecommunication services
affordable both in urban and rural areas; and (iii) give citizens and enterprises the ability to choose their
telecommunication services and providers. The roadmap envisioned an independent regulator for the
sector and a restructured (corporatized, then privatized Myanmar Post and Telecommunications (MPT).
(According to the team, the Government planned a phased privatization of State-Owned Enterprises
(SOEs). First, entities such as MPT would be restructured into a corporation that resembles a private
company and a legally separate entity from the government. The next step would be privatization of
MPT). To this end, the Government enacted the Telecommunications Act on October 8, 2013, establishing
the Myanmar Telecommunications Commission (MTC). As part of the roadmap, the Government granted
two new telecommunications licenses in 2014.

The PDOs were aligned with the Ministry of Transport and Communications (MOTC) Myanmar e-
Governance Master Plan (2016-2020) (the latest digital strategy before the military takeover). The Plan
aimed to shape the institutional framework and improve the capacities of government agencies for
designing and implementing an eGovernment system, based on global best practices. The Plan outlined a

                                                                                                       Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      MM: Telecommunications Sector Reform (P145534)



               phased strategy for establishing an online interactive portal for facilitating communication between
               Government and the public/private sectors and citizens.

               Bank strategy. The PDOs are well-aligned with the Bank strategy for Myanmar. At appraisal, the PDOs
               were consistent with the Interim Strategy Note (ISN) for 2013 - 2014. The project was aligned with the Pillar
               1 goals of of supporting private sector development, economic reform of state-owned enterprises and
               opening to external investors. Pillar 2 of the ISN aimed to build confidence of the Government through
               tangible impacts for rural communities. The PDOs were well aligned with the current Country Partnership
               Framework for 2020 - 2023. The project addressed two of the three focus areas of the CPF: Focus Area 1:
               Building human capital and fostering peaceful communities; and Focus Area 2: Fostering responsible
               private sector-led growth and inclusive economic opportunities.

               Bank experience. In 2012 the Bank started lending operations in Myanmar for the first time in 25 years. In
               the years before appraisal, the Bank provided support to the PTD for developing an operational sector ICT
               roadmap and developing key regulations (such as, licensing, competition, access, spectrum
               numbering). This project aimed at taking an integrated approach to developing the ICT sector. The three
               project components were interrelated. While activities aimed at creating an enabling policy, regulatory, and
               legal environment were likely to help in establishing a competitive telecommunications market, institutional
               reform of the government-owned incumbent MPT would likely help in separating the policy and operational
               functions of the Government. Developing a Universal Service Strategy and implementing pilots were likely
               to help in expanding services to remote communities. Finally, establishing key priority eGovernment
               foundations would allow the government agencies use the ICT services for governance reforms.

               Given the FCV country context, the PDO was pitched at an appropriate level with a focus on creating an
               enabling environment, strengthening institutional capacity, and extending coverage. The PDOs are relevant
               both to the Government strategy and the Bank strategy for Myanmar. Overall relevance of the PDO is rated
               as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             PDO 1. Improve the enabling environment for the telecommunication sector and extend coverage in selected
                             remote pilot locations.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change. The project aimed to address the challenges to private sector development in the
                             telecommunication sector and extend coverage of internet services in remote areas. Capacity building of the
                             MCIT and the regulator, investments in spectrum management and monitoring systems and restructuring

                                                                                                                            Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MM: Telecommunications Sector Reform (P145534)



Myanmar Post and Telecommunications were likely to aid in increasing competition in the sector. The outputs
of these activities were likely to help in facilitating private sector development in the sector. The outputs of
activities such as implementing a Universal Access Strategy (UAS) and USF pilots aimed at extending
internet access in remote areas were likely to help in extending coverage. The causal links between project
activities, outputs and intended outcomes were logical. The intended outcomes were monitorable. The
outcomes were predicated on two assumptions: (i) The Government remains committed to the reforms: and
(ii) The private sector is willing to invest in the sector.

Outputs.

      The number of licensed telecom operators increased from one at the baseline to 191, exceeding the
       target of 10.
      The Spectrum Management and Monitoring Systems (SMMS) were established as targeted.
      The Universal Service Strategy was adopted as targeted.
      The Ministry of Post and Telecommunications (MPT) and private operators expanded network
       coverage in more than 300 townships and network coverage reached 96% of Myanmar (no targets
       were set for this indicator). To ensure compliance of telecom operators in fulfilling rollout obligations,
       the project provided radio planning tools, digitized map and drive test equipment. The project also
       supported the Government in all aspects of public procurement related to rural pilots.
      The project helped Myanmar in making the transition to faster and more reliable networks. Given the
       rising demand for quality and high-speed connections. MyTel, a joint venture telecom operator
       between Viettel of Vietnam and a consortium of local companies in Myanmar, skipped 2G and 3G and
       rolled out 4G networks in 2022. From 2016 to 2022, mobile subscribers for 4G increased from 10% in
       2016 to 60.7% in 2022.
      At the Government's request, the Bank team conducted an online workshop in January 2021 on "
       Post-Corporatization Strategies of Telecommunications State-Owned Enterprises: Insights from
       International Experiences" in collaboration with the Ministry of Transport and Communications". This
       workshop covered trends and practices in privatization from different regions.
      The ICR notes that the implementation of rural connectivity pilots involved a challenging security
       situation in Rakhine state, and the activity to pilot network rollout in two townships had been
       terminated under force majeure.

The outputs described above were expected to lead to the following outcomes: (i) the establishment of an
Independent regulator - the Myanmar Telecommunications Commission (MTC); (ii) The percentage of
spectrum assignments made within 30 days; (iii) an increase in the percentage of population with access to
telecommunication services (fixed mainlines plus cellular phones) and with access to internet services; and
(iv) the number of direct project beneficiaries ( defined as citizens, businesses and public institutions).

      The Independent Regulator (MCC) was not established when the project closed. This activity was
       subject to delays during implementation and the ICR (para 42) noted that although the MCC billing
       was slated for parliamentary voting, the military takeover halted all activities. Therefore, the MCC was
       not formally notified in the official gazette when the project closed.
      60% of spectrum assignments were made within 30 days of application, as compared to less than
       10% of applications at the baseline. The realized figures were short of the target of 70%.
      127.50% of the population had access to telecommunication services (target 132%). 92.69% of the
       population had access to internet services, exceeding the specified target of 82%. The extent to which


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MM: Telecommunications Sector Reform (P145534)



       these outcomes could be attributed to project activities is unclear, given that some of the targets for
       the key outcome indicators were raised as the project had met the target values during the first project
       restructuring (due to the two new telecom licenses granted at the project start). Also, the
       implementation of rural connectivity pilots involved a challenging security situation in Rakhine state,
       and the activity to pilot network rollout in two townships had been terminated under force majeure. The
       ICR notes that the adoption of USF legally mandated the private sector contributes to expanding
       connectivity in rural areas. An impact evaluation survey had been budgeted by the Government to be
       conducted in rural areas at project closing.
      Thirteen million people directly benefitted from project activities, short of the target of fourteen. 35% of
       the beneficiaries were women, well short of the target of 53%.

In sum, the efficacy of this PDO is rated as modest. The presence of an independent telecom regulator
(MCC) was envisioned to be the key element of an enabling environment. The MCC bill had been tabled for
parliamentary voting, but the military take-over halted all activities. The rural connectivity pilots were
canceled. The ICR notes that the project increased access to connectivity in rural areas, specifically by
adopting the USF. However, as noted above, increased values of access indicators measure the levels of
increased connectivity in the country, which is difficult to attribute to the project. Two new telecom licenses
were issued at the time of effectiveness, which subsequently led to increases in these indicators. An impact
evaluation was planned to be conducted but it was cancelled since the rural connectivity pilots were
cancelled.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
 PDO 2: Establish priority e-government technological foundations and institutional capacity for the Recipient
to embark on its public sector reform program".

Rationale
Theory of change. The causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical.
The intended outcomes were monitorable. Establishing a national portal for providing citizens and businesses
with a single window for services provided by the government together with capacity building activities were
aimed to strengthen the Government's institutional capacity to embark on its public sector reform program.
The intended outcomes were predicated on the assumption that citizens are willing and able to use the
national portal services through mobile phones and other services.

Outputs.

      The project supported the design and launch of the national portal through workshops and
       assessments on user requirements, based on international best practice. The national portal was was
       launched in September 2018 (https://myanmar.gov.mm/) that provided citizens and businesses with
       information on government services.



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MM: Telecommunications Sector Reform (P145534)




      669 applications were available on the national portal (including 125 online services, 510 off-line
       services and 34 mobile applications), as compared to the specified target of 15.
      Capacity building activities was provided under the project to the Ministry of Information Technology,
       Post and Telecommunication Department parliamentary committee for technical, financial, legal and
       human resources required for the transition of the Myanmar Post and Telecommunications to a
       corporatized entity (and then to a privatized company).
      The project provided trainings on policy, technical and regulatory issues related to spectrum
       management, Quality of Service and Universal Service Fund to strengthen the government's capacity
       to provide robust digital infrastructure and digital services.
      The activity of capacity building of senior government officials on the national portal was dropped, due
       to challenges in government.

Outcomes.

The outputs described above were expected to contribute to the operationalization of the national portal. The
ICR defines operationalization as the portal; (i) was accessible on web and mobile devices; (ii) was in the
English and Myanmar languages; (iii) provided information and services from different ministries, departments
and agencies to the public; (iv) had a feedback channel for citizens and businesses. As of December 2022,
the portal had 7,607 registered users and over 19 million visitors. The ICR notes that the portal had a citizen
engagement page. While the launch of the Portal occurred during project implementation, the addition of
applications occurred after the military takeover. Hence, data on the number of applications, types of
services, number of visitors, etc., are from the Portal and could not be verified with the authorities.

According to the subsequent information provided by the team (email dated December 7, 2023), based on an
external independent credible source that was not available when the ICR was prepared, (Myint, Aye Aye "
Users satisfaction with e-government services: Case study on Myanmar companies (MYCO system") in the
International Journal of Research in Business and Social Science (2147 - 4478) number 3 (2022): pages 73 -
81), in 2022, Myanmar national portal offered over 120 services online and 600 downloadable public services
applications. This included the Companies Online registration system (MYCO) aimed to assist potential
businessmen conduct business and enter the Myanmar market. The team also clarified that the author of this
article was not affiliated with the Myanmar authorities and the article had been peer-reviewed by independent
peers within the research field.

The team provided additional information on Myanmar's ranking on the United Nations (UN) E -Government
Development Index (EGDI) through time. The team clarified that while there different measures of institutional
capacity, the UNEDGI can be a good proxy to understand how Myanmar's institutional capacity for public
reform strengthened over time. EDGI is a relative measure of the state of e-government in countries. It
comprises a measure of various facets of public sector reform such as provision of online services,
telecommunication connectivity and human capacity in the ICT sector. Out of 175 countries, Myanmar had a
ranking of 157 when the national portal was launched in 2018. By 2022, Myanmar was ranked 134.

In sum, based on the external evidence provided by the team which was not completely available when the
ICR was prepared, efficacy of this PDO is rated as substantial.



Rating

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 16
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               MM: Telecommunications Sector Reform (P145534)



                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The efficacy of the first PDO is rated as modest given shortcomings in achieving the objectives of
                            an improved enabling environment. With respect to access indicators, while the project exceeded or met the
                            targets there are some attribution concerns. The efficacy of the second PDO with respect to the
                            establishment of e-government technological foundations and institutional capacity for the Recipient to
                            embark on its public sector reform program is rated as substantial based on the independent and external
                            evidence provided by the team. Overall, the efficacy is rated as Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. There was no efficiency analysis at appraisal. At closure, the benefits of the project were
   assumed to come from the impact of internet connectivity on Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Economic
   research conducted by the Bank in 2018 (ICT and Economic Growth - comparing developing, emerging and
   developed countries), showed that every ten percentage point in fixed broadband penetration was associated
   with an increased in GDP growth of 1.38% in developing countries. Between 2012 and 2019, annual GDP
   growth in Myanmar ranged from 3.3% to 10.5%, with an average of 6.9%. While it is difficult to determine the
   extent to which internet access contributed to the GDP growth witnessed in Myanmar during this period, it is
   reasonable to conclude that internet access did make a positive contribution to GDP growth.

   The ICR (para 51) notes that the benefits of ICT were significant during the COVID - 19 pandemic when the
   telecommunication sector faced a surge in demand due to the lockdowns and travel restrictions. Mobile and
   broadband services were critical for citizens, businesses and the government staff to continue working from
   home. The ICR notes that there were efficiency gains with strengthened institutional capacity and spectrum
   management but it is difficult to quantify.

   Administrative and operational issues during implementation. Disbursements were slow in the initial years
   due to the procurement delays (there was only a part-time staff assigned for procurement). These were
   exacerbated by general delays in the Government's approval process. However, disbursements started to
   increase after the Government hired an international regulatory advisor, national policy advisor, postal advisor,
   and telecom policy advisor. Procurement activities were eventually conducted successfully by the assigned staff
   with close support of project consultants and the Bank team. A military takeover took place on February 1, 2021,
   and the World Bank paused all project disbursements in accordance with OP/BP 7.30.




                                                                                                                           Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MM: Telecommunications Sector Reform (P145534)



In sum, in the absence of a robust economic analysis, efficiency is rated as Modest. The task team mentioned
that "due to a halt in all communications with the authorities in Myanmar it was not possible to
collect any type of data that would suffice the EIRR calculation that is specific to Myanmar in this project."


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the Government strategy and the current Bank strategy for Myanmar is High. The
overall efficacy is rated as Substantial with moderate shortcomings due to modest achievement of PDO1 and
substantial achievement of PDO2. Efficiency is rated as Modest. Considering these ratings, the overall outcome
is rated as moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Political risk. There is high political risk to the sustainability of development outcomes. The ICR (para 98)
noted that the military takeover reversed the initial gains from the project and undermined Myanmar's
transition to a competitive telecom sector. Between February to April 2021, Myanmar faced a series of
internet censorship that have reversed the progress made through the project. Internet restrictions ranged
from: restrictions on select social media platforms to complete blackouts lasting from several hours even up
to a month, to a more precise method of restricting access to certain websites. The current situation is
expected to have long-term effects on undermining private sector investments in the telecommunication
sector.




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MM: Telecommunications Sector Reform (P145534)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank prepared this project, based on the lessons from previous Bank financed ICT projects. Key
  lessons included: (i) following a phased approach, with activities aimed at developing a Universal Service
  Strategy preceding the activities of implementing pilots in rural areas; (ii) focus on capacity building, given
  the weak implementation capacity in a fragile setting; and (iii) preparing the project in collaboration with
  private sector and industry associations representing them to ensure that private sector priorities are
  incorporated in project design. The project was prepared by a mix of staff from different backgrounds,
  including an ICT technical specialists, a regulatory specialist, social development specialists and those
  with in-country operational knowledge and experience.

  The Bank identified several risks at appraisal. The key risks included: (i) stakeholder risks (such as due to
  potential backtracking on reforms and uncertain regulatory environment); (ii) implementation agency risk
  (inadequate capacity and fiduciary weaknesses); and project risks (complexities in the rural connectivity
  component and possible weaknesses in monitoring outcomes). Even with mitigation measures, the
  project risk was rated as High at appraisal, given the fragile country context. The arrangements made at
  appraisal for fiduciary and safeguards compliance were appropriate (discussed in section 10).

  However, there were moderate shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry. One, the preparation team
  underestimated the efforts and time needed for government reforms, which required the drafting and
  passing of two new bills. The administrative processes associated with the new bills, together with the
  weak implementation capacity, contributed to the delays during implementation. Two, there was no
  separate budget allocated for the Project Implementation Unit (PIU). According to the clarifications
  provided by the team, there was no formal PIU that had a separate budget and staffing. This among other
  things, contributed to the challenges of attracting qualified candidates. Three, there were M&E design
  shortcomings (discussed in section nine).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank conducted twice a year supervision missions from appraisal mission in 2013 to the last mission
 in December 2020. The ICR (para 74) noted that virtual meetings were held throughout the COVID-19
 lockdown until the military takeover. The continuity of the supervision team was maintained, with only one
 change in the Task Team Leader (TTL) during the project lifetime. The supervision team provided close
 support given the weak implementation capacity in all functional and technical challenges. The supervision
 team addressed the challenges on the ground. For instance, given the weak capacity for implementing
 rural pilots, the Bank provided Hands on Implementation Support (HEIS) at Government request. The
 support provided by the supervision team aided in fiduciary and safeguards compliance (discussed in
 section 10).



                                                                                                      Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MM: Telecommunications Sector Reform (P145534)



 There were some shortcomings in supervision. The grievance redress mechanism was operational only in
 May 2020, six years after effectiveness. The ICR (para 97) acknowledges that the Bank team did not report
 forward-looking action plans to advance implementation progress.

 In sum, Bank performance is rated as moderately satisfactory, due to the shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry
 and Supervision.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Ministry of Communication and Information Technology (MCIT) was overall in charge of M&E. Most of
 the baseline figures for monitoring performance were available at appraisal and the remaining were to be
 collected before the project became effective.

 There were shortcomings with the M&E framework. The design did not clearly define an "enabling
 environment". The design could have clarified the different stages of the enabling environment based on
 international experiences. A clear baseline through a survey or a composite index would have helped in
 monitoring the outcomes. Likewise, the outcomes of the activity of establishing a national portal could have
 been monitored through a beneficiary survey (although a beneficiary survey was envisioned at design, the
 survey was not conducted). Further, the indicators such as "access to telephone or internet services" were
 not fully attributable to the project activities, given that the original targets had already been achieved (due
 to the two telecom licenses issued project effectiveness) during the first restructuring of the project. There
 were no clearly defined outcomes for strengthening the institutional capacity as part of the second
 objective.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E implementation was undermined by the challenges associated with finding suitable candidates
  who could reside and work in Nay Pyi Taw. As a result, the project had no qualified M&E dedicated to the
  project. This contributed to the delays in submitting annual progress reports and necessitated the Bank
  team to gather information from sources such as the telecom operators. Moreover, some of the indicators
  in the results framework were not updated regularly during implementation.



c. M&E Utilization


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MM: Telecommunications Sector Reform (P145534)



  The results framework indicators were used to monitor progress. They were used to support decisions
  on restructuring and strengthening MOTC's use of M&E data. The ICR (para 80) notes that the data on
  coverage was used to identify rural areas that were underserved.

  In sum, M&E is rated as negligible, mainly for the shortcomings in design, and that were not rectified
  during implementation. IEG notes that the team did provide credible additional information based on
  external evidence that was not completely available when the ICR was prepared to help justify the
  proposed ratings in the IEG ICR review.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Negligible

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under the World Bank safeguard
   policies. Five safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: (i) Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01);
   (ii) Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); (iii) Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); (iv) Indigenous Peoples
   (OP/BP 4.10); and (v) Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). (PAD, page vi).

   Environmental Safeguards. The project activities (construction of the communication towers and masts)
   were expected to have limited negative environmental impacts (PAD, page 19). The MCIT prepared and
   publicly disclosed an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) at appraisal to address
   the adverse environmental impacts (PAD, page 19). The safeguards on natural habitats and physical
   cultural resources were triggered as a precautionary approach, as the specific project locations were yet to
   be identified at appraisal. The ESMF included measures for addressing any issues that might arise
   pertaining to the safeguards on natural habitats and physical cultural resources.

   The ICR (para 81) notes that compliance with environmental safeguards was rated as moderately
   satisfactory when the project closed. This was mainly due to the several pending actions and delays in
   implementing the required environmental and social processes. The performance rating was upgraded after
   an environmental social safeguard consultant was hired and the PIU had delivered all the requirements.
   According to the clarifications provided by the team, there was an issue with compliance when the
   construction and installation of the fixed monitoring systems in Yangon and Mandalay were carried out
   without the implementation of the ESMF. The Bank instituted safeguard and institutional arrangements after
   construction. The team also clarified that two grievances were received in two sites. Both the sites were
   located on government land and no land acquisition was involved. The team clarified that these grievances
   were resolved when the project closed. There were no issues with the safeguards on natural habitats and
   physical cultural resources.

   Involuntary Resettlement. The PAD (page 18) observed that the project was not expected to have
   involuntary land acquisition or physical location. However, for the rural connectivity component of the
   project, some limited land acquisition was envisaged at appraisal. The ESMF included the measures that
   were to be followed if involuntary resettlement was required, once the specific project locations were



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MM: Telecommunications Sector Reform (P145534)



   identified. According to the clarifications provided by the team, the project did not involve involuntary land
   acquisition or physical location (ICR, para 91).

   Indigenous Peoples. Given that the activities could be implemented in areas with ethnic minorities, an
   Ethnic Minority Planning Framework (EMPF) was developed and attached to the ESMF to address
   indigenous peoples issues. There were no issues with the safeguards on indigenous peoples during
   implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. The Bank conducted an assessment of the financial arrangements of the MCIT at
   appraisal. The assessment concluded that the arrangements were satisfactory. The financial risk was
   however rated as substantial at appraisal, in view of the fragile country context (PAD, page 17).

   The financial management was rated as moderately satisfactory (ICR, para 84). This was mainly due to the
   significant delays in submitting audit reports. The problem with audit reports was rectified and the audited
   financial report for 2020 - 2021 and 2021 - 2022 was submitted on February 28, 2023. The ICR does not
   provide information on whether the audits were qualified or not.

   Procurement. The Bank conducted an assessment of the MCIT's procurement arrangements at appraisal.
   The MCIT staff had limited experience in public procurement and competitive bidding. As this was the first
   time the MCIT was carrying out procurement in accordance with Bank guidelines, procurement risk was
   rated as high (PAD, page 40). There were no procurement issues when the project closed.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   Although not part of the project design, on March 30, 2016, the Central Bank of Myanmar issued the
   regulation on Mobile Financial Services. This regulation allowed the non-bank service providers such as
   telecom companies to offer mobile financial services. By 2021, around 3.9% of the population of Myanmar
   above the age of 14 had made or received a digital payment.



d. Other
   Not applicable.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment



                                                                                                     Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MM: Telecommunications Sector Reform (P145534)



                                                                                 Moderate shortcomings in
Outcome                          Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory    achievement of the first
                                                                                 objective.
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Negligible           Negligible

Quality of ICR                   ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following two lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. Designing project components that are aligned with the implementation capacity is
especially important in fragile settings. The experience of this project is that project
implementation may be undermined by limited personnel and excessively bureaucratic government
systems. The lesson is that task team working in fragile settings need to have a clear understanding
of the possible constraints that can significantly influence the outcome.

2. Given the difficulties of measuring the effectiveness of a policy reform, it may help to have
a conceptual framework or a composite index to monitor the outcomes. Moreover the
targets may have to be frequently reassessed in a fragile setting where circumstances can rapidly
change.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear and well-written. The theory of change articulated in the text provides the clear causal links
between project activities, outputs and outcomes. The ICR candidly acknowledges the issues with the results
framework, which in turn contributed to the M&E design weaknesses. The evidence provided in the text is
adequate to assess project performance. The ICR clearly presents the challenges in a fragile setting.

One minor shortcoming is the length of the text. The main body of the text at 28 pages is far more than the
recommended length of 15 pages. Also, Annex 3 on project costing is incomplete.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
MM: Telecommunications Sector Reform (P145534)




                                                                              Page 16 of 16
