     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     West Bengal ISGPP-II (P159427)



                                                                                  Report Number : ICRR0023558

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Program Name
 P159427                                     West Bengal ISGPP-II

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                       Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)             Total Program Cost (USD)
 IBRD-87230                                  31-Dec-2022                                        201,319,735.09

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Mar-2017                                 31-Dec-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           210,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            210,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        201,319,735.09                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero        Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (LA, p 5) and the Program Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 14), the
   development objective of this second phase of the West Bengal Institutional Strengthening of Gram
   Panchayats Program was "to strengthen the institutional and financial capacities of Gram Panchayats across
   the State."

   For the purpose of this review, the PDO will be parsed as follows:


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     West Bengal ISGPP-II (P159427)



          to strengthen the institutional capacity of Gram Panchayats across the State
          to strengthen the financial capacity of Gram Panchayats across the State



b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during
   implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Components were reflected in the following Key Results Areas (KRAs):

   1. Establishing a state-wide unified performance-based grant (PBG) allocation system for all
   discretionary funds available to Gram Panchayats (GPs): (US$155.3 million at appraisal, US$147.09
   million actual) This component was to follow a two-pronged approach to establish a PBG system: first, the
   Panchayats and Rural Development Department (PRRD) was to conduct Annual Performance
   Assessments (APAs) of all GPs to distribute untied grants from the state. Second, grants were to be
   allocated in a timely manner to allow GPs to plan and implement investments. This component was to
   be linked with Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) 1, 2, and 6. This component was also to finance
   program management, coordination, and monitoring.

   2. Improving local government financial management systems: (US$8.0 million at appraisal,
   US$3.6 million actual) This component was to finance two sub-components. First, resources were to
   finance the PBGs; and second, resources were to finance capacity building through formal learning and
   mentoring of staff of GPs to improve their own-source revenue (OSRs) generation, their regular use of the
   Gram Panchayat Management System (GPMS), and finance the establishment of an integrated state-level
   digital dashboard to monitor GP performance in real time, and decision-making at the state and local
   government levels. It would finance the institutionalization of a risk-based internal audit ecosystem for GPs
   to strengthen the state’s oversight mechanism by developing an Internal Audit Manual and train internal
   auditors on its use. In addition, this component would finance the timely completion of annual external
   audits of GPs. This component was to be linked with DLI 5(a).

   3. Improving local governance human resources (HR) capacities for increased transparency and
   accountability in local government functioning. (US$5.25 million at appraisal, US$4.20 million
   actual) This component was to finance vacant core staff positions of GPs, establish a Grievance Redressal
   Management System (GRMS) and disclosures of such grievances, and provide training and capacity
   building using mentors. This component was to be linked with DLIs 5(b) and 7.

   4. Improving the decentralized and participatory planning and budgeting mechanisms at the local
   level. (US$37.47 million at appraisal, US$36.92 million actual) This component was to finance citizen



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    West Bengal ISGPP-II (P159427)



  engagement activities, project communications, and information, education, and communication (IEC)
  activities. This component was to be linked with the cross-cutting DLIs 3 and 4.



e. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Program Cost: The total program cost was US$210 million. Actual disbursement was US$201.3 million.
  The balance of US$8.7 million was cancelled.

  Financing: The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) financed this Program for
  Results (P4R).

  Borrower Contribution: The government committed to contribute US$384.2 million and disbursed
  US$148.9 million at closing. The data was provided in ICR, Annex 3 but not reported in the Data Sheet.
  According to footnote 21, the amount committed by the government included the grants from the 14th
  Central Finance Commission (CFC). The government eventually decided to standardize and disburse these
  grants for the entire country according to conditions not covered by this program. The CFC grants were then
  excluded from this program and government contributions.

  Dates: The program was approved on March 15, 2017 and became effective the following month, on April
  19, 2017. The Mid Term Review (MTR) was conducted on August 19, 2020. The program closed as
  originally planned on December 31, 2022. The program was restructured once, on March 31, 2021 to
  reduce the target level of Year 5 of the outcome indicator, rationalize various targets in the Disbursement
  Linked Indicators (DLIs), dropped one DLI altogether and the accompanying activity because the
  government decided to freeze hiring of GP core staff, making that indicator unachievable, and reallocate
  funds accordingly. Specific changes include the following:

        PDO-level indicators. The target of PDO Indicator 1 (total number of GPs qualifying for BMC and
           EMC criteria) for Year 5 was reduced from 80 percent to 70 percent.
          DLI 2. (i) The Year 4 target was reduced to 1,562 GPs and (ii) an additional disbursement cycle of
           APA for Year 5 was introduced for DLI 2 to use the US$13.69 million in savings
          DLI 4. The Year 5 target for the assessment of mentors was increased from 60 to 75 percent.
          DLI 5. The targets of Years 2, 3, 4, and 5 were revised by dropping unachievable targets, adding
           new targets altogether, and reallocated resources along revised government priorities (see Section 3
           Relevance of DLIs below).
          DLI 7. was dropped and the corresponding amount of US$1 million was reallocated to DLI 5 (i). The
           corresponding ‘Activity 5: GP level recruitment support’ was dropped and the related intermediate
           Indicator results (IRI) was removed.
          An IRI measuring percentage of women elected representatives mentored (physical/virtual mode) in
           remote GPs, was added.
          Funds were reallocated from savings to DLI 2 and DLI 5 (a).

  Split Rating. A split rating of the objectives will be applied. The PDO was revised from the PAD to the FA
  (deleting "further" in the PDO statement) although no further revisions were made in the PDO in the FA.
  However, the outcome target value for year 5 was reduced by 10 percent - from 80 to 70 percent - at
  restructuring because of the impact of COVID-19 (ICR, paragraph 25). According to the guidelines, if a
  change in indicator/target lowered the program’s scope (with the same commitment level), a split rating

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     West Bengal ISGPP-II (P159427)



   applies. The loan had disbursed 81.1 percent by the time of the restructuring (equivalent to US$170.29
   million).




3. Relevance   TBL




a. Relevance of Objectives   New




  Rationale
  Alignment with Sector Strategy: By strengthening the financial and institutional capacity of the Gram
  Panchayats (GPs), the PDO was aligned with the World Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
  India for 2018–22 by complementing Focus Area 3: Investing in Human Capital, which included public
  service quality. The PDO was also well aligned with Objective 3.3: Improve access to rural water supply and
  sanitation services because the strengthened capacity of state and local institutions was expected
  to deliver efficient and sustainable water and sanitation service, scale up performance-based service delivery
  models, and increase customer voice for accountability. Achieving the PDO would also build quality
  assurance mechanisms using its monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems that formed part of the program's
  key results. The PDO also contributed to Focus Area 2: Enhancing Competitiveness and Enabling Job
  Creation as part of the capacity building of GPs by hiring GP staff and building local infrastructure under the
  program. The PDO helped achieve Objective 2.4: Increase access to market-relevant skills development,
  and Objective 2.5: Enable more quality jobs for women. The CPF acknowledged that the P4R instrument
  was to provide the incentives to achieve better service delivery. The PDO was to cover all GPs of West
  Bengal to implement the government's decentralization program using the rural local self-government system
  of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) under India's 73rd Constitutional Amendment.

  World Bank Previous Sector and Country Experience: In India, the World Bank has extensive expertise
  and comparative advantages in decentralization and developing local government systems. The program's
  first phase, ISGPP-I, was one of three World Bank operations on rural local governments in addition to
  those in Karnataka, Bihar, and Kerala. All focused on strengthening the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRI)
  system as a critical institutional locus of service delivery and governance. Lessons from these operations
  informed this program (see Section 7 Assessment of Bank Performance at Entry, below). The program in this
  sector included objectives, and Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) were consistent with progress derived
  from the first phase and lessons from similar earlier projects.

  Country Capacity and Adequacy of P4R Instrument: The state of West Bengal enacted its Panchayats
  Act in 1973, which identified three tiers of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs): Zilla Parishads (ZPs) or
  districts, Panchayat Samitis or blocks, and Gram Panchayats (GPs) or villages. Two decades later, in 1993,
  the government adopted the 73rd Constitutional Amendment to foster local government decentralization by
  establishing a system of rural local self-government called Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs). States enacted
  laws to give powers and authority to PRIs as self-government units. In 2015, the 14th Central Finance
  Commission (CFC) recommended a substantial increase in tax devolution of the sharable central tax to the
  states from 32 percent to 42 percent for the next five years (2015-2020). The P4R instrument was
  deemed appropriate to use results as incentives to build capacity and develop systems for other GPs on a
  state-wide coverage and fully aligned with the government’s program. The findings of the technical, fiduciary,
  social, and environmental assessments and the progress achieved under the first phase informed the

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 26
                              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                              West Bengal ISGPP-II (P159427)



                       broader scope of the program, targeting all GPs in the state. The incentives scheme was to
                       synchronize with the performance-based grant (PBG) allocation and capacity-building support system. The
                       fourth State Finance Commission (SFC) adopted the PBG allocation model used in phase I, which was to be
                       rolled out throughout the State. This P4R instrument complemented the state's efforts to rationalize its PRI
                       system by addressing the legal and fiscal constraints and expected development challenges brought about
                       by the weak own source revenue (OSR) generation and management, unpredictable inter-governmental
                       fiscal transfer framework, lack of expenditure management systems, accounting and budgeting
                       procedures, and internal and external audit systems.

                       Given the context and the government's decentralization needs, the project’s development objective for
                       strengthening the institutional and financial capacity was important. The ICR states (paragraph 26) that the
                       program was expected to improve the overall quality of service delivery, but this was not reflected in the
                       objective. The relevance of the objectives is rated as Substantial.


       Rating Relevance TBL




                       Rating
                       Substantial


b. Relevance of DLIs                           New




DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                DLI 1
                DLI
                DLI 1: Number of phase II Gram Panchayats (GPs) that have qualified Basic Mandatory Conditions (BMCs) in
                Annual Performance Assessment

                Rationale
                This DLI was to contribute to achieving institutional reform by providing GPs with sufficient incentives to
                meet basic mandatory conditions (BMCs). The BMCs were designed to improve a GP's institutional
                performance and help achieve the PDO. The four BMCs were: (i) own source revenue (OSR) generation; (ii)
                having an external audit; (iii) having a development plan; and (iv) using the financial management system.
                Achieving the BMCs were to be combined with meeting the extended mandatory conditions (DLI 2
                below). This DLI was specific and measurable. Together with DLI 2 on achieving the EMC below, this set of
                DLIs formed a coherent results framework to achieve the PDOs by institutionalizing the PBG system in all
                GPs using a performance-based disbursement mechanism.

                Overall, this DLI is rated Substantial.



                Rating
                Substantial

                DLI 2
                DLI

                                                                                                                        Page 5 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      West Bengal ISGPP-II (P159427)



DLI 2: Number of phase II Gram Panchayats that have qualified Expanded Mandatory Conditions (EMCs) and
got access to performance rewards in Annual Performance Assessment

Rationale
GPs were to meet the extended mandatory conditions (EMCs) in this DLI as an incentive to receive
performance rewards that would lead to the GPs institutional reform. The EMCs covered the mandatory use
of grant funds (EMC 1) and the completion of sub-projects (EMC 2). Meeting these conditions were to
achieve the PDOs and meet all four Key Results Areas (KRAs). Together with DLI 6 below, these two DLIs -
1 and 2 - comprised 75 percent of the P4R financing and were key to the institutionalization of the PBG
system. This DLI was measurable with independent consultants conducting technically sound, and credible
verification protocol to assess GP performance. Together with DLI 1 above, this DLI formed a coherent the
results framework to achieve the PDOs. DLI 2 was revised at restructuring (see below).

Overall, this DLI is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 2 REVISION 1
Revised DLI
The target number of participating GPs in Year 4 was reduced by 3 percent and a disbursement cycle was
added to spend the savings from previous cycles.

Revised Rationale
This DLI 2 was revised at restructuring to remain relevant to the PDO, program needs, and government
priorities. The number of targeted GPs in Year 4 was reduced from 1,634 to 1,562 GPs because 112 GPs
were under the Gorkha Territorial Administration (GTA) and were not covered by the program. One additional
disbursement cycle of APA for Year 5 was introduced to use the US$13.69 million in savings accumulated
by Year 4 under both DLIs 1 and 2. Other aspects of the original DLI discussed above remained relevant to
this revised DLI.

Overall, this revised DLI remained rated Substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial

DLI 3
DLI
DLI 3: Percentage of activities implemented as per PRDD’s annual learning and training plan.

Rationale
This DLI was to provide an incentive to GPs to participate in the PRRD’s annual training plan to improve the
GP’s performance in service delivery by building the institutional and financial capacity of the GPs to achieve

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      West Bengal ISGPP-II (P159427)



the desired results of the program. It was to contribute to all the following Key Results Areas: (i) establishing a
statewide unified PBG system using all discretionary funds and made available to all GPs; (ii) improving local
government financial management systems; (iii) improving local governance and human resource (HR)
capacity for increased transparency and accountability in local government functions; and (iv) improving the
decentralized and participatory planning and budgeting mechanisms at the local level. Together with DLI 4,
this DLI was aligned with the PDO and the results framework by providing formal learning and training
activities for all GP staff (NS, Secretaries, and Executive Assistants), elected representatives (Pradhans and
Upapradhans), and contractors. The PRRD initiated the training plans through a bottom-up district-level
planning process. District staff met every year to assess and plan the training needs of GPs. These plans
were then consolidated at the state level.

Relevance of this DLI is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 4
DLI
DLI 4: Average number of annual mentoring input days per Gram Panchayat with performance assessment

Rationale
This DLI served to institutionalize the practice started in the preceding phase 1 project to improve GPs
institutional performance thereby achieve the PDOs by regularly deploying mentors to GPs to help the GPs
navigate how to meet their extended minimum conditions (EMCs) to qualify for additional grants. Combined
with DLI 3 above, this DLI facilitated GPs to adopt institutional change to achieve the PDO. The day-to-day
mentoring support ensured that GPs understood their responsibilities and functions; identified and addressed
the gaps in planning, service delivery, and fiduciary aspects, and enabled them to collectively achieve overall
program outcomes. The DLI was strategic, easy to monitor, and was coherently tied to specific actions of the
PRRD that were independently verified.

This DLI is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 4 REVISION 1
Revised DLI
This DLI was not revised but the target for Year 5 for the assessment of mentors was increased at
restructuring from 60 to 75 percent.

Revised Rationale



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      West Bengal ISGPP-II (P159427)



The March 2021 restructuring increased the annual target for this DLI. The government policy to freeze hiring
of core GP staff led the GPs to rely on mentors to meet the targets for their APAs. The factors noted above
for the original DLI remained the same.

Overall rating of the relevance of this DLI remained Substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial

DLI 5
DLI
DLI 5: This DLI had two components: (i) Core institutional systems implemented by PRDD across all GPs for
Gram Panchayat Management System (GPMS), Web-based Monitoring System (WBMS), and Geographic
Information System (GIS); and (ii) Grievance Redressal Management System (GRMS)

Rationale
This DLI was to contribute to Key Results Area (ii) improving local government financial management
systems and facilitating the development of integrated systems, dashboards, and analytical tools to
improve accountability and transparency of all GPs, and to help state government departments in decision-
making and analysis of GP performance. Together with DLIs 3, 4, and 7, this DLI complemented DLIs 1, 2,
and 6, to drive institutional change and enable the achievement of the PDO. This DLI was strategic, could be
monitored, time bound, and achievable. Activities under this DLI initiated reform by rolling out five user-
friendly and integrated web-based applications: (i) GPIMS, which was designed to replace the manual system
of collecting data, planning, and monitoring of GP-level activities (subprojects or schemes); (ii) GRMS, which
played a key role in registering and timely resolution of grievances by the GPs; (iii) the training MIS
application, which enabled departmental users to capture and monitor training/trainer/trainee data and take
decisions accordingly; (iv) GP Works Manual, which contained a simplified list of typical works undertaken by
GPs with descriptions of standardized procedures to be followed before and during construction, including the
ESMF guidelines; and (v) GIS application, including the Mentor Reporting System (MRS). An automated link
between the GPIMS and GPMS was created and allowed data exchange between the two systems
to improve the accuracy and efficiency of the functional operations of GPs. The activities supported by this
DLI also helped establish a state-level digital dashboard that displayed GP-level performance data in the
public domain for improved accountability and transparency. The availability of this dashboard enabled GPs’
staff and government officials to make decisions and analyze GP performance over time. It also developed an
online vetting software to ensure efficient workflow management and timely vetting procedures for GP
subproject documents (for example: estimates, drawings, and designs). Overall, the program enabled the
implementation of several systems aimed at enhancing transparency and efficiency in GPs and
facilitated decision-making at the state/department level. Targets were revised at restructuring
to accommodate new government priorities (see below).

This DLI is rated Substantial.



Rating


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      West Bengal ISGPP-II (P159427)



Substantial

DLI 5 REVISION 1
Revised DLI
This DLI was not revised but the targets for Years 2,3,4 and 5 were revised to realign with government priorities.

Revised Rationale
After the Mid Term Review, the March 2021 restructuring revised the unachieved targets for DLI 5 (a)
in Years 2, 3, 4, and 5. This freed up US$5.6 million that was reallocated to new targets under this DLI. In
Year 4, a state level dashboard was developed to improve transparency and inform the state and local
decision making. The new targets and allocation for Year 4 were (i) web-based integrated system (GPIMS)
developed and used by all GPs (US$3.2 million), and (ii) digital state level dashboard to provide a snapshot of
key performance indicators on all financial and physical data of GPs (US$1.2 million). For Year 5, the new
targets and allocations were: (i) module on preparation, submission and approvals of scheme estimates, and
design and roll out to all GPs as part of the integrated GPIMS (US$1 million), and (ii) a comprehensive
analytical tool developed and available in production mode to generate state level standard reports on the
performance of GPs, using key information available in the existing GP systems (US$1.2 million). In addition,
US$1 million freed up by dropping DLI 7 below was reallocated to DLI 5(a), for a total reallocation of US$6.6
million under DLI 5(a). The target for Year 5 (percent of grievances redressed) of DLI 5(b) was increased at
restructuring and a new DLI was added with a target of providing mentoring support (physical/virtual) to 70
percent of women elected representatives in remote GPs. A few annual targets for DLI 5 became redundant
and were dropped.

Overall, new policies adopted by the government led to revising the rationale for this DLI, but strengthened
the link to achieving the PDOs. This DLI is rated Substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial

DLI 6
DLI
DLI 6: APA conducted by Panchayats and Rural Development Department or PRDD

Rationale
This DLI was to contribute to Key Results Area 1 – establishing a statewide unified PBG system using all
discretionary funds and made available to all GPs. PRRD was to conduct the APAs and facilitate its
independent verification to inform how the state’s untied funds would be distributed to the GPs and achieve
the intended results under the PDO. Together with DLIs 1 and 2, this DLI accounted for about 75 percent of
the IBRD funds and were closely linked to the PDO and the results framework. Together, these DLIs
helped institutionalize the PBG system and the performance-based disbursement mechanism in all GPs.
This DLI was strategic, achievable, and time bound.

The relevance of this DLI is rated Substantial.




                                                                                                    Page 9 of 26
                            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                            West Bengal ISGPP-II (P159427)




            Rating
            Substantial

            DLI 7
            DLI
            DLI 7: Targeted number of vacant core GP positions filled - Executive Assistants; GP Secretaries; and Nirman
            Sahayaks (NS)

            Rationale
            Hiring the core staff under this DLI was to help GPs implement the institutional and financial management
            reforms and achieve the PDO. Meeting targets were acknowledged in the results framework and was to
            contribute to Key Results Area 3 – improving local governance and human resource (HR) capacity for
            increased transparency and accountability in local government functions. These vacant core GP positions
            were – executive assistant, GP secretary, and Nirman Sahayaks (NS or engineer). The targets were
            monitorable with credible verification protocols. This DLI was consistent with the Theory of Change indicating
            that the hiring of staff would lead to enhanced institutional capacity of GPs. As a result of the state level hiring
            freeze of GP core staff, changes in state laws, and systems development already implemented by other
            central government systems, the March 2021 restructuring dropped this DLI and the activities and outputs it
            supported. The corresponding amount of US$1 million was reallocated to DLI 5 (a).

            Overall, the relevance of this DLI is rated Substantial. However, it was subsequently dropped due to the state
            level hiring freeze and not pursued until the program closed.



            Rating
            Substantial


OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




            OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
            Rationale
            Overall, relevance is rated as Substantial. The PDO and the DLIs were relevant to the Bank's strategy for the
            country and supported the government's decentralization priorities throughout the program period. However,
            there were minor shortcomings, which were addressed during restructuring to keep the DLIs relevant. Some
            targets under DLI 5 could not be achieved and were made redundant as the state decided to implement
            similar systems and froze the hiring of core GP staff making the DLI 7 targets unachievable. According to the
            ICR, the West Bengal State Finance Commission (SFC) grants adopted these program DLIs and planned to
            continue to use them to disburse the state level grants accordingly beyond the program period. Overall, the
            DLI verification methodologies were comprehensive. All seven DLIs focused on indicators that provided
            evidence of continued progress toward achieving the PDO.



            Rating


                                                                                                                  Page 10 of 26
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  West Bengal ISGPP-II (P159427)



               Substantial



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To strengthen the institutional capacity of Gram Panchayats across the State

               Rationale
               Theory of Change: No explicit Theory of Change (TOC) was outlined at appraisal but the program activities
               that led to key results areas (KRAs) provided a causal link of the inputs, outputs and expected outcomes at
               appraisal. A retrospective TOC was prepared for the ICR. The activities were designed to strengthen
               the institutional capacity of all 3,229 GPs in West Bengal by establishing a statewide performance-based
               grant (PBG) allocation system that would distribute discretionary funds to the GPs. They were to use these
               funds to build human resources capacity and improve the overall quality of service delivery.

               Inputs: were training, technical assistance, and grants to eligible GPs. Surveys of a sampling of GPs were to
               be conducted and results were to be gathered from workshops/consultations/field visits. The State of West
               Bengal consisted of 3,342 GPs. Phase I covered 1,000 GPs. Phase II covered 2,230 GPs.

               Outputs: were to be the system of allocating PBGs to GPs. The state's discretionary funds were to be
               distributed through this system. Other outputs included enhanced human resources capacity, and service
               delivery. The Panchayats and Rural Development Department (PRRD) was to conduct the annual
               performance assessments (APAs) of the GPs to validate outputs. The APA assessed (i) four basic mandatory
               conditions (BMCs); (ii) two additional expanded mandatory conditions (EMCs); and (c) specific thematic areas
               that provided performance incentives in planning and budgeting, project execution and service delivery,
               financial management, and transparency and accountability. These conditions also covered the progress of
               the four Key Results Areas (KRAs) under the program.

               Outcomes: were expected to be percentage of GPs that met the BMCs and EMCs annually in the APAs;
               and the share of performance-based untied grants that the GPs utilized. Note that these two indicators
               measured outputs and intermediate outcomes rather than outcomes such as the improvements in services
               delivered by the GPs to its residents.

               Critical assumptions: The TOC included the following critical assumptions that, if realized, were to enhance
               the achievement of the PDO: (i) independent consultants carried out the assessments every year, following
               pre-defined performance criteria; (ii) the government provided state level grants in a timely manner; and (iii)
               GP-level capacity was in place to ensure timely recording of all sub-project level data in the Gram Panchayat
               Management System (GPMS) and the Gram Panchayat Integrated Monitoring System (GPIMS).

               OUTPUTS: The following three Key Results Areas (KRAs) under this objective – (i) establishing a statewide
               unified PBG system using all discretionary funds and made available to all GPs; (ii) improving local
               government financial management systems; and (iii) improving local governance and human resource (HR)


                                                                                                                Page 11 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   West Bengal ISGPP-II (P159427)



capacity for increased transparency and accountability in local government functions – generated the
following outputs or intermediate results:

      A state-wide unified performance-based grant allocation system for all discretionary funds was
       established and made available to GPs.
             o Annual performance assessments (APAs) were conducted for at least 95 percent of
               GPs. The original target was to have completed annual assessments by September 30, 2020.
               The baseline was April 19, 2017. Assessments were conducted annually by November 30,
               2022. The Year End target for Year 5 APAs (2020) was delayed and was completed in July
               2022 because the external auditors were delayed in completing their audits, and delays from
               the impact of mobility restrictions in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
             o Performance-based grant allocations (following the APA results) were completed annually. The
               baseline was April 19, 2017, the target date for annually allocating performance grants was on
               October 31, 2020, and was achieved on November 30, 2022, indicating that the
               program achieved the targets except for the last year when the 2020 APAs were
               delayed. This cascaded to a delay in PBG allocation for that year.
      Local governance and human resource capacities were improved indicating an increase
       in transparency and accountability in local government functioning.
             o Participation, transparency, and accountability aspects achieved a score of 51.21
               percent. Baseline was 53.0 percent; the target was 73 percent. The target score for improved
               participation, transparency, and accountability was not achieved and was lower than the
               baseline. This was due to the low scores received in the Grievance Redressal Management
               System (GRMS). Marks were allotted based on the number of grievances received
               and resolved. Utilization of GRMS (number of grievances lodged) gradually increased over the
               past few years as GPs continued to spread awareness about the system. The World Bank
               team informed IEG that in the initial years, grievances were lodged and resolved orally and not
               recorded or reported. Grievances were then subsequently recorded, registering 10,800 in
               2019-2020 to 59,774 at closing with 99 percent of these redressed. However, it is not clear
               how this data affected the 51.21 percent score reported in the ICR. The government clarified
               that its replica initiatives may have drawn residents away from using the program promoted
               GRMS because beneficiaries preferred the alternative government-sponsored redress
               mechanisms.
             o Human resource capacity: The GPs filled 1,195 vacant positions (executive assistant, GP
               secretary, Nirman Sahayak, or engineer) were filled annually in the GPs. The baseline was 55
               percent filled positions, and the target was 90 percent of vacant positions in GPs would have
               been filled by the end of the program. The State decided to freeze hiring of staff statewide, so
               no vacancies were filled by Year 4 or 5. The World Bank team informed IEG that the program
               introduced mitigating measures to address the shortage of staff in those last two years
               of implementation. These measures included increased mentoring, assistance from existing
               GP technical staff of other government initiatives, and the implementation of online systems
               and quality assurance mechanisms to boost staff efficiency. The March 2021 restructuring
               dropped both the DLI 7 and the output linked to this disbursement. While IEG acknowledges
               the additional measures taken, the program did not achieve the original target.
      Improved the decentralized and participatory planning and budgeting mechanisms at the local level.
             o Improved project execution and service delivery capacity at GP level. With a baseline of
               65 percent and an original target score of 85 percent, the program achieved a score of 40.2
               percent. The target was not achieved and the achievement was significantly lower than

                                                                                                Page 12 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   West Bengal ISGPP-II (P159427)



              the baseline value primarily because of a lack of operations and maintenance (O&M)
              budgeting, establishment of remunerative assets, etc. Output Verification Studies were
              conducted to assess the infrastructure built by the GPs. Quality assurance mechanisms were
              commissioned, and a GP Works Manual was developed to standardize the procurement
              processes, contract management, quality testing, etc. to guide GPs on how to prepare
              estimates, execute works, etc. The World Bank team informed IEG that GPs improved their
              technical capacity for project execution and service delivery shown in their delivery of basic
              services such as providing accessibility to functional ladies’ toilets (99 percent) and safe
              drinking water (89 percent) in their respective jurisdictions. This additional data, however, did
              not increase the score achieved for this indicator target.
            o Improved planning and budgeting capacity at the GP level - with a baseline of 55 percent,
              the target score was 75 percent, and the program achieved a score of 68.39 percent, not
              achieving the target. The overall planning and budgeting performance of GPs gradually
              improved but did not meet the target.

OUTCOMES:

      The GPs utilized an average of 75 percent of the untied performance-based grants. The baseline was
       46 percent. The original target was 66 percent. The target remained unchanged and was exceeded.
      In Year 5, the total number of beneficiaries increased by 10.57 percent compared to Year 4. The
       program reached 11 percent, exceeding the original target of 10 percent. The indicator was the total
       number of beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender (male and female) but this information was not
       provided, only the percent increase in the total number of beneficiaries.

Overall, the efficacy of the program to achieve this objective is rated Modest. The technical capacity for
project execution and service delivery improved in the GPs, as the procurement processes, contract
management, quality testing, etc. were standardized. The outcome indicators related to the GPs qualified for
PBGs after meeting the Basic Mandatory Conditions (BMCs) and Expanded Mandatory Conditions (EMCs),
as well as the performance-based untied grants utilized by the GPs were substantially achieved. The World
Bank team clarified that the moderate shortcomings noted in the achievement of key intermediate results that
supported enhanced institutional capacity regarding – human resource capacity; participatory planning,
transparency, and accountability; and project execution and service delivery – were supplemented to sustain
enhanced institutional capacity through state-initiated measures. The efficacy of the program to achieve this
objective of strengthened institutional capacity is rated Modest because of the significant gaps between
achievements and output target value, where achievements of two of the targets were even lower than the
baseline values.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The objective was not revised. The targets were revised.

Revised Rationale
                                                                                                 Page 13 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   West Bengal ISGPP-II (P159427)



REVISED TOC: The TOC noted above was unchanged. The revisions referred to the decrease by 10 percent
of the target outcome indicator. Various targets of DLIs and the activities linked to those disbursements were
dropped (in the case of DLI 7 and related activities) and increased in places (introduced new targets for
added activities) as the MTR reallocated budgets and deleted redundant targets. The causal link between the
inputs and outputs continued to establish a logical link to the expected outcomes. The assumptions were not
revised.

REVISED INPUTS: A performance assessment (APA) cycle for Year 5 was added for DLI 2 to allow the use
of US$13.69 million in savings generated by unused resources linked to DLIs 1, 4, and 5. US$1 million was
reallocated from DLI 7 to DLI 5 because DLI 7 was dropped. This DLI was dropped in response to the
government's adoption of the statewide policy to freeze hiring of staff.

REVISED OUTPUTS: The Year 5 target for the assessment of mentors increased. The DLI 5 targets of Years
2, 3, 4, and 5 were adjusted according to government priorities. Year 2 target for OSR was modified as the
government adopted other mechanisms for raising OSRs. The Year 3 target to develop a web-based
integrated system was moved to Year 4. The Year 4 target of ease in doing business module was instead
adopted by the state as its own initiative. The Year 5 target of an asset management module was revised to
make way for the state initiative of centralizing the management of all GP assets in a web-based system
instead. DLI 7 was dropped altogether. The corresponding amount was reallocated (see revised inputs
above) and the associated activity was no longer supported by the program because the government adopted
a freeze hiring policy of GP core staff. The GPs did not fill any vacancies in three key GP staff positions
because of the statewide decision to freeze hiring of staff. This indicator was dropped. The World Bank team
informed IEG that supplemental measures noted above were adopted to sustain the enhanced human
resources capacity for subproject implementation and service delivery. A new target, providing onsite
mentoring support (physical/virtual) to 70 percent of the women elected representatives across remote GPs,
was added for Year 5. 82.52 percent of women elected representatives were mentored (physical/virtual
mode) in remote GPs exceeding the target. The achievements of the key indicators related to participatory
planning, transparency, and accountability (51.3 percent achieved compared to baseline of 53 percent and
target of 70 percent, i.e., target not achieved and lower than the baseline); and project execution and
service delivery capacity (40.2 percent compared to the baseline of 65 percent and target of 85 percent, i.e.,
target not achieved and lower than baseline) remained the same.

REVISED OUTCOMES: The target for the outcome level indicator regarding the share in the total number of
GPs qualifying for BMC and EMC was reduced in Year 5 from 80 to 70 percent.

      75 percent of GPs qualified for PBGs after meeting the Basic Mandatory Conditions (BMCs) and
       Expanded Mandatory Conditions (EMCs) annually in the Annual Performance Assessments (APAs).
       With a baseline of 40, the original target was 80 percent. This was revised to 70 percent at
       restructuring and the target was exceeded. The APA exercise improved day-to-day GP functioning
       and ensured effective utilization of the funds based on the DLIs that needed to be achieved to receive
       a favorable score in the assessments. These assessments were conducted and
       verified independently.
      62.16 percent of the total number of Scheduled Tribes (ST) GPs met the extended mandatory
       conditions (EMCs), against a baseline of 5, exceeding both the original target of 25 percent, and
       the revised of 30 percent. The target was exceeded. Note that this outcome was erroneously referred
       to as the "number" rather than "share" of Scheduled Tribes that met the EMCs. According to the
       PAD, this indicator measured the total number of Scheduled Tribes GPs (GPs with 40 percent or more
       of scheduled tribe populations) that each year will qualify the Expanded Mandatory Conditions by (i)

                                                                                                Page 14 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   West Bengal ISGPP-II (P159427)



       achieving a minimum of 60 percent expenditure across all untied fund (received up to and including
       third quarter) within the fourth quarter of the Financial Year; and (ii) regularly maintaining a
       computerized accounting system per state norms. This indicator was to track the program's impact on
       State Tribes/State Castes, officially designated groups of people and among the most disadvantaged
       groups in India. The Indian Constitution recognize these terms.
      65.91 percent of the total number of Scheduled Castes (SCs) GPs met the EMC, from a baseline of
       20, percent, and a target of 40 percent, revised to 45 percent. The target was exceeded.

Overall, the efficacy of the program to achieve this objective with the revised indicators and targets is rated
Modest despite the exceeded revised outcome targets. The human resources capacity indicator was dropped
given the statewide hiring freeze. The World Bank team informed IEG that measures had been adopted to
address the shortcomings presented by unmet targets in the key intermediate results indicators highlighted in
the previous section (pre-restructuring) that supported enhanced institutional capacity. However, the key
indicators related to participatory planning, transparency, and accountability (51.3 percent achieved
compared to baseline of 53 percent and target of 70 percent); and project execution and service delivery
capacity (40.2 percent compared to baseline of 65 percent and target of 85 percent) remained unmet and
the reported achievements were below the baseline values. The efficacy of the program to achieve this
objective is therefore rated Modest.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen the financial capacity of Gram Panchayats across the State

Rationale
Theory of Change: As noted above, there was no TOC at appraisal but the causal relationship between the
inputs, outputs, and expected outcomes were laid out in the activities that were to trigger the disbursements
to achieve key results. A retrospective TOC was prepared for the ICR. The financial capacity of GPs in West
Bengal was to be strengthened by improving the financial management systems, combined with the statewide
PBG mechanism established under the first objective above.

Inputs: were training, technical assistance, and grants to be distributed to eligible GPs.

Outputs: The APA assessed (i) four BMCs; (ii) two additional EMCs; and (iii) specific thematic areas
that provided performance incentives in planning and budgeting, project execution and service delivery,
financial management, and transparency and accountability. These conditions also covered the progress of
the following four Key Results Areas (KRAs) - (i) establishing a statewide unified PBG system using all
discretionary funds and made available to all GPs; (ii) improving local government financial management
systems; (iii) improving local governance and human resource (HR) capacity for increased transparency and
accountability in local government functions; and (iv) improving the decentralized and participatory planning
and budgeting mechanisms at the local level. In addition to scoring the factors in the APAs, the GPs
performance was also assessed on their use of mentoring support (corresponding to DLI 4); their participation
in formal learning and training (corresponding to DLI 3); their use of the institutional systems developed; and

                                                                                                 Page 15 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   West Bengal ISGPP-II (P159427)



overall program management. Outputs were to include the various systems that were designed to improve
the financial capacity of GPs across the state such as the Gram Panchayat Integrated Monitoring System
(GPIMS), the Gram Panchayat Management System (GPMS), the use of external audits, and the internal
audit mechanisms.

The TOC provided a clear causality between the inputs and outputs. Outputs could reasonably be attributed
to the inputs. The expected outcomes were narrowly expressed as achieving sound financial management
practices. There was a gap between how these management practices then led to improved services
delivered to beneficiaries, similar to the those noted in objective 1 above. While attribution is reasonably
achieved by the expected outcomes, these were expressed at the intermediate rather than outcome level.

Critical assumptions: The same critical assumptions noted under Objective 1 above applied to this TOC.

OUTPUTS: The following outputs improved local government finances and financial management systems in
GPs. The key activities included providing hand-holding support to GPs (capacity building through formal
learning and mentoring) to improve OSRs through PBGs.

      The program institutionalized a risk-based internal audit ecosystem for GPs to strengthen the state’s
         oversight mechanism. The program developed an Internal Audit Manual, achieving target.
        The program trained more than 300 internal auditors. The ICR did not report a target.
        Regular mentoring and training mechanisms were established in all 3,229 GPs, achieving target. In
         FY2021–22, the Program targeted 14,100 participants on e-tendering, online GPMS, Goods and
         Services Tax (GST), and technical and engineering issues (including environmental and social
         safeguards (E&S) and disaster risk management and improving OSRs. At closing, the program trained
         around 75,000 participants. No target was provided.
        The program deployed around 480 mentors every year with an average of 19 days of onsite mentoring
         in each GP and performance assessment of the mentors deployed. Mentor support increased from an
         average of 21 days in FY2017–18 to 33 days in FY2021–22. A Mentor Deployment Strategy (MDS)
         was developed to identify weaker GPs and intensify support for them. The Program’s Mentor
         Reporting System (MRS) geotagged the movement of mentors and automatically updated the mentor
         hours provided to GPs by each mentor. Mentor deployment was reduced during the
         Panchayat elections in 2018, the State Assembly elections in 2021, and the COVID-19 pandemic in
         2020 and 2021.
        An integrated state-level digital dashboard was established to improve monitoring of GP performance
         in real time, achieving target. However, the development and use of web-based integrated systems
         across all GPs was not achieved at closing.
        The comprehensive analytical tool was not developed at closing.

OUTCOMES:

      Own source revenues increased. GPs achieved a value of US$24.77 million increase in GP’s own
       source revenue. The original target was equivalent to an annual increase of 10 percent over the
       baseline till closing. Baseline was US$18 million; end target was US$26.3 million. The target was
       exceeded. The exchange rates for ‘actual’ and ‘end target’ were the same as the one used for the
       baseline (US$1 = INR 65).
      The program achieved an average score of 75 percent of the performance-based untied grants
       utilized by the GPs. The baseline was 46 percent, and the target of 66 percent was exceeded. The

                                                                                               Page 16 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    West Bengal ISGPP-II (P159427)



       Program helped institutionalize a set of FM systems and improved the OSRs of GPs. On average, GP
       revenues increased by 8– 9 percent over the last four years of the program.
      The state-level integrated digital dashboard informed decision-making at the state and local
       government levels but no data was provided to support this claim.
      At closing, all GPs completed their respective internal audits for FY2021–22 achieving target, an
       improvement from the 75 percent of GPs completing their internal audits for the preceding fiscal year.
       This improvement was reflected in achieving a score of 84.44 percent, exceeding the target of 73
       percent.

he targets for using the internal audit ecosystem, increasing GP level OSRs, and the state level dashboard to
monitor GP financial management performance were achieved. There were minor shortcomings in the
achievement of the intermediate results such as the lack of establishment of the digital dashboard to improve
monitoring of GP performance. The efficacy of the program to achieve this objective is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To strengthen the financial capacity of Gram Panchayats across the State

Revised Rationale
Achievement and rating are as outlined above.



Revised Rating
Substantial




OVERALL EFFICACY
Rationale
The overall efficacy of the program to achieve both objectives is rated Substantial with moderate
shortcomings. There were moderate shortcomings in the achievement of the first objective regarding
strengthening the institutional capacity of Gram Panchayats across the State. Even though the outcome
indicators related to the GPs qualified for PBGs, as well as the utilization of performance-based untied grants
were substantially achieved, there were shortcomings in the achievement of key intermediate results that
supported enhanced institutional capacity regarding – human resource capacity; participatory planning,
transparency, and accountability; and project execution and service delivery. The second objective related to
the strengthening of financial management capacity was substantially achieved. On the financial
management capacity front, GPs improved their OSRs, the rate of fund utilization of state grants, and have


                                                                                                 Page 17 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      West Bengal ISGPP-II (P159427)



 an internal audit mechanism in place to improve documentation and reporting systems. The overall efficacy
 rating pre-restructuring is rated as Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



 Rating
 Substantial

 OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
 Revised Rationale
 The overall efficacy of the program to achieve the revised targets is rated Substantial with moderate
 shortcomings. There were moderate shortcomings in the achievement of the first objective regarding
 strengthening the institutional capacity of Gram Panchayats across the State. Even though the outcome
 indicators related to the GPs qualified for PBGs, as well as the utilization of performance-based untied grants
 were achieved, and the human resource capacity indicator was dropped there were shortcomings in the
 achievement of key intermediate results that supported enhanced institutional capacity regarding –
 participatory planning, transparency, and accountability, and project execution and service delivery. The
 second objective related to the strengthening of financial management capacity was substantially achieved.

 The overall efficacy rating post-restructuring is rated as Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



 Revised Rating
 Substantial


5. Outcome

The Relevance of Objectives and DLIs was substantial before and after restructuring. The efficacy rating was
Substantial with moderate shortcomings both before and after restructuring. Given that the ratings were the
same, both pre- and post-restructuring, a split evaluation will not make a difference to the overall outcome
rating. The overall outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory due to the shortcomings in Efficacy. It is noted that
85 percent (i.e., $170.3 million was disbursed before restructuring).




    Outcome Rating
    Moderately Satisfactory


6. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose risks to the development outcomes of the program (ICR, paragraphs 75-76):



                                                                                                     Page 18 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     West Bengal ISGPP-II (P159427)



     Technical risk: This is a moderate risk. In this project, innovative technology and systems were
      introduced to design and implement the statewide unified PBG system to disburse untied grants to
      GPs. Incentives that use online systems, such as the annual performance assessments, geo-tagging
      the use of mentors, computerized accounting systems, internal audit mechanisms, Grievance
      Redressal Management System (GRMS), Gram Panchayat Integrated Monitoring System (GIMS),
      Gram Panchayat Management System (GMS), Mentor Reporting System (MRS, etc., were widely
      adopted. These systems use software and hardware that require periodic updates as functionalities
      evolve, services expand, and needs emerge. Commitment to these periodic technical updates may
      need to be captured as part of the state's incentive scheme for the use of the systems to respond to
      changes and be sustained over time. There is a risk that these updates may not be pursued if
      government policy changes, if capacity in various departments reduce over time, or if training is not
      delivered. GPs may discontinue their participation. External agencies may not continue to support the
      systems in place, such as external audits to verify performance indicators. Mandating periodic
      technical updates and finding resources to accompany this mandate may mitigate this risk.
     Financial risk: This is a substantial risk. In this program, GPs were encouraged to raise their own
      source revenues (OSR) as part of building their capacity to deliver services and meet the burgeoning
      need of its constituents. Targets were met. GPs were encouraged to plan and implement basic
      infrastructure and deliver services to its neighborhoods using grants from the state. Local
      infrastructure assets completed under the program require financial commitments for operations and
      maintenance (O&M). Noting that an output target (4.1 improved project execution) remained unmet at
      project closing because of lack of financial resources to meet O&M needs highlights the risk to future
      needs of assets completed under the program. GPs will also need support to address the O&M
      needs of their remunerative assets. Retaining staff capacity also needs financing commitments to be
      sustained. Refining the incentive schemes of the PBG from the state to include these considerations
      may mitigate this risk at the GP level.
     Government ownership/commitment risk. This is a moderate risk. In this program the government
      embraced the institutional reform underlying the program to reach all the GPs in the state
      (except GTA). The government expressed its commitment to continue with the program after the
      program closed. In some instances, the government also committed to continue the training and use
      of mentors to support the capacity of the GPs to perform its functions and deliver services to its
      constituents. At closing, the state government acknowledged that the program improved the
      institutional capacity of GPs, promoted decentralization, and committed to using and maintaining the
      systems developed under this program.
     Macroeconomic Risk. This is a high risk. In this program, the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 affected
      program implementation. Wars and other civil disturbances worldwide are expected to have economic
      and social consequences worldwide. These pose high risks to sustaining the outcome achieved by
      the program. There would be pressure on how to finance competing priorities. Disruptions to
      employment and income earnings in rural areas may pose risks to the willingness to pay water and
      sanitation tariff rates. The difficult and uncertain global and national macroeconomic environment in
      the near- to medium-term pose high risks to sustaining outcomes achieved in this program.




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

                                                                                                Page 19 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     West Bengal ISGPP-II (P159427)



  The Bank team designed this program considering that West Bengal was at the forefront of the
  decentralization process in India. The team identified the strengthening of the institutional and financial
  capacity of GPs as its key development objective. The Bank team considered the priorities of the state as
  well as those of the State Financial Commission (SFC) to scale up the program initiated under phase 1 to
  reach all GPs (excluding the GPs of the Gorkha Territorial Administration or GTA) and adopt the PBG
  system to distribute all state-level untied grants. The Bank team considered the lessons from the
  predecessor phase I of the program that covered 1,000 GPs and now expanded the coverage to include
  all GPs of the state (covering all 3,229 GPs of the state, except for the GTA GPs). The World Bank team
  conducted a technical Fiduciary Systems Assessment (FSA), and the ESSA adequately identified the
  implementation risks because of the lack of experience of the GPs that were not part of phase 1 and
  identified measures in a comprehensive Program Action Plan (PAP) to address these weaknesses during
  implementation. The Bank team designed mandatory conditions and performance measures to address
  these risks built into the indicators to support capacity building and institutional strengthening. The team
  designed the implementation arrangement by building on the preceding phase and incorporating lessons
  from the preceding phase into the design. Among these lessons were leveraging a PBG system
  to improve GPs performance, mentoring as a key element of capacity building, and separating the
  executing from the evaluating agencies for objectivity and establishing the integrity of the performance
  assessments and verification, such as using external independent firms for the APA, and conducting
  independent verification studies. The team designed the results framework with matching DLI verification
  methodology supported by an M&E framework (see Section 8)—the DLI verification
  protocol distinguished between annual and end targets. The team justified using the P4R instrument as
  an appropriate follow-on to the first phase, indicating a readiness to implement with staff from the state-
  level Program Management Unit (PMU) continuing into phase II implementation. However, the Bank team
  did not identify the risks of overextending the Examiner of Local Accounts (ELA) agency that was
  mandated to conduct external audits, not just of these GPs, and government policy changes, in this case,
  the freeze hiring of core GP staff that directly affected the achievement of a disbursement
  linked indicator. Following the Mid Term Review (MTR, see below), the team designed corrective
  measures for restructuring.

  Overall, the performance of the Bank team at entry is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The task team leader changed once from preparation to closing. The team conducted 13 supervision
 missions over the course of the five-year program period including virtual missions during the COVID-19
 pandemic. During the pandemic, the World Bank task team proactively supported the PMU in developing a
 virtual methodology for undertaking the APA exercise. The task team reported consultations with GPs
 and the state-level PMU to discuss implementation delays from a lack of resources and impacts of COVID-
 19 on external audits by the ELA under the Office of the Accountant General of West Bengal, a decline in
 performance of Phase I GPs, and government policy changes that led to freeze hiring of core GP staff. The
 team addressed these at restructuring, following the MTR. The team drew up a Mentor Deployment
 Strategy (MDS), recalibrated training and mentoring to uniformly deploy resources across all GPs. The
 team rationalized indicators and targets to remove redundant targets and add a target on mentoring

                                                                                                   Page 20 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     West Bengal ISGPP-II (P159427)



 women elected representatives in far flung GPs. With the freeze hiring of core GP staff, GPs turned
 to mentors to fill the capacity gaps (ICR, paragraph 53). External factors such as the policy change noted
 above to freeze hiring of core GP staff, the Panchayat elections in 2018 and the State Assembly elections
 in 2021, COVID-19 delayed implementation (ICR, paragraph 58). The Bank team helped revamp the APA
 tool into a virtual desk-based activity. The Bank team devised a feedback loop for a need-based training
 and mentoring plans and helped develop an online dashboard to inform the public and the government on
 GP performance. The team also helped support systems to enable the government to continue with the
 PBG systems after the program closed. However, funds made available under the program (CFC, SFC,
 and IBRD) funds were less than the initial estimate of US$593.7 million (ICR, paragraph 57). Central
 government discretionary (untied) funds (CFC) were disbursed separately and outside the program (ICR,
 footnote 14) under a set of conditions separate from this program but applicable to the entire country.
 However, this did not affect either the PDO, or the overall operation of the GPs, or attribution of the
 program interventions because SFC and IBRD funds remained part of the Program.

 Overall, the performance of the Bank team under supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 The overall rating of the Bank performance at entry and supervision is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Theory of Change prepared at closing showed a logical causal link where inputs led to outputs that led
 to the expected outcomes. The program objectives were clear and specific, directed at the capacity of the
 GPs in West Bengal. The coverage was adequate to provide an impact since the program covered the
 entire state (except for GTA GPs). The PDO was well formulated and aligned with the government's plans
 (national and state levels) to strengthen the PRI system, with a focus on the GP level. The PDO had a
 clear link with the RF. Indicators encompassed all aspects of the PDOs..The DLIs were clearly defined,
 measurable, and aligned with the PDOs. Technically sound and credible protocols and methodologies to
 monitor and verify DLIs were in place. There were a few mislabeled indicators, e.g., the "Total number of
 GPs" or "Total number of beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender" that were measured in percentages.
 Each indicator was to be analyzed with on-ground feedback obtained through consultations. These
 indicators sufficiently captured the contribution of the activities to the key results area and toward achieving
 PDO-level outcomes. For example, the completion of the APAs received a score that qualified GPs to
 indicate improvement in their capacities to plan and budget. The APA exercise constituted the overall M&E
 arrangement of the program (ICR, paragraph 61) and was relied upon to provide the evidence to support
 the achievement of the PDOs. Data collection methods and analysis of the indicators were contained in the
 APA, the Independent Verification Agency (IVA), and the Quality Assurance Review (QAR) (hired by the
 World Bank) to be engaged for the overall assessment verification and quality assurance of the APA

                                                                                                     Page 21 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     West Bengal ISGPP-II (P159427)



 process. A training MIS was to be developed to track annual capacity-building activities and the
 implementation of the formal training plans. The M&E design and arrangements were well-embedded
 institutionally.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E system was implemented by the PRRD using the APA exercise to measure and report on
  progress against indicators in the results framework. The APA implemented the M&E system of the
  program (ICR, paragraph 61). An APA firm with more than 300 field staff collected data directly from the
  GPs. An Independent Verification Agent (IVA) verified the data. Weaknesses in M&E design, including
  specification of indicators, were corrected after the mid-term review and rationalization and removal of
  redundant targets, and a new indicator was added at restructuring that followed. The APA tool was often
  fine-tuned (for example, targets were revised, and means of verification [MOVs] were clarified) before the
  start of each cycle based on feedback from APA field staff and the IVA and QAR teams. Disbursement
  indicators were scalable and well defined, verified through field visits by the IVA sampling 100 of the
  3,200 GPs. The program encouraged all GPs to use GPMS and established an integrated state-level
  digital dashboard to enhance transparency while monitoring GP performance in real-time. This
  dashboard was available to the public and was intended to inform policy decision-making at the state and
  local government levels. Post MTR, the program developed a feedback loop (ICR, paragraph 56) to
  identify relatively weak GPs (based on APA scores) and deliver targeted training and mentoring. The
  overall APA performance of GPs was reviewed at the department level, but the program did not include a
  formal mechanism to communicate the APA performance scores to the GPs. After the program closed,
  the government acknowledged the benefits of the systems introduced under this program and committed
  to continue implementing those, including M&E functions and processes.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data from the APA exercise was used to report on GP performance at the department level.
  M&E data informed restructuring. The program created a feedback loop, wherein the APA performance
  of the GPs was analyzed at the department level, and corrective measures such as targeted training and
  mentoring were identified. M&E data was communicated to various stakeholders through the feedback
  loops that were implemented later in the program and through the implementation of a state-level digital
  dashboard using data from the GPMS and the GPIMS that made available GP-level data in the public
  domain for improved accountability and transparency. M&E data was used to develop an online vetting
  software to ensure efficient workflow management and timely vetting procedures for GP subproject
  documents (for example, estimates, drawings, and designs). Overall, the Program enabled the
  implementation of several systems aimed at enhancing transparency and efficiency in GPs and
  facilitating decision-making at the state/department level. The M&E systems established were likely to
  be sustained after closing (ICR, paragraph 66).

  The overall rating of M&E quality is Substantial. The program designed an M&E system using the APA
  exercise to provide evidence of achieving targets for the various indicators in the results framework.
  M&E data was implemented and corrected when shortcomings were identified. M&E data was used to
  inform feedback mechanisms for greater transparency and accountability.




                                                                                                  Page 22 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     West Bengal ISGPP-II (P159427)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

9. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards: The program was assigned OP/BP 9.00, which established the policy and
   planning elements necessary to achieve outcomes consistent with a P4R operation. The policy, OP 9.00,
   Program-for-Results Financing, was first issued in February 2012, revised in April 2013, and further updated
   in April 2015. The elements of the policy guided Bank implementation support and assessed the
   government's systems and their capacity to plan and implement effective measures for environmental and
   social risk management. The program reported satisfactory performance of its Environmental and Social
   Systems (E&S, ICR, paragraph 68). The program adopted the Environmental and Social Systems
   Management Framework (ESMF) laid out in the preceding phase. The Environmental and Social
   Safeguards Assessment (ESSA) was disclosed on December 15, 2016. The ESSA was uploaded in the
   websites of the World Bank and of the state of West Bengal on December 22, 2016 and re-disclosed in the
   program's website on February 15, 2017. Minor implementation delays initially occurred because the
   coverage expanded from 1,000 GPs in Phase 1 to all 3,200 GPs in Phase II. GPs developed schemes that
   reflected limited understanding of the ESMF at the block level leading to initial delays in technical
   approvals/vetting of schemes. GPs in remote eco-fragile villages lacked technical/E&S capacity that led
   to delays in developing infrastructure subprojects. Activities in the Program Action Plan (PAP) included
   conducting an orientation on ESMF to build capacity at all levels of the local government. GP engineers and
   contractors received regular technical trainings. Additional mentoring support was delivered to eco-fragile
   GPs in remote areas. The GP staff were aware of E&S issues at the field level after the implementation of
   the ESMF. Several GPs scaled up their E&S practices in other schemes, including adherence to the
   negative list provided under the Program. The Output Verification Study indicated improvements in the
   integration of ESMF guidelines by GPs. The program, however, did not meet the corresponding output
   indicator because of shortcomings in ESMF reporting, geotagging of subprojects, preparing good quality
   comparison statements during procurement, creation of sustainable and remunerative assets, fund
   allocation for operation and maintenance (O&M) activities, and utilization of own funds for development
   activities.

   Social Safeguards: Since most of the works were anticipated to be small scale and subject to a negative
   list, no major negative impacts were expected. No land acquisition or resettlement were expected. Negative
   environmental impacts, if any, were expected to be minor. Activities in the Program Action Plan (PAP)
   included implementing the Grievance Redress Mechanism System (GRMS). The GR was strengthened
   through information and communication technology tools including a web-based system for effective
   monitoring. The program created a Vulnerable Group Development Framework (VGDF). This enabled GPs
   to identify lagging areas, prioritize areas of disparity (for example, disadvantaged rural citizens), and
   improve the planning processes to provide better quality services. An online land portal was developed and
   is now in use by all districts to document government land transfers, donation of land parcels, etc.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

                                                                                                 Page 23 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    West Bengal ISGPP-II (P159427)



  Financial Management: The Integrated Fiduciary Systems Assessment (IFSA), conducted at preparation,
  built on the experience gained from phase I. Suitable mitigation measures were embedded in the program
  design to strengthen the system (ICR, paragraph 70). The program received complaints. These were sent
  to the World Bank's Integrity Vice Presidency (INT) who investigated these. The West Bengal State
  Vigilance Commission conducted its own investigation. The task team took actions in accordance with the
  Legal Agreement (ICR, paragraph 71). At closing, the fiduciary arrangements assessed in the IFSA
  remained except for the flow of funds to GPs. Funds went directly to the GPs from the ISGPP cell instead
  of being routed through the district offices. External and internal audits were built into the systems funded
  by the program. Completing those formed part of the annual performance assessments. Fiduciary issues
  raised during implementation included weak accounting practices in the District Coordination Units (DCUs).
  Both the internal and external auditors made repeated observations on DCU’s weak accounting practices.
  These included maintenance of records for fixed assets and inadequate supporting documentation for
  expenditure. These recurrent observations were usually related to petty expenditure. The PMU addressed
  these weaknesses with training and frequent monitoring, but the weaknesses persisted till closing. Weak
  internal audit at the Program level was another issue. Repeated delays in appointing internal auditors for
  the program affected the program's internal expenditure control framework. The internal auditors did not
  report on risks, process, and performance-related weaknesses of the program. They focused more on
  compliance and inconsistencies in individual transactions/payment vouchers.

  Procurement: A GP Works Manual was developed under the Program to help GPs standardize the
  subproject execution and service delivery process and enabled them to complete subprojects more
  efficiently. With the introduction of e-tendering systems and the Procurement Manual, the overall
  procurement systems have become more transparent and efficient and facilitated wider participation of
  bidders. Procurement of testing equipment and installation of quality control laboratories at the block level
  have strengthened the GPs’ overall contract management capacity, as GP staff are now able to assess the
  quality of materials provided by the contractors and are able to monitor the progress of works effectively.
  Training of contractors under the Program has helped GPs manage expectations and improve the overall
  quality of construction. One of the key fiduciary issues during Program implementation included the change
  in Program procurement approach. Until the MTR, the Program continued to use World Bank IPF
  procurement processes and legacy arrangements that were part of ISGPP. Post MTR, in line with the
  approach to use country systems, the procurement arrangements were comprehensively revised and
  aligned with the State Government’s procurement rules and guidelines. Also, the quality of procurement
  audit during the initial years of Program implementation faced some issues. In FY2018– 19, a procurement
  audit was undertaken by the Program’s external auditors who were transactional experts with limited
  procurement audit capacity. As a result, the audit reports could not ascertain if the procurement processes
  followed the agreed principles and procedures. Thereafter, it was agreed that qualified and specialized
  firms would conduct the independent annual procurement audits. A few procedural lapses related to
  authorization by competent authorities were observed by the auditors and these were resolved during
  implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---


                                                                                                  Page 24 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     West Bengal ISGPP-II (P159427)



10. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               Shortcomings in achievement of
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   the institutional capacity
                                                                               objective
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


11. Lessons

Some of the key lessons offered by the operation are the following: (ICR, paragraphs 77-81)

      A unified statewide performance-based grant system may facilitate institutional and
       financial systems reform of GPs. In this project, untied grants from the state were
       distributed to GPs using a performance-based grant allocation system. Disbursements were
       linked to the adoption of targeted reforms and the use of various systems to build GP
       capacity. The annual performance assessments facilitated institutional reforms. GPs
       generated own-source revenues (OSRs) and regularized administrative functions such as
       planning, budgeting, procurement, and improved service delivery.
      A programmatic approach to follow reforms introduced under the first phase may
       ensure a readiness to implement and help achieve development objectives. In this
       project, GPs were provided a preview of the expected progression of the institutional reform
       initiated under the program's first phase. GPs were given a preview of the benefits to be
       derived from the adoption of institutional and financial reforms to benefit them. The P4R
       mechanism served as a platform where incentives were offered to reward the adoption of
       institutional reform. The P4R engagement allowed for cascading operational and technical
       aspects of the reforms. The legacy systems adopted by the prior phase ensured the
       program's readiness to be implemented. The state-level Program Management Unit (PMU)
       had sufficient capacity, with many staff continuing from the first phase. Using established
       systems and trained staff from the predecessor project helps ensure continuity.
      Continuous community engagement may help sustain program interventions. In this
       project, local communities were continuously engaged at the GP level. Para baithaks
       (community meetings) were organized where the local people could interact directly with GP
       officials and articulate their demands. Residents were consulted during the construction of
       subprojects (for example, road laying). Any grievance was resolved through the GRMS within
       a specified period. The program increased the participation of women in Gram Sabha and
       Sansad meetings. Local people saw the benefits of a bottom-up planning process,
       which helped them register ownership of the program activities. Adopting a state-level digital
       dashboard that displays the public GP level performance noted above and the participatory
       experience facilitated by the program may encourage residents to continue their civic
       participation and help demand sustaining capital assets.


                                                                                                 Page 25 of 26
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       West Bengal ISGPP-II (P159427)



        A detailed assessment of external agencies may inform the design of program
         incentives that would minimize implementation delays. In this project, some key program
         activities, such as the external audit of GPs that involved the engagement of external
         agencies (such as ELA), were severely delayed. Therefore, a thorough assessment of the
         external agencies, which play a key role in implementing the program, needs to consider
         adding incentives for the timely completion of obligations. In addition, programs may
         establish a systematic coordination mechanism to engage with external agencies to help
         reduce implementation delays.



12. Assessment Recommended?

  No

13. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR report followed the guidelines. The narrative, the evidence, and the ratings were clearly linked. The
evidence linked to the disbursements were verified independently and documented to support evidence of
outcomes. Verification processes were strong. The annexes provided additional justifications to support the
ratings of program performance. The analysis of the data was clearly linked to the findings. The report provided
strong arguments to support the link between the program interventions and the outcomes. The theory of
change justified how the ratings were reached. Lessons were specific, useful, and based on evidence of what
occurred in the program. Overall, the report is rated Substantial.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 26 of 26
