     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     INTEGRATED CITIES AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (P150991)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023649

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P150991                                    INTEGRATED CITIES AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 West Bank and Gaza                         Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A2846                                   30-Jun-2021                                           5,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Sep-2016                                31-Dec-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             5,000,000.00                                    5,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              5,000,000.00                                    5,000,000.00

 Actual                                          5,000,000.00                                    5,000,000.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Paul Robert Honeybone      Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was “to enhance the capacity of participating urban areas to plan
   for sustainable urban growth.” This is consistent throughout the project, from the Financial Agreement (Trust
   Fund Grant Agreement, Schedule 1, p.7), to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p.5) and into the ICR.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     INTEGRATED CITIES AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (P150991)



  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had two components:

   Component No. 1: Planning for Sustainable Urban Growth (Approval cost US$4.55 million from Trust
   Fund for Gaza and West Bank (TFGWB); Actual cost US$3.85 million.)

   This component aimed to strengthen participating urban areas' institutional and technical capacity to plan
   for sustainable urban growth. Sub-components for the five urban areas included:

   1.1: Structured capacity development to assist equip Local Government Units (LGUs) with the necessary
   information, tools, and analysis to achieve four milestones of urban growth planning: (i) establish and
   actively maintain intra-urban area coordination mechanisms; (ii) complete baseline assessment of existing
   urban extent; (iii) complete exercise to develop cost-analyzed urban growth scenarios, and to disclose them
   to the public, and (iv) modify respective member LGUs’ plans based on the optimum urban growth scenario
   selected at the urban area level.

   1.2: Demand-driven customized support for urban growth planning for the West Bank urban areas. This
   provided the urban areas with support and training to conduct activities throughout the life of the proposed
   project to continually encourage and maintain the momentum and ownership for the longer-term urban
   growth planning exercise. The support was demand-driven based on meeting urban growth planning
   milestones and where support would benefit the urban area.

   1.3: Demand-driven customized support for urban growth planning for Gaza City. This sub-component
   supported Gaza City in conducting activities to improve urban space management and services over the
   project.

   Component No. 2: Project Implementation Support and Management Cost (Approval cost US$0.45
   million from TFGWB; Actual cost was US$1.15 million).

   This component financed the training, operating costs, and goods necessary for the technical oversight and
   implementation support of the proposed project to be performed by: Local Coordinators (LC) for Bethlehem,
   Hebron, and Nablus areas, a Geographic Information System (GIS) Specialist, and a Project Assistant. This
   component also financed the management fee of the Municipal Development and Lending Fund (MDLF),
   which was responsible for the procurement, financial management, safeguards, and reporting for the project
   based on technical inputs from the Technical Supervisor (TS).

   The project underwent two level 2 restructurings:

        i. In April 2021, the project went through a level 2 restructuring to re-focus the delivery and to do a
          moderate shift in resource allocation between the two project components, along with a delivery

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    INTEGRATED CITIES AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (P150991)



          timeframe extension in the context of delivery challenges and COVID-19. The changes were
          to component costs, Results Framework (RF) revisions (targets were not scaled down), reallocation
          of funds between disbursement categories, changes of disbursement estimates, changes to the
          implementation schedule, and a project closure date extension until 31 December 2022.. The RF
          revisions contained amendments to (a) refine the PDO level indicator relating to growth scenarios
          aligning with LGU plans to focus on urban growth plans per se, recognizing that LGUs had
          committed to working jointly and little baseline information existed. The case was made that urban-
          level growth scenarios and plans, including other tools and activities, effectively covered all LGUs by
          design. Also, (b) the ‘direct project beneficiaries’ target was expanded (from 180 to 353,506 people)
          to capture wider impacts on citizens beyond direct training impacts. Further, three indicators were
          added to quantify (c) the number of ‘indirect beneficiaries’ (a simple population-level metric), (d) the
          number of urban pilot interventions informed by the work, and (e) an urban and planning related
          training metric (number of person-days conducted).
      ii. In May 2022, the project underwent a second level 2 restructuring, extending the closing date to
          December 31, 2022.

  The first restructuring provided relatively minor revisions to the components, resulting in a more explicit
  specification of activities, e.g., changes in the RF to clarify a focus on urban growth plans, reflect LGUs
  working jointly, and more fully measure training and claim indirect population-level benefits. There were no
  explicit downward revisions in associated outcome targets, rather a reallocation from Component 1 to
  Component 2 reflecting higher project implementation costs than initially anticipated. From a timeframe
  perspective, COVID-19 delays were primarily the extension driver rather than a distinct shift in delivery
  focus.

  A split evaluation will not be undertaken, as there was no reduction of indicator targets or major changes in
  indicators due to the restructurings.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost

  The total project cost of the Integrated Cities and Urban Development (ICUD) Project was US$ 5.00 million.
  The Actual cost was US$ 5.00 million.

  Financing

  The Integrated Cities and Urban Development (ICUD) Project was fully financed by an IDA Grant.

  Borrower Contribution

  There was no borrower contribution (planned or actual).

  Dates




                                                                                                     Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     INTEGRATED CITIES AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (P150991)



   The project was approved on September 21, 2016 (Grant Agreement signed October 13, 2016), with the
   project becoming effective on December 5, 2016. The MTR was conducted on Jan 7, 2019; the original
   closing date was June 30, 2021, and the actual closing date was 18 months later, on December 31, 2022.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector context: Despite a background of war and ongoing constraints, there have
been economic improvements in the urban centers of Palestine since 2014. However, West Bank and Gaza
(WB&G) territories have faced instability and significant fiscal constraints that have persisted since the
2000s. High population growth, complex social constraints (unemployment, poverty, and urbanized refugee
camps), constrained physical spaces for expansion, uneven infrastructure, public service provision, and
unplanned and poorly serviced construction activity in some areas present significant barriers to progress.

Within a comparatively fragile institutional operating environment, a unique and dispersed set of urban
areas co-existed in volatile locations. All areas suffered from poorly planned and uncoordinated urban
development. This was partly constrained by a lack of urban planning, which hampered the potential for
urban organization and forward-looking investment. To deliver a clear and coordinated structuring of land
and urban initiatives, there was a need for support to establish (i) baseline information, (ii) to consider
development scenarios, and (iii) to provide planning collateral to inform future conceivable and 'investor-
ready’ urban projects. While generally overwhelmed by existing demands, Local Government Units (LGUs)
provide the longest-standing unit of Palestinian administration. They presented the opportunity to forge new
connections to overcome divisions between different units, lift capacity for areas to plan growth more
comprehensively (jointly and individually) and build connections to central Palestinian Authority (PA)
agencies. In combination, this could help to inform common policy frameworks and investments to help
urban advancement.

Bank Experience:

With its history of supporting the geographic region and local government capacity building since the 1990s,
the World Bank was well positioned to spearhead integrated planning system improvements. Recognizing
the criticality of urban planning as a foundation for growth, along with the coordination between five
geographically distributed Local Government Units (LGUs), the project built on the World Bank’s
programmatic work undertaken in the local government (LG) sector.

Alignment to World Bank Strategies:

The Bank has had a series of Assistance Strategies (AS) in the West Bank and Gaza since the 1990s. This
included AS FY 2015-2016 that guided institutional strengthening assistance, with an emphasis on
integrated development and public service provision to underpin economic progress. The project was fully
aligned with the strategic pillars defined in the AS, including directly addressing Pillar No. 1 to “Strengthen
the institutions of a future state to ensure service delivery to citizens” and contributing towards Pillar No.2
to: “Support private sector-led growth that increases employment opportunities.”



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      INTEGRATED CITIES AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (P150991)



               The project also aligned with the MENA strategy (October 2015), addressing public sector assistance to
               better respond to the needs of continuous population growth (under Pillar 1, ‘Renewing the social contract’).
               Additionally, it helped with advancing the latest Country Assistance Strategy (FY22-25) by specifically
               helping underpin a “Pathway to a well-connected Palestine” (Filter 3) and, more generally, building
               to “strengthening institutions’ accountability and transparency (Objective 1.1), “connecting the Palestinian
               economy to regional and global economies” (Objective 2.2), and improving infrastructure investment
               (Objective 2.3).

               Alignment with Country Priorities:

               Local government capacity building, alongside improving governance and policy-making capacity at the
               center (Palestine Authority Ministries), has been a consistent central plank for support and investment over
               the past decade. Efforts are ongoing in a fragile context. In the quest for “effective public institutions and
               fiscal stability”, the PA’s National Development Plan (NDP, 2014-2016) was to “enable LGUs [Local Govt
               Units] across the governorates to deliver better public services” and “build sustainable, equitable
               Palestinian infrastructure which contributes to promoting economic development.”

               Encompassing the five leading socio-economic urban areas – namely Gaza City in the Gaza Strip and four
               urban agglomerations in the West Bank: Nablus urban area, Hebron urban area, Bethlehem urban area,
               and Ramallah-Al Bireh urban areas – the strategic importance is tied to population concentration
               (approximately 30% of people or 1.45 million in 16 municipalities, 14 village councils, and 8 refugees
               camps), and the centrality of these areas for sustainable future growth.

               Level of PDO ambition:

               The PDO of “enhancing the capacity of participating urban areas to plan for sustainable urban growth” was
               broadly phrased. However, the focus was on delivering technical urban planning products and
               strengthening coordination capacity. “To enhance capacity for planning” does not extend far into
               understanding what development results were expected as a long-term consequence of the project.
               However, given the fragile and unstable political context, acknowledging the need to build capacity and
               strong institutions before focusing higher up in the results chain meant the level of PDO was pitched at an
               adequate level.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To enhance the capacity of participating urban areas to plan for sustainable urban growth.


                                                                                                                            Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   INTEGRATED CITIES AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (P150991)




Rationale
Theory of Change:

The project offered a retrospective Theory of Change (ToC) in the ICR, given one was not required at
appraisal. The PDO was to enhance the capacity of participating urban areas to plan for sustainable urban
growth. The ICR notes that sustainable urban growth was defined through the baseline work, namely the
Urban Growth Scenario that set the context for ‘sustainability’ with reference to strategic alignment in national
policy to the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The main development challenges
identified were: (i) lack of joint working and intra-urban area coordination among LGUs; (ii) lack of
coordination between land use planning and infrastructure planning; (iii) unregulated and informal urban
growth; (iv) weak institutional and technical capacity at LGUs; and (v) insufficient supply of serviced land. The
activities /outputs of formal training; collaborative working with national, sub-national, and international
partners; development of online UGS or urban planning tool allowing different policy levers and urban
interventions to be modeled against scenarios; production of joint plans that coordinated infrastructure and
land use planning; and pilots' design, planning, and delivery were to contribute towards enhanced institutional
capacity for evidence-based planning and informed decision-making. In the long term, with improved
capacity, the LGUs would be expected to efficiently and effectively deliver their mandates as land use
regulators and service providers and improve living conditions in urban areas. The assumptions for the TOC
include 1. fiscal and technical understanding at the LGU level for capital and infrastructure development to
enable private sector investment; 2. LGUs will be engaged and active partners in the activities conducted in
the urban areas; 3. a pipeline of future funding is available for infrastructure and development projects; A4.
Voluntary cooperation can be maintained, and A5. The Government of Israel applies no further import
restrictions. The rationale for the ToC was sound. The outcomes are causally linked to the project’s activities
and described outputs.

Outputs:

      5 costed growth scenarios for urban areas developed and disclosed (meeting the target of 5).
      5 urban areas with baseline assessments completed (achieving the target of 5)
      4 intra-area coordination mechanisms for the project's life (meeting a target of 4).
      4 urban pilot interventions informed by urban growth scenarios (below the target of 5). The urban
       planning interventions implemented that were informed by the results of urban growth scenarios
       included the (i) design and placemaking activities for a city center park in Gaza City to improve public
       green space availability; (ii) development of a network of 'complete streets' with light-junction
       management and street redevelopment to improve access and safety by a pedestrian, and traffic flow
       in the Hebron Urban Area; (iii) a series of bus stops across the urban area to improve mobility and
       public safety in the Nablus Urban Area; and (iv) Solar Photovoltaic Systems Pilot Project in 30 LGUs
       to develop solar energy usage at the LGU level, and in turn, improve energy efficiency and
       climate mitigation as identified from the recommendations and findings of the UGS. With respect to
       the fifth pilot, which was not implemented, the ICR notes that while the designs for developing a
       network of 'pedestrian-friendly streets’ were prepared and delivered for the Ramallah-Al Bireh Urban
       area, the urban area decided not to take the pilot forward due to the relatively small size of the
       budget.
      1,420 person-days of training in urban development and planning-related subjects, achieving the
       target of 1,400 person days.



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   INTEGRATED CITIES AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (P150991)



Outcomes:

      16 plans were developed that were informed by the results of the urban growth scenarios (exceeding
       the target of 10). These included (i) Transportation Assessment for Nablus, (ii) Transportation
       Assessment for Hebron, (iii) Traffic Assessment for Surda-Abu Qash, (iv) Public Transportation Plan
       for Ramallah-Al Bireh Urban Area, (v) Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA)
       Ramallah-Al Bireh Urban Area; (vi) SESA-Nablus Urban Area; (vii) SESA-Bethlehem Urban Area; (viii)
       SESA-Hebron Urban Area; (ix) SESA-Gaza City; (x); (x- xiii ) area-based Joint Strategic Spatial And
       Investment Plans for Nablus Urban Area, Ramallah-Al Bireh Urban Area, Hebron Urban Area, and
       Bethlehem Urban Area respectively; (xiv) Gaza City Development Plan; (xv) Gaza City Center
       Development Plan; and (xvi) Bethlehem Tourism and Visitor Economy Development Plan.

      Direct Project Beneficiaries – 367,243 people achieved, exceeding the revised target of 353,506
       (representing the increasing population of the five targeted LGU areas).

      Female Beneficiaries – 40% of trainees were female, exceeding the target of 30% of female
       beneficiaries of training delivered.

      Indirect Beneficiaries – 1.136M indirect beneficiaries, meeting the identified target of 1.136M
       Palestinian citizens.

The ICR provides evidence of capacity-building contributions to intermediate outcome measures based on
the activities undertaken and the outputs achieved. These include the following:

      The Urban Performance (UP) tool was used to develop and assess the scenarios and forecast each
       urban area’s future performance by analyzing geospatial and numeric data specific to the urban area.
       The direct training on GIS programs helped LGU staff to engage more closely in the subsequent
       development of the Joint Urban Area Spatial Databases. LGUs used the databases and GIS
       information to inform other project activities, such as the Urban growth scenario plans and sectoral
       plans.
      The ICR notes that the production of joint plans that coordinate infrastructure and land use
       planning has directly enhanced the public policy capacity by addressing one of the critical weaknesses
       of the current planning process in the Palestinian territories, namely the lack of coordinated land use
       and infrastructure policies which was identified as a critical issue affecting sustainable urban growth
       planning in previous LG engagements by the Bank.
      The delivery of the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) also enhances ongoing
       public policy capacity to plan for sustainable urban growth by positioning strategic environmental and
       social considerations as a central part of public policy development.
      The Joint Coordination Units developed under the project have contributed towards enhancing the
       public policy capacity to plan for sustainable urban growth by voluntarily developing joint municipal
       planning and metropolitan governance practices, with MoUs signed.

Overall, the project contributed towards capacity enhancement and met its outcomes except for implementing
the Ramallah-Al Bireh Urban Area pilot. The ICR, however, notes that given the novel approaches to planning
introduced by the project, limited LGU resources, and generally weak legal capacity, particularly in planning
enforcement, there is some risk that urban development continues to occur informally outside the official
planning system and that further projects from the sectoral plans are not delivered. With respect to

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                INTEGRATED CITIES AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (P150991)



                            strengthening coordination, the ICR notes that the policy paper, draft by-law and Ministerial note signed
                            aimed to formalize and continue coordination arrangements. The task team informed IEG that the MoUs
                            signed by the participating LGUs and the funding for staff for coordination activities associated with the
                            project activities concluded with the end of the project. The policy paper identified the significant constraints
                            imposed by existing fiscal stress at the municipal level on future coordination mechanisms and explored
                            several potential financing approaches. Also, including small-scale pilot interventions was valuable in
                            demonstrating the benefits of a coordinated planning and investment approach to LGUs. However, their
                            impact was somewhat limited by their relatively small size and their funding entirely from within the project
                            budget. While the evidence of contributing towards meeting the identified challenges (e.g., unregulated and
                            informal urban growth; insufficient supply of serviced land, etc.) will be evident in the long term as per the
                            theory of change, given the capacity enhancements under the project, this may plausibly lead to achieving the
                            desired long-term outcomes. Overall, the project made a significant contribution towards strengthening the
                            capacity for urban planning. However, there is a potential risk to the sustenance of this capacity. Overall,
                            efficacy is rated as Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            As outlined above, the project substantially achieved the PDO. The project contributed towards capacity
                            enhancement and met its outcomes except for implementing the Ramallah-Al Bireh Urban Area pilot. Given
                            the challenging FCV operating context and constrained institutional capacity, the project undertook significant
                            work to contribute towards establishing the urban planning functions. LGUs now have scenarios and analyses
                            upon which further planning, and investment documentation can be developed. The ICR, however, also notes
                            that given the novel approaches to planning introduced by the project, limited LGU resources, and generally
                            weak capacity, particularly in planning enforcement, there is some risk to the sustenance of the capacity and
                            that further projects from the sectoral plans are not delivered. Overall Efficacy is Substantial with moderate
                            shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Efficiency

   No economic analysis was provided for the project. The PAD did note that a quantitative economic and financial
   analysis was not an appropriate tool to assess project benefits since the project did not finance public

                                                                                                                               Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      INTEGRATED CITIES AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (P150991)



investment. The focus on planning capacity to strengthen urban planning and investment activity was
reasonable and what was to be expected in the country's context. The ICR notes that the project contributed
towards enhanced efficiency in investment planning by introducing standard economic and financial analysis,
such as cost-analysis and investment prioritization approaches, into the baseline assessment of growth
scenarios.

Administrative Efficiency

The project experienced delays attributed to bureaucratic coordination issues, COVID-19, and continued
interruptions such as the global supply chain constraints that delayed the project's delivery of key materials and
equipment, leading to the extension of 18 months from the original closing date. The project’s joint LGU
activities required extensive coordination support and communication with the LGUs to facilitate progress. As a
result, the Project Implementation Support and Management Cost increased from the initial estimate of US$0.45
(at 9 percent of the total project budget) to US$1.15 (at 23 percent of the total project budget), which was met
through reallocation from component 1.

Due to the lack of relevant information to assess the efficiency of the project (cost relative to comparable
projects, for example), as well as implementation delays, efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives was rated Substantial, Efficacy was rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings, and
Efficiency was rated Modest given the implementation delays and lack of relevant economic analysis. Hence,
the overall outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                       Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      INTEGRATED CITIES AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (P150991)




7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government Ownership Risk: The government showed high ownership and interest in the project.
However, maintaining and developing continuity of urban planning may slip in relation to other immediate
priorities in the volatile FCV environment.

Financial Risk: There was no explicit indication of resource provision for continuity of the coordinative
capacity developed in the PA central agencies (e.g., the MoLG), the LGUs, or the implementing partner
(MDLF). There was also no explicit indication of budget and strategic prioritization to advance the
development of proposals to reach the long-term outcomes identified.

Technical Risk: The core planning products generated under the project will need to be maintained so they
remain up-to-date and fit for purpose. This includes managing and maintaining online GIS information and
other land-use planning processes as online services for the public. The ICR notes a risk that the voluntary
intra-urban area coordination arrangements under the project will not be maintained or formalized and that
joint intra-urban area coordination will not continue.

Political Risk: The political situation in the West Bank and Gaza remains highly volatile. Regime instability
that constrains the value of the work is a high risk, especially with the recent escalation of the conflict in
Gaza.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  During the preparation stage, the Bank engaged stakeholders to design the project and also took into
  account lessons from previous activities in the region.

  The project and PDO were well informed by sound background analysis and took account of the
  main implementation lessons and key outcome gaps identified from the Bank’s wider programmatic
  engagement in the Palestinian LG sector. There was adequate readiness for implementation. MDLF (the
  implementing agency), with MoLG’s technical lead, had gained strong experience in fulfilling fiduciary and
  safeguard responsibilities for Bank projects.

  A risk assessment was conducted, and it identified ‘significant risks’, including critical government
  ownership and political risks inherent in introducing a planning regime in fragile circumstances requiring
  further institutional support and ongoing capacity building. While many risks were beyond the control of
  the project, mitigation measures were embedded in the project design including high-level dialogue with
  national agencies, structural governance support, capacity building and technical guidance, and project
  oversight which proved largely adequate.

  The quality-at-entry is rated Satisfactory.




                                                                                                     Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     INTEGRATED CITIES AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (P150991)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The quality of supervision was adequate, with a strong focus on development impact. Key staff sensitively
 handled building capacity in a fragile and unique environment, further challenged by COVID-19 restrictions.
 This required both proactivity to initiate engagement and astuteness to respond to emergent
 opportunities. This was in-part achieved by the TTL and supported through semiannual supervision
 missions (12 ISRs were undertaken over five years of project implementation). A Midterm Review (MTR)
 was conducted (January 2019). Supervision also guided a useful project re-focusing where outputs and
 key indicators were more comprehensively specified with restructuring.

 TTL continuity enabled relationship development and assisted supervision quality in an FCV context.
 Improvements occurred through the project lifecycle, including recognizing opportunities for ‘demand-
 driven’ training and development to improve LGU understanding and involvement in small-scale pilot
 opportunities on the ground (solar panel demonstration initiatives that provided coordination learning
 experiences for the LGUs). A number of minor issues around indicators and targets were identified in the
 MTR and addressed in a timely and collaborative manner during the first restructuring. Regular
 procurement and FM reviews took place throughout the project's lifetime.

 The quality of supervision is rated as Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PDO was at an acceptable level for the context, albeit at a relatively less outcome-oriented in the
 results chain. Relevant indicators to monitor progress towards the achievement of technical planning and
 coordination outputs were identified in the Results Framework. Some of the indicators in the RF were
 identified as outcome indicators while they were measuring outputs. The project provided anecdotal
 evidence regarding the capacity-building activities informing urban planning and decision-making. Some of
 the indicators required further specification, which was done at the MTR.




                                                                                                 Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     INTEGRATED CITIES AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (P150991)



b. M&E Implementation
  Project M&E built on processes and capacities previously developed at the MDLF relating to Bank
  projects. While the MDLF was positioned as responsible for M&E, the MoLG provided detailed technical
  reporting for activity-level oversight. Reporting was systematic, and project reports were prepared in a
  timely manner and shared regularly. With the MDLF’s role in supporting local government development in
  the PA jurisdiction, there is the potential that M&E functions and processes may be sustained after
  project closure.



c. M&E Utilization
  The data collected was fit-for-purpose to help inform project management level decision making and met
  associated performance reporting requirements. Having the Local Coordinators embedded in the LGUs
  also assisted the utility of this level of information in LGU capacity building in project development and
  delivery. Beyond noting formal reporting requirements (a published summary and content in annual
  reports for example), no information regarding how and to what degree M&E data was communicated to
  stakeholders was provided in the ICR.

  Overall, the M&E quality is rated as substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated as a category B and triggered safeguard policies: OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental
   Assessment), Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Strategic Environment and
   Social Assessment (SESA).

   Environmental:

   The project triggered OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) due to the scope of work like technical
   assistance, studies, training, and land use mapping. The ICR deemed this project to be in compliance with
   this policy. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared, approved, and
   disclosed at appraisal. It was monitored and updated throughout implementation, including amendments
   made to disclose the pilot activities and minor works undertaken (e.g., urban park placemaking, a bus stop
   upgrade, and solar panel projects). Environmental safeguards performance was rated Satisfactory
   throughout the project.

   Social:

   The project undertook the Strategic Environment and Social Assessment (SESA). The project contained
   screening instruments that were used by MDLF to assess impacts, identify potential downstream social
   risks, and guide the preparation of safeguards-specific actions in parallel to technical planning activities. As

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     INTEGRATED CITIES AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (P150991)



   the studies of urban space covered public and private land, care was taken to ensure the Bank’s Policy on
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) did not apply (no land acquisition was financed), and that there was “no
   involuntary resettlement and/or displacement due to land taking, and/or impacts on livelihoods due to
   restrictions on land use.” Social safeguards performance was rated as Satisfactory throughout, with the
   overall safeguards performance rated as satisfactory at closure.

   Overall, as the implementing agency, the MDLF has gained strong experience in fulfilling fiduciary and
   safeguard responsibilities for Bank projects. MDLF was responsible for safeguards, FM requirements, and
   compliance, and consistently discharged its duties for environmental and social safeguards.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement:

   Procurement activities were carried out in accordance with the WB Procurement Guidelines. The overall
   responsibility for project procurement rested with MDLF to manage the day-to-day project implementation
   and to ensure adherence to fiduciary policies. Procurement plans were prepared and updated regularly by
   MDLF and were cleared by the Bank. Six ex-post procurement reviews were conducted by the Bank. No
   indication of possible governance issues and noncompliance was observed. Procurement performance
   was rated Satisfactory throughout implementation.

   Financial Management (FM):

   Financial Management performance was rated Satisfactory throughout the life of the Project. An external
   auditor was appointed based on terms of reference acceptable to the Bank. The ICR (para 101) notes that
   'all audit reports received for the project had unmodified, clean opinions with a nil management letter'. The
   Bank submitted and accepted the final audit period covering the year ending December 31, 2022 on 16
   May 2023, with an unmodified audit report and a nil management letter.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 Moderate shortcomings in
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory    achievement of objectives, and
                                                                                 modest Efficiency


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     INTEGRATED CITIES AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (P150991)



Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Some of the key lessons highlighted in the ICR include the following:

Joint intra-urban spatial and capital infrastructure planning can contribute to sustainable
urban growth planning and help strengthen municipal roles and accountabilities.

In the Palestinian context, intra-urban coordination was an effective instrument to plan across LGU
boundaries to achieve sustainable urban area scale land use planning, as well as coordinated
infrastructure provision and basic service coverage. It demonstrated the strategic benefits of
coordinated planning at the urban area scale. This supported addressing both land use and zoning,
alongside the detailed consideration of infrastructure development and services provision, to support
programming future investments. With implications for LGU’s role and budgets, this work also help
aid local transparency through, for example, this disclosure of baseline reports conducted. This
further helped to strengthen municipal accountability, enhancing the link between communities and
local government.

Taking a flexible and responsive ‘demand-driven’ approach to capacity development
may provide beneficial flexibility in an FCV context.

The ability to provide flexible training and capacity building activities in response to emerging
demands and a changing context (such as the near blockade and conflict in Gaza as well as the
outbreak of COVID-19), enabled opportunities and challenges to be addressed swiftly to support
municipalities. Frontloading capacity building and training at the beginning of planned activities
enabled municipal staff to better engage with the project activities. It also provided flexible forward-
looking support to municipalities aimed at service-continuity and resilience over the long-term.

If political engagement and senior governmental commitment to capacity building is not
forthcoming, learning may not be absorbed to embed value.

Achieving greater local government level policy and planning consistency, coordination and
connectivity in a fragile environment – facing the challenges of geographic separation, movement
restrictions and conflict with neighboring areas – is a difficult undertaking. Capacity building
initiatives that generate new co-ordination potential where little previously existed, require strong
governance commitment to ensure the uptake of opportunities for ongoing development. A staged
long-run approach is necessary to achieve results beyond a relatively short-term technical capacity
grant. Technically focused, planning-oriented work remains one element to drive coordination and
shared outcome building initiatives.

Demonstrating the benefits of coordinated intra-urban planning and joint investment through
small-scale pilot projects may assist in building long-term benefits.


                                                                                                      Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       INTEGRATED CITIES AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (P150991)



Creating a “big” constructive vision while doing “small” tangible interventions to get results and build
capacity and political capital “on the ground”, can help to accelerate engagement, joint LGU
commitments and momentum for positive progress. The approach to urban planning introduced for
the first time in the Palestinian territories was a long-term goal of MoLG and required significant
changes to existing working arrangements at a municipal and ministerial level. This presented
several challenges and necessitated significant political leadership and required a shared sense of
ownership and buy-in to be developed during project implementation. However, future large-scale
vision and investment will be required to prove the long-term benefits of coordinated joint planning.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Overall, the ICR provided a comprehensive overview of the project. The ICR was consistent with OPCS
guidelines. The activities and results described provided a detailed and candid explanation of what was
achieved. The ICR was internally consistent and supported a coherent narrative in relation to the project’s
development objective and the key factors influencing the results achieved. The lessons learned were based on
the project's experience and were useful for the region and projects in a similar context.

Overall, the ICR quality is rated as Substantial.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 15
