     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Promoting Sustainable CBNRM and Institutional Development (P144269)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023716

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P144269                                     Promoting Sustainable CBNRM and Institutional Development

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Indonesia                                   Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A2104,TF-A2858                           31-Dec-2021                                          21,821,047.01

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 27-May-2016                                 31-Dec-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            22,420,000.00                                    22,420,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             22,212,091.75                                    21,821,047.01

 Actual                                         21,821,047.01                                    21,821,047.01




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Nina Rinnerberger           Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was “to strengthen institutional and local capacity for
   decentralized forest management and generate improved forest-based livelihoods in targeted
   areas”. (As stated in the Grant Agreements of July, 2016 (p. 5) and of August 2016 (p. 5). The PDO
   formulation in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page iii) was identical.

   For the assessment in this ICRR, the objective will be parsed into the following two objectives:


                                                                                                      Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Promoting Sustainable CBNRM and Institutional Development (P144269)



   (1) to strengthen institutional and local capacity for decentralized forest management and

   (2) to generate improved forest-based livelihoods in targeted areas.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1. Strengthening Legislation, Policy, and Institutional Capacity in Decentralized Forest
   Management

   At appraisal: US$1.34 million; At closing: US$0.39 million (29% of appraisal amount)

   This component provided grant financing to address existing institutional and policy constraints by
   (i) augmenting the subnational ownership and commitment to the Forest Management Unit (FMU) program,
   (ii) assisting with drafting revisions and amendments of forest sector regulations and Standard Operating
   Procedures (SOP) to clarify roles and functions, implementation requirements, and means to achieve
   sustainable financing, and (iii) building institutional partnerships and capacity among 9 key government
   entities. The implementation of this component was built on existing efforts to harmonize regulations and
   the work of the FMU National Secretariat (SEKNAS) to increase support for operationalizing FMUs.

   Component 2. Developing the Knowledge Platform

   At appraisal: US$3.04 million; At closing: US$3.91 million (128% of appraisal amount)

   This component financed the establishment of an effective modern knowledge platform that facilitates
   information and data sharing, access and use of user friendly outputs, and knowledge exchange among
   practitioners. This included setting up a Knowledge Management and Information System accessible to
   national and subnational (provincial and district) government and non-government stakeholders, FMUs and
   local communities. Capacity-building and knowledge exchange, which involved developing training modules
   and clinics was also supported.

   Component 3. Improving Forest Management Practices

   At appraisal: US$13.97 million; At closing: US$11.76 million (84% of appraisal amount)

   This component provided technical assistance and small scale investments to advance operationalization of
   up to 10 FMUs and empower communities within the same FMUs by supporting sustainable utilization of
   forest products (timber and non-timber). The specific level of assistance for each FMU was determined
   through a needs assessment and provided through consultancies. The menu of community activities ranged

                                                                                                  Page 2 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Promoting Sustainable CBNRM and Institutional Development (P144269)



  from support for processes to support for sustainable management and utilization of forest
  resources. Capacity building for select FMUs to become knowledge exchange centers (for “training of
  trainers” and learning from practice) was also supported.

  Component 4. Project Management, Monitoring and Reporting and Program Coordination

  At appraisal: US$4.07 million; At closing: US$5.76 million (142% of appraisal amount)

  This component financed project management and oversight, and implementation of the project monitoring
  and reporting system, including measuring progress on the overall FIP program’s carbon benefit target. It
  also covered financial management, procurement, project coordination, and equipment and supplies, as
  well as some of the costs associated with the FIP Program Coordination Unit, responsible for coordination
  among the FIP financed projects. The lead implementing agency was the Directorate General of
  Forestry Planning and Environmental Management within the Ministry of Environment and Forestry.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost

  The total project cost estimated at appraisal was US$22.42 million (PAD, Data Sheet). The actual
  disbursement at the end of the project was US$21.82 million (ICR, page 2). The difference is due to an
  unspent balance ($0.21 million) returned to the Single-Donor Trust Fund and under-disbursement of the FIP
  grant.

  Financing

  The sources of financing were as follows (ICR, p 2 and 12):

  FIP, Strategic Climate Fund Grant: US$17.35 million at appraisal. The actual amount disbursed at project
  closing was US$16.96 million.

  Single-Donor Trust Fund (Denmark: Danish International Development Assistance, DANIDA) Grant:
  US$5.07 million at appraisal. The actual amount disbursed at project closing was US$4.86 million.

  Borrower Contribution

  None

  Dates

  The project was approved by the Board of Directors on May 27, 2016 and the FIP and DANIDA Grant
  Agreements were signed on July 21, 2016 and August 5, 2016, respectively. The project became effective
  on October, 3, 2016 and underwent a mid-term review in February/March 2020.

  The project went through two Level 2 restructurings, which included extensions of closing dates. The
  original closing date was moved from December 31, 2021 to December 31, 2022. The project objective
  remained unchanged.


                                                                                                 Page 3 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Promoting Sustainable CBNRM and Institutional Development (P144269)



   Restructuring 1 (December 2018): The closing date of the DANIDA Grant Agreement was extended by six
   months from December 31, 2018 to June 30, 2019, following natural disasters (earthquakes and tsunamis)
   in four project sites, which affected project disbursement, to allow for additional time to maximize utilization
   of the Single-Donor Trust Fund resources.

   Restructuring 2 (June 2021): The closing date of the FIP Grant Agreement was extended by 12 months to
   complete remaining activities and meet the Trust Fund indicator targets. The restructuring included
   reallocation of the remaining budget among components and activities; adjustments to the implementation
   arrangements; and revisions to the results framework, including revision of PDO indicators and reduction of
   end targets.

   Split Rating: This review will undertake a split rating, given that some of the project results framework
   indicators and some end targets were reduced during the second restructuring. The amounts disbursed
   before and after the June 2021 restructuring were US$14.11 million (64.6%) and US$7.71 million (35.4%),
   respectively (ICR, p 59).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context: According to the PAD (p 2-5), Indonesia holds the third-largest area of tropical forest
globally, with an estimated 95 million hectares of natural and planted forests or 52% of the land area. The
country's Forest Estate comprised 133 million hectares (or 68.3 percent of the country’s total land
area). Deforestation and forest degradation, however, remained a growing problem threatening the
country’s abundant forest resources. The underlying causes included inconsistent and inadequate spatial
planning; unclear land ownership and land conflicts; and weak governance. The Government of Indonesia
promoted decentralized management of forests and the 1999 Forestry Law established decentralized
Forest Management Units (FMUs) to address these challenges in the Forest Estate. In 2014, the
Government retracted forest management responsibilities/ mandates from the districts to provinces, which
had implications on operationalizing FMUs. Therefore, the complete transition to effective decentralized
forest management, including operationalization of 600 FMUs, remained a challenge. The project
responded to the Government’s need to strengthen the institutional and local capacity for decentralized
forest management by helping to create the enabling policy and institutional environment for change. It also
invested at the community level and supported activities to improve forest-based livelihoods and
participatory approaches, as a way to improve the likely success of decentralized forest management. The
project recognized that its interventions would focus on key areas of support for operationalizing FMUs,
augmenting the available government support.

Relevant Previous Bank Experience: The project drew on lessons learnt from other countries (Brazil,
Mexico, India) and reflected these in the design. It anticipated that other emerging initiatives, such as the
Sustainable Landscapes program, would need to provide additional financial and technical support to help
with implementation (e.g. related to solutions to land conflicts).

Alignment with World Bank Strategy and Country Priorities: At appraisal the project was aligned with
the Country Partnership Strategy for FY2016-2020, which emphasized improved management of, and
benefits from, terrestrial natural assets, under its sustainable landscape management engagement area

                                                                                                       Page 4 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Promoting Sustainable CBNRM and Institutional Development (P144269)



               (PAD, p 6). At completion, the project remained highly relevant to the Country Partnership Framework for
               FY2021-25 Engagement Area IV: Sustain Management of Natural Assets, Natural Resources-Based
               Livelihoods and Disaster Resilience, Objective 4.1: Strengthened management of natural assets and
               environment (CPF, p 34). The project was part of the FIP in Indonesia and is consistent with the high-level
               objective of the Global Forest Investment Program to promote sustainable forest management and
               enhancement of forest carbon stock. It also contributed to Focus Area 1 on Sustainable Forestry of the
               World Bank’s Forest Action Plan FY16-20. The development of FMUs remains a priority in Indonesia’s
               National Medium-Term Development Plan (2020-2024) and the Ministry of Environment and Forestry
               Strategic plan 2020-2024.

               Appropriateness of PDO: The PDO was pitched at an appropriate level with a focus on both strengthening
               the capacity for decentralized forest management as well as to improve the livelihoods of forest-dependent
               communities.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen institutional and local capacity for decentralized forest management

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change

                             The project included activities such as developing and revising requisite regulations, facilitating inter-
                             ministerial dialogue to develop a vision and road map to operationalize local FMUs, technical support to
                             FMUs to move toward operationalization, including preparation and revision of 10-year sustainable forest
                             management plans, development of a Knowledge Management and Information System (KMIS) for informed
                             decision-making by FMUs, establishment of a Forest Information System (FIS, i.e., inventory of forest
                             resources), training and building capacity for government staff, forestry personnel and other key stakeholders
                             (including building capacity to identify solutions to land conflicts), and awareness raising of the benefits of
                             decentralized forest management. These activities were expected to result in outputs such as key regulations
                             drafted for government review, improved coordination among key stakeholders, clear roadmap for
                             operationalization of FMUs, revised sustainable forest management plans for ten FMUs, key standard
                             operating procedures drafted and submitted for government review, a functioning KMIS and FIS, knowledge
                             resource centers, trained government and forestry staff, and improved awareness of the benefits of
                             functioning FMUs.

                             As outcomes, this was expected to help create the enabling policy and institutional environment for
                             operationalization of FMUs, better inter-ministerial coordination and alignment on the approach, reduced

                                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Promoting Sustainable CBNRM and Institutional Development (P144269)



challenges related to operationalization of local FMUs, including enhanced legal status of FMUs to manage
their own finances, and enhanced institutional and local capacity to sustainably manage forest resources
because key knowledge and information is accessible to and used by all relevant stakeholders, thereby
achieving the objective to ‘strengthen institutional and local capacity for decentralized forest management’. In
the long term, this was to contribute to reduced greenhouse gas emissions through sustainable management
of forests.

The causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical and convincing. There were no
obvious logical gaps. The critical assumptions were: (i) a decentralized forest management model is superior
to the existing approach in sustainably managing Indonesia’s forests (ii) operationalization of local Forest
Management Units (FMUs) will strengthen national effort to decentralize forest management in a sustainable
way; (iii) if requisite regulations are developed, then the enabling policy environment for FMUs to operate is
strengthened; (iv) access to harmonized information on forests will lead to more effective decision-making
towards sustainable forest management; and (v) successful operation of participating FMUs will serve as a
model to improve performance of other FMUs (potential for scale-up and replication).

Outputs

      13 government institutions were provided with capacity building to advance their knowledge and skills
         on forest management; against the original target of 6 (original target exceeded).
      4 Knowledge Resource Centers were established and operationalized at targeted national and sub-
         national levels; against the original target of 4 (original target met).
        A publicly accessible Forest Information System was operationalized at the national and sub-national
         level (original target met).
        152,703 online users were accessing knowledge products via the KMIS; against the original target of
         5,000 (original target exceeded).
        44,580 users were accessing knowledge sub-portals associated with the knowledge platform; against
         the original target of 2,000 (original target exceeded).
        10 FMUs achieved full legal status in accordance with the prevailing law; against the original target of
         4 (original target exceeded).
        5 FMUs with Adat (indigenous peoples) representation within their forest boundaries involved Adat as
         community representative in their forest management planning process; against the original target of 5
         (original target met).
        6 FMUs established a conflict resolution mechanism; against the original target of 6 (original target
         met).
        10 standard operating procedures (SOPs) were drafted and submitted for review among concerned
         ministries; against the original target of 10 (original target met).
        3 key regulations were drafted through increased coordination and submitted for government review;
         against the original target of 3 (original target met).
        No FMUs with forest boundaries delineated in spatial plans and submitted to geospatial agency for
         being included in the One Map Policy; against the original target of 50 FMUs (original target not
         achieved).

The ICR reported on the following additional achievements not covered in the Results Framework, and hence
without target values:



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Promoting Sustainable CBNRM and Institutional Development (P144269)




      A coalition of stakeholders was created to consolidate three government forestry regulations based on
         the coalition's recommendations.
        11 comprehensive, sustainable Long-Term Management Plans (of which four were legalized through
         Ministerial Degree) were prepared through participatory processes involving public stakeholder
         consultations, and using up-to-date data and information, including potential environmental and social
         risks.
        A Knowledge Management Information System (KMIS) was developed and operationalized for use by
         the ten supported FMUs, along with the installation of related equipment and infrastructure at the
         national level.
        72 targeted curriculums and 248 modules for FMU training were developed, and virtual classes and
         conferences were conducted at a 'Mini Studio' at the Center for Training and Development.
        629 staff from ten FMUs and 222 additional staff (non-FMU) were trained to effectively perform FMU
         management activities.

The intermediate indicator on 'FMUs with forest boundaries that have been delineated in spatial plans and
submitted to geospatial agency for being included in One Map Policy' (original target of 50) was dropped
during the 2021 restructuring because the associated, underlying activities were implemented and financed
by the State Revenue and Expenditures Budget, rather than the project. According to the Borrower ICR (p.
35), integrating boundary delineations was achieved for 529 FMU areas, including the 50 FMUs intended to
be supported under the project.

Outcomes

The main outcomes realized were:

      10 FMUs were governed by sustainable long-term and annual forest management plans, prepared or
         revised with community participation; against the original target of 8 (original target exceeded).
      79.5% of beneficiaries/stakeholders reported increased satisfaction from the administration of FMUs,
       according to a beneficiary satisfaction survey carried out by the project in 2022; against the original
       target of 70% (original target exceeded).
      75% of FMU human resources staff reported using skills from project coordinated trainings (on
       subjects including forest security, forest navigation techniques, handling illegal activities, etc.) to
       effectively perform FMU management activities, according to post-training assessments carried out by
       the project in 2019 and 2022; against the original target of 60% (original target exceeded).
      122,903 direct project beneficiaries were supported by the project; against the original target of
       113,000 (original target exceeded).
      30.5% female beneficiaries were supported by the project; against the original target of 45% (original
       target not achieved).

A key achievement of the project was the inclusive approach to forest management planning involving Adat
communities living within the FMU forest lands. At project closing, all participating FMUs were governed by
sustainable forest management plans that had been prepared in a participatory manner. Based on a
beneficiary satisfaction survey of 121 respondents in 2022, there is evidence that stakeholders’ satisfaction of
FMU administration increased to nearly 80% for key services performed by FMUs (such as complaint
handling and procedures to obtain forest utilization permits), up from a baseline of 62% satisfaction level in
2018 (Borrower ICR, p. 32-33). Additionally, the indicator targets related to online users of the KMIS and its
sub-portals were far exceeded due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting shift to using online

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Promoting Sustainable CBNRM and Institutional Development (P144269)



platforms and services. Anecdotal evidence suggests that there was limited interest by the Government in
digitizing services at project outset, which was noted by the project team as the reason for setting low, original
targets. Overall, some of the indicators selected for measuring progress towards the objective are closer to
outputs and are, therefore, relatively weak indicators of achievement of the PDO, e.g., the indicators on key
regulations and SOPs only partially speak to outcomes. The ICR would have benefited from presenting
additional information or evidence on the likelihood that the sustainable forest management plans,
regulations, and SOP are being implemented and followed by FMUs.

Given the Government's need to operationalize 600 FMUs across Indonesia's dispersed geography, the
project's support to 10 FMUs, while contributing to the solution in important ways, may not by itself be
sufficient to generate lasting development results at the scale needed to tackle existing challenges in the
country's forest sector. The project outlined several conditions for decentralized forest management to be
successful in the context of Indonesia, not all of which were able to be addressed by the project. However,
the project achieved many important outputs and achievements towards operationalizing participating FMUs
and strengthening their capacity. Despite relatively weak outcome indicators, there is plausible evidence that
the project supported interventions have led to strengthened institutional and local capacity.

This ICR review notes that based on IEG’s CLR Review for Indonesia, dated April 29, 2021, this project
contributed to achievement of Focus Area V of the Country Partnership Strategy on Sustainable Landscape
Management, with one indicator that was considered achieved ‘land supported by forest management units
with improved management effectiveness (hectares)’ (baseline, 2016: 0. Target, 2020: 177,000). Based on
Indonesia’s Ministry of Environment and Forestry, approximately 7.4 million hectares were supported by the
FMUs with improved management effectiveness as of June 2020 (CLR, p.9). The use of a more outcome-
oriented indicator (such as the number of forest fires or total losses from forest fires) would have been more
appropriate.

The efficacy of the project, for objective 1, is rated Substantial based on the evidence presented and given
minor shortcomings in the adequacy of PDO-indicators to fully measure the PDO to strengthen institutional
and local capacity for decentralized forest management.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The objectives were not revised. However, some of the project results framework indicators end targets were
reduced.

Revised Rationale
Outputs

      152,703 online users were accessing knowledge products via KMIS; against the revised target of
       16,000 (revised target exceeded).



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Promoting Sustainable CBNRM and Institutional Development (P144269)




      44,580 users were accessing knowledge sub-portals associated with the knowledge platform; against
       the revised target of 5,500 (revised target exceeded).

Outcomes

      122,903 direct project beneficiaries were supported by the project; against the revised target of 95,000
       (revised target exceeded).
      30.5% female beneficiaries were supported by the project; against the revised target of 30% (revised
       target met).

The original outcome indicators remained the same, including beneficiary/stakeholder satisfaction, staff using
skills from trainings, etc. The efficacy rating for objective 1 is Substantial after restructuring.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To generate improved forest-based livelihoods in targeted areas

Rationale
Theory of Change

The project included activities such as provision of small grants to 95 Forest Farmer Groups in 10 FMUs to
support community-based business development, issuance of social forestry and partnership
schemes, development of superior seedling nurseries and non-timber forest product business opportunities
(e.g., honey, coffee, ecotourism), development of training curriculums and modules, community-based fire
prevention, building capacity for sustainable use of forest resources, including through
community empowerment, online training, workshops and webinars, and delivery of technical assistance,
consulting services, coordination efforts, coaching clinics, and in-house training. These activities were
expected to result in outputs including built capacity of communities to manage forest resources, improved
decision-making processes and entrepreneurial skills, curriculum and modules developed, FMUs with benefit-
sharing mechanism, FMUs with conflict-resolution mechanism, superior seedling nurseries, and non-timber
forest product business opportunities (such as honey, coffee).

As outcomes, the monetary and non-monetary benefits related to improvements concerning income,
employment, entrepreneurship, access to land, access to finance, education, combined with capacity
building, were to lead to strengthened capacity to develop business plans, reduced tenurial conflict and better
management practices, which would result in improved forest-based livelihoods. The small grant mechanism
was considered as a model for community-based business development with the potential for replication and
scale-up nationwide, using Government funding or financing from other development partners. In the long
term, the interventions were to contribute to enhanced economic development in participating rural areas.

The causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were mostly logical, i.e. capacity building
would contribute to non-monetary benefits while small grants would contribute to monetary benefits. However,

                                                                                                 Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Promoting Sustainable CBNRM and Institutional Development (P144269)



the links to outcomes are somewhat tenuous, given the project’s primary focus on technical assistance and
capacity building for institutional change. The ICR presents limited information on which activities were
implemented, and led to which outputs and results that were attributable to the project. The Results
Framework did not monitor the specific activities or intermediate outputs supported (such as number of grants
implemented, nurseries established, communities trained on effective forest fire prevention, businesses
established with positive revenue, etc.), which would have helped provide evidence towards achievement of
the PDO.

The critical assumptions were plausible: (i) directly involving communities in forest management, contributes
to reduced tenurial conflicts, thereby ensuring more sustainable use of forest lands; (ii) active community
participation in sustainable forest management activities is key to success of the decentralized forest
management model; and (iii) providing a menu of interventions for communities to select from will provide
context-specific solutions that address local challenges.

Outputs

      5 FMUs with Adat (indigenous peoples) representation within their forest boundaries involved Adat as
       community representative in their forest management planning process; against the original target of 5
       (original target met).
      6 FMUs developed guidelines for forest farmer groups and Social Forestry permit holders to enter into
       benefit sharing arrangement with business licensees for forest utilization and other business entities;
       against the original target of 6 (original target met).
      6 FMUs established a conflict resolution mechanism; against the original target of 6 (original target
       met).

The ICR (and Borrower ICR, made available to IEG by the World Bank team as part of e-mail
correspondence on October 24, 2023) reported on the following additional achievements not covered in the
Results Framework, and hence without target values:

      Various training curriculums and modules were developed and delivered to FMU staff, Forest Farmer
         Group members, and the local community on topics to improve forest-livelihoods (including, inter alia,
         cultivation techniques for agroforestry, bamboo processing techniques, palm sap processing
         techniques, natural tour guide translator, cultivation of honeybee, increasing the productivity of coffee
         plants).
        Various small grants provided to 95 Forest Farmer Groups within ten participating FMUs, totaling
         24 billion Indonesian Rupiah over 3 years.
        50 partnership agreements were issued between FMUs and communities, which served as a
         precondition for granting social forestry permits to Forest Farmer Groups.
        An interactive Productivity Information System (SiproKUPS) was developed, and integrated with the
         KMIS, to allow Forest Farmer Group administrators to regularly record their economic value of
         production.
        40 villages categorized as “developed” by the end of 2022 (out of 86 villages supported by
         the project), according to a study by Indonesia FIP (against a baseline of one in 2017).
        1 village considered “underdeveloped” in 2022 (out of 86 villages supported by the project), according
         to a study by Indonesia FIP (against a baseline of 12 in 2017). The ICR does not provide any



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Promoting Sustainable CBNRM and Institutional Development (P144269)



         information regarding the meaning or criteria used for the categorization of villages as “developed” or
         “underdeveloped”.

The project Results Framework contained few indicators to directly measure outputs from the activities and
achievement of objective 2 in improving forest-based livelihoods. Rather, the indicator on Adat (indigenous
people) representation can be seen as a precursor to eventual effects on livelihoods by giving voice
to indigenous people in how to manage resources. Similarly, while FMUs with conflict resolution mechanisms
in place may experience reduced land conflict, allowing for improved forest resource management, the ICR
presents limited evidence in that regard. As part of the restructuring in 2021, the project adjusted the indicator
on 'FMUs with benefit sharing mechanism' to focus on the development of guidelines, following issuance of a
new Government regulation and implementation of the Job Creation Law that changed the role of FMUs from
business to governance units. As such, FMUs became facilitators of developing the guidelines for Forest
Farmer Groups to enter into business arrangements with permit holders, which can be viewed as an
important step towards establishing benefit sharing arrangements with local communities. There is little
information in the ICR on the totality of grants provided, although Annex 8 (ICR, p.60) offers some examples
of monetary and non-monetary benefits achieved by different FMUs (see additional details below). While the
Indonesia FIP study offers some insights as to the development improvement of participating villages, these
results are not solely attributable to this project, and the study was not available to IEG.

Outcomes

      10 FMUs were governed by sustainable long-term and annual forest management plans prepared or
         revised with community participation; against the original target of 8 (original target exceeded).
        94,823 project affected people in forest and adjacent communities have increased monetary and non-
         monetary benefits; against the original target of 108,000 (original target not achieved).
        17,034 project affected people in forest and adjacent communities have increased monetary and non-
         monetary benefits – ethnic minority / Masyarakat Adat; against the original target of 10,800
         (original target exceeded).
        34,235 project affected people in forest and adjacent communities have increased monetary and non-
         monetary benefits – number of females; against the original target of 50,450 (original target not
         achieved).
        79.5% of beneficiaries/stakeholders reported increased satisfaction from the administration of FMUs,
         according to a beneficiary satisfaction survey carried out by the project in 2022; against the original
         target of 70% (original target exceeded).
        122,903 direct project beneficiaries were supported by the project; against the original target of
         113,000 (original target exceeded).
        30.5% female beneficiaries were supported by the project; against the original target of 45% (original
         target not achieved).

While the indicator on FMUs governed by improved plans provides evidence that local communities
participated in the planning process, it does not directly speak to the achievement of objective 2. Increased
monetary and non-monetary benefits were measured through the annual Multi-Topic Household Survey of
project beneficiaries that captured socioeconomic and cultural data (ICR, p. 26). However, neither the ICR,
nor the project Results Framework provide any additional information regarding survey results or trends, and
the survey was not available to IEG. As noted above, Annex 8 of the ICR provides details on the types of
community activities (monetary and non-monetary benefits) that can potentially generate family income and
create job opportunities, including inter alia: production of honey, palm sugar, coffee, citronella grass ginger,

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Promoting Sustainable CBNRM and Institutional Development (P144269)



red pepper, bananas, pineapples, oyster mushrooms, as well as production of charcoal and skewer sticks by
various participating FMUs, along with details, for some activities, on production values and revenue
generated. However, there is no baseline data provided, nor any information on the extent of increased
incomes, or the types of targeted benefits that indigenous people and/or women may have
received. According to the Borrower ICR (p. 52), which cites data entered into SiproKUPS, the project’s
community empowerment activities raised the performance and status of some Forest Farmer Groups (along
a performance rating scale of blue / silver / gold / platinum), and generated an economic value of 5.63 billion
(Indonesian Rupiah) per year from production and services of the 95 Forest Farmer Groups’ incomes during
2020-2022. Although these data points provide some evidence of increased benefits, the project could have
more systematically collected evidence to support the measurement of one of the project’s key outcome
indicators. Regarding non-monetary benefits, the indicator on beneficiary satisfaction with FMUs gives some
indication that satisfaction from FMU administration increased (compared to the baseline survey score of
62%), as discussed above. The ICR states that the final beneficiary/stakeholder satisfaction survey
(conducted at 9 FMUs) revealed that the establishment of a publicly accessible Forest Information System
and a Knowledge Resource Center significantly contributed to improving decision-making processes, leading
to better management practices that would result in improved forest-based livelihoods in the target areas.
However, the ICR does not provide any documentation or evidence thereof. Furthermore, the ICR does not
present comprehensive information related to reduction in land conflicts, establishment of nurseries, or fire
prevention measures.

Even though it substantially met the key outcome targets, the efficacy of the project for objective 2 is rated
Modest, based on the limited availability of evidence to measure the achievement of the PDO to generate
improved forest-based livelihoods in targeted areas.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The objectives were not revised. The associated output indicators were not revised. However, some of the
relevant project outcome indicators were revised, including reduction in some end targets.

Revised Rationale
Outcomes

      94,823 project affected people in forest and adjacent communities have increased monetary and non-
       monetary benefits; against the revised target of 90,000 (revised target exceeded).
      17,034 project affected people in forest and adjacent communities have increased monetary and non-
       monetary benefits – ethnic minority / Masyarakat Adat; against the revised target of 15,500 (revised
       target exceeded).
      34,235 project affected people in forest and adjacent communities have increased monetary and non-
       monetary benefits – number of females; against the revised target of 30,000 (revised target
       exceeded).



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 22
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Promoting Sustainable CBNRM and Institutional Development (P144269)




                                    122,903 direct project beneficiaries were supported by the project; against the revised target of 95,000
                                     (revised target exceeded).
                                    30.5% female beneficiaries were supported by the project; against the revised target of 30% (revised
                                     target met).

                              Even though the revised targets of key indicators were exceeded, the extent and degree to which project
                              affected people had experienced monetary and non-monetary benefits is unclear, as discussed under the
                              original objective section. Based on the lack of robust evidence, the efficacy rating of the revised project
                              remains as Modest.



                              Revised Rating
                              Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Based on the discussion of objectives 1 and 2 above, against the original targets, the efficacy for the original
                            project is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings. Even though the project substantially achieved the
                            first objective, the achievement of the second objective regarding improved forest-based livelihood is rated as
                            Modest given the lack of robust evidence.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Based on the discussion of objectives 1 and 2 above, against the revised targets, the efficacy for the revised
                            project is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings. Even though the project substantially achieved the
                            first objective, the achievement of the second objective regarding improved forest-based livelihood is rated as
                            Modest given the lack of robust evidence.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency

                                                                                                                                Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Promoting Sustainable CBNRM and Institutional Development (P144269)



Economic and financial analysis: Cost effectiveness of the project was estimated at appraisal and completion.
Specifically, an illustrative economic and financial analysis was conducted of a well-functioning FMU to calculate
Net Present Value (NPV), Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) and Benefit-Cost-Ratio (BCR) using two
discount rates (5 percent and 10 percent) over a 20 year period. The analysis captured benefit streams from the
sale of timber, various types of non-timber forest products (such as honey, coffee, bamboo, charcoal, etc.),
ecotourism services, and income generation opportunities from the business-related activities and the village-
level livelihoods. At completion, the analysis was based on actual revenue data from 10 FMUs (as the direct
beneficiaries of the project) for the first five years, combined with assumptions about what will happen after
project completion. The economic analysis at a discount rate of 10 percent shows an NPV of US$423 (at
completion) compared to US$206 (at appraisal), with an IRR of 13.65 percent (at completion) compared to 14
percent (at appraisal) and BCR of 3.96 (at completion) compared to 1.16 (at appraisal). The sensitivity analysis
indicates that the economic viability of the project is robust, with all scenarios resulting in a positive NPV, while
IRR and BCR show minor variations. The full results are shown in Table 1.

               Table 1: NPV, IRR, and BCR Results at Appraisal and Closing
Discount Rate           NPV/hectare (US$)   IRR (percent)         BCR
5% (appraisal)          741                 14                    1.40
10% (appraisal)         206                 14                    1.16
5% (closing)            992                 19.06                 6.41
10% (closing)           423                 13.65                 3.96

Carbon Sequestration:

A sensitivity analysis was conducted at appraisal and completion using different unit prices for carbon ($15, $30,
$50), and cost scenarios for the two discount rates. The results showed that the economic viability at the FMU
level is more sensitive to changes in total cost than to the change in carbon price, as illustrated by the change in
NPV and EIRR. The ICR notes that a rapid assessment by the Project Management Unit, comparing carbon
stocks between 2016 and 2020, shows an increase in carbon stock in two FMUs.

In addition, public benefits through carbon sequestration and reduced emissions were estimated at appraisal,
showing a potential contribution to emissions reductions of 1,560 million tons of CO2eq, based on various
assumptions underlying the analysis. The carbon sequestration estimates presented in the ICR remained the
same.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                  14.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable


                                                                                                      Page 14 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Promoting Sustainable CBNRM and Institutional Development (P144269)



                                                                                   0
ICR Estimate                                              13.65
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

On account of high Relevance, substantial Efficacy with moderate shortcomings, and substantial Efficiency, the
project outcome is rated as Moderately Satisfactory both prior to and post-restructuring. The calculation of the
split ratings for the project is shown in Table 2.

                                                       Table 2: Split Ratings Calculation

                                                      Original                    Objectives after
 Rating Dimension
                                                      objectives                  restructuring
 Relevance of Objective                               High
 Efficacy
 Objective 1: Strengthen institutional and local
                                                      Substantial                 Substantial
 capacity for decentralized forest management
 Objective 2: Generate improved forest-based
                                                      Modest                      Modest
 livelihoods in targeted areas
                                                      Substantial with            Substantial with moderate
 Overall Efficacy
                                                      moderate shortcomings       shortcomings
  Efficiency                                          Substantial
  Outcome Rating                                      Moderately Satisfactory     Moderately Satisfactory
  Outcome Rating Value                                4                           4
  Amount Disbursed (US$ million)                      14.11                       7.71
  Disbursement (%)                                    64.6%                       35.4%
  Weight Value                                        2.58                        1.42
  Total                                                 4
  Overall Outcome Rating                              Moderately Satisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
    Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

According to the ICR, the following posed risks to development outcomes:

Financial risk: There is a risk that FMUs may not receive consistent allocation of resources on an annual
basis, and over the long-term, to perform their functions. A government review of revenue sources in the
forestry sector is needed to determine the appropriate proportion of expenditures that should mandatorily be
allocated to the FMUs. This ICR review also notes that given Indonesia's vast forest resources and dispersed
geography, additional technical support and financing, including from other development partners and
donors, is likely needed to fully realize the government's commitment towards decentralized forest

                                                                                                  Page 15 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Promoting Sustainable CBNRM and Institutional Development (P144269)



management and operationalizing all Forest Management Units, and achieving the desired long-term
objectives of effectively reducing deforestation and forest degradation.

Political risk: Continuation of FMUs in each province relies on the support of provincial political leaders and
government commitment. Without a clear fiscal framework established by the government, support to FMUs
as the primary forest landscape management unit may weaken. This ICR review also notes that there is a
risk that partnerships and engagement between government, FMUs, and communities are not sustained,
reversing gains in improved coordination and weakening management of forest resource management.

Governance risk: Based on the new Job Creation Law (of November, 2020), and its broad-based licensing
regime, supervision of forest resources may become more difficult, and FMUs may face the risk of illegal
logging, forest encroachment, and illegal mining. Additional capacity strengthening and delegation of
authority are needed for the FMUs to successfully supervise forest areas and concessions granted under the
new licensing regime to ensure forest license-holders comply with the law.

Further, this ICR review identifies additional risks to development outcomes, including:

Environmental risk: There is a risk that climate change and anticipated impacts on forest resources (e.g.,
increased severity and frequency of forest fires) negatively affect project outcomes to the extent that higher-
level objectives are not achieved and/or sustained despite progress towards improved forest management.

Stakeholder ownership risk: While the project demonstrated some successes in strengthening the capacity
for institutional and local forest management as well as enabling livelihood improvements, the sustainability,
replication and potential scale-up of these efforts is dependent not only on continued government support
and ownership of the agenda, but also commitment by stakeholders, including indigenous communities,
women, and local forest farmer groups.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design reflected lessons from a range of relevant projects (PAD, p 12), inter alia:
  (i) decentralization requires an incremental approach focused on quick gains as well as creating the
  enabling conditions for the reform; (ii) sustainable forestry with community involvement, while providing a
  solid framework for generating ecosystem benefits, requires assistance to and capacity building for
  communities; (iii) generating income and employment can provide incentives for communities to
  sustainably use the resource base. Accordingly, the project built on existing WB experience and put in
  place additional pre-conditions needed for the reform, included investments at the community level, and
  supported community empowerment activities to generate economic well-being from natural assets.
  Selection criteria for the participating FMUs were sound.

  At appraisal, the Bank thoroughly considered key risks to achieving the PDO (the overall risk rating of the
  project was Substantial) and put in place mitigation measures (PAD, p 15-17). However, the institutional
  capacity of the Implementing Agency, including challenges related to the complexity of inter-agency
  coordination, was not fully accurately estimated. Limited expertise in donor-financed projects and lengthy
  approval processes required under the FIP for community-based grants proved more challenging than

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Promoting Sustainable CBNRM and Institutional Development (P144269)



  anticipated. The project design and planned activities may have been overly ambitious based on the
  context (given vast investment needs vis-a-vis limited available grant financing, existing governance and
  institutional challenges in the sector, as well as dispersed geography and cultural diversity within
  Indonesia). Over the first two years, this affected implementation start-up as the project
  faced procurement delays, including in contracting the subnational supporting units (tasked with assisting
  the FMUs in day-to-day management of the project). Coordination challenges amongst Implementing
  Agencies, the executing agency and the Project Management Unit led to concerns by the World Bank
  about fragmentation in the project. The quality at entry is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank proactively supervised the project by carrying out 14 implementation support missions,
 including a Mid-Term-Review (MTR), throughout the project lifetime. These missions assessed progress
 and identified issues requiring management response. Performance reporting through ISRs was candid,
 actionable (where relevant) and of high quality. The ICR notes that experienced Bank staff based in the
 Jakarta office provided continuous support and guidance to the Project Management Unit and the FMUs in
 support of project implementation, including on procurement, FM, M&E, and environmental and social
 safeguards. Overall, the project faced continued delays, lack of high-level senior management oversight
 and guidance by the line Ministry, and changes in the implementing agency as late as 2020. According to
 project documents, the MTR was carried out later than originally planned, in February/March 2020, instead
 of December 2018, due to adjustments to the implementing arrangements, which were undertaken in
 response to moderately unsatisfactory progress of the project. Given the implementation challenges and
 slow disbursement, restructuring could have been used earlier and more pro-actively as a tool for adaptive
 management of the project. The quality of supervision is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 During the project’s appraisal, institutional arrangements were designed to measure progress on the
 indicators that were provided in the Results Framework and on the overall FIP program’s carbon benefit
 target (PAD, p.14). The Project Management Unit was to be in charge of operationalizing the M&E system
 and reporting to the World Bank and FIP Steering Committee on a biannual basis, based on M&E inputs
 from each of the FMU’s supporting units. The principal data sources of the M&E system were to include the

                                                                                                  Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Promoting Sustainable CBNRM and Institutional Development (P144269)



 annual household survey for measuring monetary and non-monetary impacts on beneficiaries, a perception
 survey targeted at stakeholders who received training from the project, and remote sensing technology to
 analyze land use change within the targeted FMUs, as well as annual progress reports, and structured
 stakeholder interviews.

 While the last part of the PDO was pitched at a level that adequately reflects outcomes (aiming to improve
 the livelihoods of beneficiaries), the Results Framework did not monitor the specific activities or
 intermediate outputs that were to contribute to improved forest-based livelihoods in targeted areas, and
 activities related to the implementation of the small grants in the 95 forest farmer groups were not
 monitored.



b. M&E Implementation
  Due to delays and limited capacity at project outset, M&E did not initially receive the attention it required.
  Implementation support missions focused on procurement, FM, and coordination challenges between
  project implementing agencies. Nevertheless, the ICR notes that M&E was conducted twice a year during
  the preparation of the biannual reports. Setting up the supporting units for each FMU, which were to
  provide a pivotal role in the M&E system and data collection, took time. The MTR identified the need for
  changes to some of the project indicator targets (as described elsewhere in this ICRR), which were
  revised as part of the June 2021 restructuring. However, the MTR was conducted relatively late and
  efforts to improve M&E could have been more prompt. Other reports that monitored implementation,
  including financial data was monitored monthly.



c. M&E Utilization
  Progress was tracked based on the Results Framework and all indicators were routinely updated and
  reported in the ISRs to the extent possible given initial delays in implementation. According to the ICR,
  the project used M&E data effectively to guide implementation and support informed decision-making.
  However, based on the MTR findings, the M&E system was not properly implemented as the project did
  not have a dedicated person responsible for the project monitoring and evaluation, nor did the project
  have an effective project management information system in place. Establishment of the GRM lagged
  behind, (see Safeguards section of this ICRR).

  Overall, M&E quality is rated Modest. However, these shortcomings overall did not hinder the project in
  gathering sufficient M&E data for the Substantial rating of three of the four objectives.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


                                                                                                     Page 18 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Promoting Sustainable CBNRM and Institutional Development (P144269)



  The project triggered Bank OP/BP 4.01: Environmental Assessment and was assessed as Category B
  (partial assessment). The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), approved by the
  Bank in 2015, consisted of several sub-frameworks to guide project implementation, including guidance
  to develop the Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan (including social aspects), the Community
  Participation Framework (which included the requirements for the Indigenous Peoples Plan), the Land
  Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework, and the Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM). The ICR
  lacks information on the specific Safeguard policies triggered or the approval dates for key safeguard
  documents. It does note that Safeguard performance was rated Moderately Unsatisfactory in December
  2019 due to poor safeguard implementation. During the COVID-19 pandemic, virtual coordination proved to
  be an effective strategy. Evidence of a fully functioning Grievance Redress Mechanism was available at
  project closing. According to the ICR, the project had no occupational, health, or safety incidents or
  fatalities. The ICR does not comment on compliance.

  Based on available Implementation and Status Reports (ISRs), the project's overall Safeguards rating was
  Moderately Satisfactory or Moderately Unsatisfactory during much of project implementation (from
  December 2018 until April 2022, when the rating was upgraded to Satisfactory, following project
  restructuring in June 2021). The rating was Satisfactory at project closing. The project GRM was first
  recorded as being in place and accessible to project-affected people in December 2021 (ISR#12).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement

  The project experienced delays in processing procurement activities at the early stages of project
  implementation, and continued slow disbursement rates (16% of grant funding was disbursed by
  December 2018, more than two years after project effectiveness; with only 54% of funding disbursed by
  June 2020). According to the ICR, significant weaknesses and risks in the Project Management Unit's
  existing capacity were identified at appraisal. Qualified procurement officers were hired and provided with
  training on the Bank's procurement guidelines and Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement
  (STEP) system. Procurement activities were generally carried out in accordance with the Bank's
  Procurement and Consultant Guidelines, although there were some gaps in procurement planning and
  processing, as well as regular monitoring of procurement management, including that some information
  was not properly recorded in the STEP system. The procurement was rated as Moderately Satisfactory at
  project closing.

  Financial Management

  The ICR states that the project's FM system was generally adequate, with a Moderately Satisfactory rating.
  Audit reports were timely and provided a clean opinion on the project's annual financial situation. The FM
  team promptly addressed findings, including refunding ineligible expenditures. Delays in budget availability
  were resolved through improved coordination among agencies. Interim Financial Reports were frequently
  delayed but improved with close supervision from the Bank’s FM specialist. The ICR does not specify
  whether a final project audit took place and what the findings were. The FM was rated as Satisfactory at
  project closing.



                                                                                                 Page 19 of 22
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Promoting Sustainable CBNRM and Institutional Development (P144269)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR does not present unintended impacts (positive or negative).



d. Other
   --



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  On account of high Relevance,
                                                                                  substantial Efficacy with
                                                                                  moderate shortcomings, and
Outcome                           Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                  substantial Efficiency, the project
                                                                                  outcome is rated as Moderately
                                                                                  Satisfactory.
                                  Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory   ---
                                  Satisfactory
                                                                                  On account of shortcomings in
                                                                                  M&E design, implementation,
Quality of M&E                    Substantial           Modest
                                                                                  and utilization, the Quality of
                                                                                  M&E is rated Modest.
Quality of ICR                    ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

The ICR draws lessons and provides several recommendations (p. 30-31) related to project design,
procurement, financing, local champions, project implementation, monitoring, and environmental
safeguards.

Based on this review, IEG draws the following overarching lessons:

If institutional arrangements are too complex, there is a risk that project performance is
adversely affected. The project did not fully account for ambiguous relationships between central
and local governments, the limited capability of project staff, and readiness for implementation. The
inability to effectively coordinate across implementing agencies and establish essential support
systems (notably supporting units for the FMUs) during the initial project phase, negatively impacted
activity implementation of the FMUs, particularly activities under the community empowerment
component. Contributing to the project challenges and initial low disbursement were a lack of clarity
around roles and responsibilities.



                                                                                                     Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Promoting Sustainable CBNRM and Institutional Development (P144269)



If local champions are empowered to engage with communities and facilitate activities to
improve forest-based livelihoods, this may create buy-in and commitment for sustainably
managing forest resources. Local champions proved pivotal to the success of the small grants
program benefitting forest farmer groups. The skills, adaptability, and approach of interpreting
community needs and addressing emerging challenges were critical for achieving project objectives.
Emerging women local champions that were supported by the project encouraged other women to
actively participate in the establishment of community-based forestry businesses, and to take a key
role in the forest management activities.

If long-term government commitment and high-level support are in place, this may increase
the potential for positive change towards sustainably managing forest resources. The
Indonesian government faced significant challenges in addressing the underlying causes of
deforestation and forest degradation and better managing its forest resources. While the project set
out ambitious goals at appraisal and contributed to enhancing the enabling policy environment and
empowering local communities in some FMUs, early progress towards the PDO was slow given
leadership challenges of the project’s initial Executive Agency. A high-level decision to adjust
implementing arrangements helped the project improve in its later years. In light of this, high-level
government commitment as well as additional technical support and long-term financing are critical
to address underlying challenges of poor forest governance and management and move towards
sustainably managing forest resources in Indonesia.

If a robust theory of change with appropriate outcome indicators is not in place, there is a
risk that progress towards project objectives cannot be adequately measured. In this case,
there were limited outcome indicators for monitoring performance with respect to the objective to
strengthen institutional and local capacity for decentralized forest management and generate
improved forest-based livelihoods (see discussion on Efficacy). Given the short time frame of the
project interventions and the project’s primary focus on technical assistance and capacity building
for institutional change, the links to outcomes were somewhat tenuous.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is concise, well-written, and presents a comprehensive overview of the project experience,
citing credible sources. The narrative supports the theory of change and articulates how the ratings have been
reached. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis. The evidence
and analysis presented, however, could have benefited from additional triangulation to fill in certain gaps,
particularly for objective 2 (e.g., presenting a complete picture of results from the small grants or elaborating on
the findings of the Annual Multi-Topic Household Survey, which was central for measuring monetary and non-
monetary benefits). The ICR could have included a candid discussion of outcome indicators and their adequacy
to measure the PDO. The ICR would have benefited from additional information on the project's Safeguards
aspects and M&E issues.


                                                                                                      Page 21 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Promoting Sustainable CBNRM and Institutional Development (P144269)



Based on these shortcomings, the quality of the ICR is Modest.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                 Page 22 of 22
