     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR RJ Mass Transit II (P111996)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023561

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P111996                                   BR RJ Mass Transit II

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Brazil                                    Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-77190,IBRD-81170                     30-Jun-2014                                         658,762,082.57

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 09-Jul-2009                               30-Dec-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          211,700,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           730,925,577.82                                               0.00

 Actual                                       658,762,082.57                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan         J. W. van Holst              Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to both the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) Loan Agreement (p.6)
   dated September 24, 2009, and the Project Appraisal Document (p.7) dated June 2, 2009, the project
   objectives were “(a) to improve the level-of-service provided to the suburban rail transport users in the RJMR
   in a safe and cost-efficient manner; and (b) to improve the transport management and policy framework in the
   RJMR,” in which RJMR stands for Rio de Janeiro Metropolitan Region.



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR RJ Mass Transit II (P111996)



   According to the IBRD Loan Agreement (for additional financing) dated September 5, 2012 (p.5), the project
   objectives were revised to read as follows: “(a) to improve the level of service provided to suburban rail
   transport users in the RJMR in a safe and cost-efficient manner; (b) to place the suburban rail transport
   system on a lower carbon growth path; and (c) to improve the transport management and policy framework in
   the Borrower's territory and in the RJMR.” The borrower was defined as the State of Rio de Janeiro.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  26-Jan-2012

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project consisted of two components:

   A. Infrastructure Equipment. (Appraisal cost: US$187.30 million excluding contingencies and fees;
   revised cost at additional financing: US$684.00 million excluding contingencies and fees; actual cost:
   US$638.90 million)

   This component was to finance the acquisition of 30 electrical multiple unit (EMU) trains of four cars each
   and accessories for a total of 120 cars to be operated on the lines of the State Company of Transport
   Engineering and Logistics (CENTRAL - Companhia Estadual de Engenharia de Transportes e Logística,
   S.A.) of the State of Rio de Janeiro by the concessionaire (a consortium named SuperVia) under the terms
   of the concessionaire contract.

   B. Institutional and Policy Development. (Appraisal cost: US$4.80 million excluding contingencies and
   fees; revised cost at additional financing: US$34.00 million excluding contingencies and fees; actual cost:
   US$18.56 million)

   This component consisted of two subcomponents:

   B.1. Technical assistance to the Secretariat of Transport of the State of Rio de Janeiro (SETRANS -
   Secretaria de Estado de Transportes do Rio de Janeiro). This subcomponent was to finance the
   following policy development activities: (a) consolidating the urban transport agency of the Rio de Janeiro
   Metropolitan Area (AMTU-RJ - Agência Metropolitana de Transporte Urbano do Estado do Rio de Janeiro);
   (b) updating the current integrated transport policy, land use and air quality management master plan for the
   Rio de Janeiro Metropolitan Region (RJMR) to meet both transport and air quality targets and to introduce
   sound cost-recovery, tariff, regulatory and subsidy policies; and (c) supporting the adoption of Integrated



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 26
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BR RJ Mass Transit II (P111996)



Modal Tariffs, which allow users to be charged a single fare for completing a trip using more than one
service or mode within a certain period of time.

B.2. Technical Assistance to CENTRAL. This subcomponent was to provide support to CENTRAL in the
project implementation and supervision including the acquisition and reception of the trains.

Revised Components

At the first restructuring in January 2011, the project scope was expanded to procure four additional trains,
introduce technical upgrades to the trains, rehabilitate and modernize existing metric gauge rolling stock,
and to modernize the head office facilities of the Secretary of Transport (SETRANS) under the first
component.

At the time of additional financing in January 2012, the scope of the first component was expanded to
include the purchase of an additional 60 trains and the design and implementation of a non-motorized
transport and greening demonstration pilot program in selected stations of the suburban rail system. The
scope of the second component was revised to provide technical assistance to SETRANS to conduct
additional studies on policy development as follows (LA for Additional Financing, p.5):

    1. The design of a sustainable transport policy including measures to reduce the carbon growth path of
         transport and improve environmental and social sustainability.
    2. The design and implementation of a strategy for the territory of Rio de Janeiro and the RJMR
         passenger and freight transport system to adapt to the impacts of climate change, environmental
         and social risks and liabilities, and natural disasters.
    3.   The design and implementation of a center to monitor the impact of natural disasters on the
         metropolitan public transport system.
    4.   The design of a strategy to improve the efficiency and to reduce the carbon footprint of the freight
         system and its environmental and social risks and liabilities.
    5.   The feasibility and detailed engineering studies for potential bus rapid transit corridors in the RJMR
         area.
    6.   The design of a transport-related, accident-reduction policy to make the transport system safer.
    7.   The design of an updated strategy for SETRANS to carry out consultations with stakeholders to
         improve its transport reform planning process.
    8.   An evaluation study to assess the social, economic, and environmental impact of the project,
         particularly on carbon emissions.
    9.   Studies to support the implementation of demonstration pilot program under the first component.

At the fifth project restructuring in June 2015, the project scope was expanded to use the loan savings
under the additional financing (following the procurement of 60 trains) for the purchase of 22 additional
trains and 7 new fuel-efficient light rail trains to replace the existing old trains with higher emissions serving
the poorest areas on the SuperVia rail network. Because of capacity limitations or coordination requirement
with other government agencies in implementing the project activities under the second component, it was
decided to prioritize the implementation of the following studies: (a) Evaluation of a pilot for a Transit
Oriented Development (TOD) project; (b) a climate change adaptation strategy for transport systems in the
metropolitan region; (c) a study to design a business model to foster the integration between non-motorized
modes (bicycles) and the railway system; and (d) the first phase of an Intelligent Transportation System



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BR RJ Mass Transit II (P111996)



  project (“CIMU – Centro Integrado de Mobilidade Urbana”) that focuses on generating real time data on
  public transport.

  At the sixth project restructuring in March 2018, the following project activities were cancelled because the
  terms of references were not ready, or the procurement processes had not started: (a) Acquisition of seven
  light rail trains; (b) studies for the renovation of the SETRANS building; (c) contingency for project
  management contract; and (d) other technical consulting services related to rolling stock. The following
  activities were added to the project scope to increase railway safety works: the construction of a 30-km of
  walls, 6 pedestrian overpasses, and 3 automated gates at grade crossings on the Saracuruna Branch.

  At the eighth and last project restructuring in May 2022, fare and intermunicipal bus studies were added to
  the project scope.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project cost was originally estimated at US$221.0 million including physical and price
  contingencies and a front-end fee. At the time of additional financing in September 2012, the estimated
  project cost was revised up to US$821.0 million. The project closed on December 30, 2022 with an actual
  cost of US$658.9 million. Because of the loan savings, the actual project cost was lower than the cost
  estimated at appraisal.

  Financing: At appraisal, the IBRD loan amount was estimated at US$211.7 million, which increased by
  US$600 million at the additional financing. By the project closing in December 2022, the project had fully
  disbursed the original loan, but only US$447.8 million of the additional financing. The difference between
  the total commitment of $811.7m and the total disbursement of $659.5m equals to $152.2m, of which
  $80.65 million was cancelled at the sixth restructuring in 2018, and the remainder was cancelled at project
  closing. All project funds were accounted for at the time the ICR was prepared.

  Borrower’s contribution: At appraisal, the borrower’s (the State of Rio de Janeiro) contribution was
  estimated at US$9.30 million. The borrower’s estimated contribution did not change at the additional
  financing but was cancelled at the fifth restructuring upon the request of the government with the World
  Bank’s agreement. At project closing, the borrower’s actual contribution was US$1.7 million.

  Project Restructurings: The project was restructured eight times including one additional financing.

        First Restructuring (January 19, 2011 – Report No: 57826-BR): To utilize the loan savings of
         around US$47.1 million that occurred after the procurement of the 30 trains, the scope of the first
         component was expanded (see Revised Components above). Two intermediate results indicators
         were introduced to measure the implementation of these new activities: (a) cumulative percent of
         completion of rehabilitation/modernization of metric gauge rolling stock; and (b) cumulative
         completion of SETRANS building rehabilitation.
        Second Restructuring (July 11, 2011 – Report No:63677-BR): The project was restructured to
         reallocate funds between disbursement categories because of loan savings and increases in the
         estimated costs of consultancy services and the rehabilitation of SETRANS building.
        Third Restructuring and Additional Financing (January 26, 2012 – Report No:64281-BR): An
         additional financing of US$600.0 million was approved to finance the new activities added to the
         project scope (see Revised Components above). The additional financing could be accepted by the

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 26
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
BR RJ Mass Transit II (P111996)



       beneficiary because the federal government increased the debt ceiling for the State of Rio de
       Janeiro. The project name was changed from Rio Mass Transit II Project to Upgrading and Greening
       the Rio de Janeiro Urban Rail System Project. A third objective was added to the project objectives
       (see section 2a. Objectives above). To allow time for the completion of the project activities added to
       the project scope, the project closing date was extended by three years from June 30, 2014 to June
       30, 2017. The target values of the indicators were revised up to reflect the increased project scope,
       and a new indicator was added to measure the reduction in greenhouse gas emissions, i.e.,
       reductions of transport-related greenhouse gas emissions in the SuperVia area of influence.
      Fourth Restructuring (December 27, 2013 – Report No:10611): The project was restructured to
       reallocate funds between disbursement categories because of the adjustment of the price of goods
       and change of scope of consultancy services.
      Fifth Restructuring (June 23, 2015 – Report No:14858): To use the loan savings, the project
       scope was expanded to purchase additional trains (see Revised Components above), and project
       funds were allocated accordingly among disbursement categories. The counterpart funding was
       cancelled (see Borrower’s Contribution above).
      Sixth Restructuring (March 23, 2018 – Report No:25635): Prior to this restructuring, the project
       closed on June 30, 2017 because of the delay at the federal government level in approving the
       amendment to the loan agreement to extend the closing date, but the project was reinstated on
       January 31, 2018 through the memo to Latin America Regional Vice President. The project closing
       date of the original loan agreement was extended by 24 months to June 30, 2019, and the closing
       date of the additional financing loan agreement was extended by 30 months to December 31, 2019
       to allow time for the completion of studies under the second component and cover the warranty
       period of the train contracts. Some project activities were cancelled, and railway safety works were
       added to the project scope (see Revised Components above). The undisbursed funds of US$80.65
       million were cancelled. Funds were reallocated about disbursement categories because of the
       changes in the project activities.
      Seventh Restructuring (December 27, 2019 – Report No:39095): The original loan closed on
       June 30, 2019 as fully disbursed. The project was restructured to extend the closing date of the
       additional financing loan agreement by three years from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2022
       to allow time for the completion of the railway safety works (including the construction of walls,
       pedestrian bridges, and automatic gates at railway crossings) and three studies under the second
       component (i.e., socioeconomic impact evaluation, study on climate change, and the CIMU) the
       procurement process of which had not started. This extension would also allow the outstanding
       payment of the five percent retainer toward the train acquisition following the government’s issuance
       of a final acceptance certificate expected by September 2022. A reallocation of unused contingency
       funds and loan savings to other disbursement categories were agreed in principal but could not be
       processed because the Rio state was under a bailout program, and the bailout program council
       needed to assess the impact of the fund reallocation on the finances of the State of Rio de Janeiro.
       The parties agreed to restructure the project for reallocation of funds following the completion of the
       bailout program council’s review.
      Eighth Restructuring (May 31, 2022 – Report No:41459): The project was restructured to
       reallocate unused contingency funds and loan savings to finance the cost of the rail safety activities,
       which were at an advanced stage of procurement. This restructuring added fare and intermunicipal
       bus studies to the project scope. The project development objective level indicator of “travel time
       plus waiting time between selected pairs of stations before and after the trains are delivered” was
       dropped as it was argued that the project did not result in a reduction in travel time because of the
       introduction of operational speed limits to ensure safety. Three new indicators were introduced to


                                                                                                 Page 5 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR RJ Mass Transit II (P111996)



          better capture the project outcomes such as reliability, seat capacity, and increased energy
          efficiency: (a) mean kilometer between failures; (b) available seat kilometers; and (c) energy
          consumption per train-km. The target of the project development outcome level indicator of “number
          of SuperVia stations with parking facilities” was revised down from 20 to 15 because of the
          suspension of the bicycle storage facilities at some stations during the COVID-19 pandemic. The
          targets of three intermediate results indicators were revised down because of decreased ridership
          during the COVID-19 pandemic: (i) trains in peak-hour and off peak hour; (ii) additional demand
          generated from project on SuperVia – passengers per day; and (iii) working ration SuperVia. Two
          intermediate indicators were added to measure the user satisfaction and record the completion of
          studies added to the project at this restructuring.

   Dates: The project was approved on July 9,2009. The IBRD Loan Agreement was signed on September 24,
   2009, and the project became effective on December 3, 2009. The Additional Financing Loan Agreement
   was signed on September 15, 2012. The Mid-Term Review was conducted in June 2015. The original
   project closing date was June 30, 2014 but was extended by eight years and six months. The project closed
   on December 30, 2022. The reasons for project closing date extensions are given in the project
   restructuring entries above.

   Reasons not to undertake a split assessment of the project’s performance: The project objectives
   were revised at the time of the additional financing in January 2012 and the changes were made to the key
   outcome indicators at the eighth project restructuring in May 2022 (seven months before project closing).
   However, this review will not undertake a split assessment of the project performance as the changes
   resulted in an increase in the ambition of the project in line with the increased funding. Furthermore, except
   the reduced target for one indicator (i.e., number of SuperVia stations with bicycle parking facilities) that did
   not affect the assessment of the achievement of the project outcomes and objectives, the targets of other
   indicators were revised up in accordance with the expansion of the project scope. Hence, this review will
   assess the achievement of the revised objectives (consisting of three objectives) based on the achievement
   of the indicators defined at the time of additional financing and those added at the eighth project
   restructuring.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objectives were highly aligned with the World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework Fiscal
Year 2018-2023 (CPF) for Brazil. The project originally sought to address the obstacles to an efficient and
reliable urban mass transportation in a mega metropolitan area (i.e., Rio de Janeiro) serving mainly lower
income families and subsequently decarbonization of transportation through encouraging the use of more
easily accessible and cleaner modes of public transportation (trains rather than buses) and decrease the
use of private vehicles in the medium and long-terms (i.e., modal shift from privately-owned vehicles to
public transportation). In Brazil, transport accounts for about 45 percent of the energy-related greenhouse
gas emissions. The project was to achieve its objectives through the acquisition of electrical multiple unit
trains that would replace old and inefficient trains running on the metropolitan rail system in Rio de Janeiro
and improve the policy framework and institution capacity in sustainably operating and maintaining the rail
system. The project objectives corresponded to “Focus Area 3: Inclusive and Sustainable Development” of


                                                                                                       Page 6 of 26
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BR RJ Mass Transit II (P111996)



               the CPF and supported the achievement of “Objective 3.2: Provide more inclusive and sustainable urban
               services.”

               The project objectives were highly relevant to the regional context in the Rio de Janeiro metropolitan region
               (RJMR). The population of the RJMR is estimated at 14 million people. The sustainable and efficient
               operation of the metro system in the RJMR is critical for the transportation of the people in a city where
               traffic congestions are frequent. This would also contribute to the Brazilian government’s efforts to reduce
               greenhouse gas emissions from transport. Therefore, the project objectives were outcome-oriented and
               appropriately pitched for the development status and capacity in the RJMR, where SETRANS and
               CENTRAL had the capacity to implement complex mass transportation projects. Given the development
               level of the country and the RJMR, the project objectives were achievable.

               At the time of appraisal, the World Bank had already been a long-term development partner of the State of
               Rio de Janeiro in urban transport since mid-1990s starting with the preparation of the Urban Transport
               Development Plan and involvement in the urban rail system’s privatization process under the Rio de
               Janeiro Metropolitan Transport Decentralization Project (P006547). The World Bank continued to support
               the development of urban railroads in the RJMR through other projects, such as the Rio de Janeiro First
               Mass Transit Project (P043421), which introduced an integrated modal tariff to improve the affordability of
               rail commute while renewing the train fleet. The main driver for the World Bank’s continued engagement in
               the urban rail transport development in the RJMR was the benefits lower income communities received
               from access to urban rail lines in the region (ICR, p.7). Therefore, given the World Bank’s long-term
               engagement in urban transport development in the RJMR, the outcomes expected from the project were
               consistent with the progress over time (i.e., increased efficiency and affordability and lower-carbon growth
               path in urban transport) and the project objectives were sufficiently challenging.

               Overall, the relevance of objectives is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the level-of-service provided to the suburban rail transport users in the RJMR in a safe and cost-
                             efficient manner.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change for Objective 1

                             In the original project design, the project inputs—IBRD loan and technical assistance—were to be used to
                             finance the acquisition of trains and accessories, the update of the and the preparation of integrated transport

                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR RJ Mass Transit II (P111996)



policy, land use and air quality management master plan (PDTU) for the RJMR, and the expansion of the
Integrated Modal Tariffs (IMT) on the SuperVia substations. The project’s outputs would be the delivery of 30
trains to replace and expand the train fleet running on the SuperVia’s rail network, the PDTU updated, and
the IMT expanded. The outcomes expected from the delivery of the 30 trains would have been increased
frequency of rail service (both at peak and off-peak times), decreased travel time, less crowded trains, fewer
train failures, and increased availability of seating resulting in an improved level-of-service and increased
ridership (shifting from bus service to rail service). The expansion of the IMT would have been expected to
encourage more passengers to use the rail service as this would allow easier transfer from bus service to rail
service and vice versa. As more passengers would have been expected to shift from bus services to rail
service, this would have resulted in a decrease in the bus service and fewer road accidents. Hence, the
suburban transport would have become safer. Increased ridership and the better management of the rail
service as a result of the updated PDTU would have been expected to generate more revenues for a cost-
effective operation of the rail service. The operation of more efficient trains would also have been expected to
increase the cost-effectiveness of the rail service. However, the original project design did not include
activities to improve the level-crossings and pedestrian crossings on the SuperVia lines and the construction
of safety walls along the certain section of the rail lines that would have contributed to the safer delivery of rail
service. These shortcomings in the theory of change were addressed in various project restructuring through
the addition of relevant project activities to the project scope, such as the improvement of level-crossings and
pedestrian crossings, construction of security walls, and introduction of automated train protection systems.
The improvement in the accessibility, quality, reliability, affordability, and sustainability of urban rail services
would have been expected to contribute to a sustainable urban development in the RJMR in the long run.
Overall, the causal links from project activities and outputs to expected outcomes were direct and valid, and
the achievement of the project objectives could be attributed to the project’s interventions; however, it should
be noted that other factors outside of the control of the project could affect the achievement of the project
outcomes and objectives, such as the financial sustainability of the urban rail system, the ease of commuting
by buses and informal modes of transport (such as subsidized bus fares and easy access), fuel prices,
availability of parking, and security.

Outputs

      Delivery and operation of trains: The project financed the procurement of 30 trains under the
       original loan and 60 trains under the additional financing, as targeted, and an additional 16 trains
       utilizing the loan savings. The total number of trains purchased under the project was 106.
      Rehabilitation of rolling stock: The project financed the rehabilitation of the existing trains that
       continue to be operated, as targeted.
      Number of SuperVia stations with bicycle parking facilities. The project financed the construction
       of bicycle parking facilities at 17 SuperVia stations as targeted increasing the number of stations with
       bicycle facilities to 20. However, SuperVia suspended the services of bicycle storage facilities at five
       stations because of issues with the service operator and low demand during COVID-19 pandemic.
       Currently, 15 stations have bicycle parking facilities, but the evidence is insufficient to assess their
       current level of operation and impact on facilitating passengers’ easier access to the rail stations.
      The project was to finance the construction of road and pedestrian safety works that would improve
       safety at level crossings, but the procurement of these project activities could not be initiated by
       project closing. It was also intended that the project would finance an automated train protection
       system, which would allow higher operational speeds under safe conditions, but this activity was
       dropped from the project scope as it was identified as the contractual responsibility of SuperVia, the


                                                                                                       Page 8 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR RJ Mass Transit II (P111996)



       system operator. As there was no enforcement mechanism under the concession contract, SuperVia
       did not install the automated train protection systems (ICR, p.21).
      The project updated the PDTU and completed the studies for the expansion of the IMT on the
       SuperVia substations as targeted.

Outcomes

The followings indicators are used to assess the achievement of the improvement in the level-of-service:

      Mean kilometers between failures. This indicator was added to the results framework at the last
       project restructuring to better capture the improvement in the reliability of the urban rail service
       because of the new trains acquired under the project. The baseline was 24 km indicating that train
       failures were frequent. The target was to increase this to 500 km, but the achievement at project
       closing was around 150 km, which was significantly lower than the target because of increased
       incidents of copper cable theft after the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and worsening economic
       situation. The data is insufficient to assess what percent of the service disruptions was because of
       train failures and what percent was because of other reasons, such as cable thefts, accidents, or
       human errors.
      Available seat-kilometers. This indicator was added to the results framework at the last project
       restructuring in May 2022 to better capture the improvement in the urban rail travel comfort because of
       the purchase of new trains. The baseline was around 13 million seats, and the target was to increase
       this number to 16.9 million seats. The achievement at around 12.2 million was lower than the
       baseline. The underachievement was mostly because of the COVID-19 pandemic, which led to lower
       demand and decreased number of train services. The gradual resumption of normal train services,
       which was scheduled in March 2022, is postponed because of adverse impact of increased incidents
       of copper cable theft on train services.
      Travel time between selected stations. The operation of new trains on SuperVia lines was expected
       to lower the travel time from certain stations. However, of the five stations selected, travel time
       decreased from only one station (i.e., Belford Roxo) from 73 minutes to 65.5 minutes against the
       original and revised targets of 62 and 68 minutes, respectively. The travel times from the other four
       selected stations increased above the baselines. For example, the travel time from the Campo Grande
       Station increased from 62 minutes to 86.5 minutes. The ICR (p.45) reports that this indicator “ceased
       to be relevant for measuring the project outcome given that operational speeds have been reduced to
       ensure safe operations of the newly acquired trains.” The trains operate at lower speeds because of
       level-crossings without barriers that create a safety risk to car traffic and pedestrians. Additionally, the
       travel time also depends on integrated systems such as signaling and power supply, which were
       outside the project’s intervention. The absence of automated train protection systems also requires a
       safe distance between trains and lower speeds. Overall, the project’s intervention was ineffective in
       reducing the rail travel time.
      Trains in peak-hour (off peak) hour. The increased number of trains was to lead to more frequent
       peak and off-peak hours train service from five stations (same stations selected for the previous
       indicator). Because of the adverse impact and the increased incidents of cable thefts, SuperVia
       reduced the number of train services. Therefore, the project did not achieve its targets for train service
       frequency increase. The frequency of peak hour train service decreased below the baselines in four
       stations, except the Ramal Japeri Station, where it increased from 8 trains to 10. Off-peak hour train
       service frequencies in all five stations either did not change or decreased at project closing compared
       to their baselines.

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR RJ Mass Transit II (P111996)




      Average number passengers per square meter on SuperVia lines at peak hour. This indicator
       captures the project’s impact on improving the level-of-service through increased passenger capacity.
       Before the project, the average number was eight passengers per square meter. The project already
       achieved the target of six passengers per-square-meter in 2019 when the train ridership was not
       affected by the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the achievement was attributable to the
       project’s intervention. At project closing, average number of passengers per square meter was three,
       better than the target of six passengers. However, the ICR (p.40) indicates that the reduction in the
       average number of passengers per square meter at project closing could not be attributed to the
       project’s interventions mostly because of the adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on ridership,
       i.e., decrease in ridership because of COVID-19 restrictions, and the train ridership did not bounce
       back as expected in 2021 and 2022 because of the adverse impact of continued economic crisis,
       interruptions in rail service caused by copper cable thefts, and the continuation of the bus fare
       subsidies introduced by the municipalities during the pandemic.
      Additional demand generated from project on SuperVia - passengers per day. This indicator was
       to measure the increased number of passengers following the improvement in the urban rail service
       shifting to rail service from public buses or informal modes of transport (such as unregulated
       minibuses). The project was expected to create an additional demand of around 70,000 passengers
       per day. In 2016, the achievement was recorded at 118,536 additional passengers. However, as the
       ICR (p.47) reports, the achievement at project closing was zero because of exogenous factors such
       as the economic slowdown in the State of Rio de Janeiro since 2016 and the onset of the COVID-19
       pandemic in March 2020. Furthermore, although the subsidized bus tariffs resulted in a faster
       recovery in bus ridership after the slowing down of the pandemic, the recovery in train ridership was
       negligible as there was no subsidized rail tariff and service interruptions because of copper cable
       thefts. The ICR (p.47) reports that the demand for rail service is expected to bounce back in 2025.

The followings indicators are used to assess the achievement of the safety and cost-effectiveness aspects of
the rail service:

      Energy consumption per train-kilometer (kWh). This indicator was added to the results framework
       at the last project restructuring in May 2022 to capture the improvement in the efficiency of the train
       operation and reduction in the greenhouse gas emissions. The baseline was 3.70 kWh per train
       kilometer. The achievement was 3.20 kWh per train kilometer against the target of 3.30 kWh. With the
       introduction of new trains, the electricity consumption per train kilometer has decreased. As the trains
       operate more efficiently consuming less energy, this would contribute to cost-effectiveness of the rail
       service.
      Working ratio SuperVia. This indicator was defined as the ratio of SuperVia’s operational costs to
       operational revenues, which entirely comes from user tariffs. At appraisal, SuperVia was already able
       to cover its operational costs with its operational revenues as the ratio was 0.75. The target was to
       improve the ratio to 0.70, which was later revised to 1.0 following the decline of ridership (hence, the
       decline in operational revenues) because of the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. The achievement
       at project closing was 0.97. SuperVia is still able to cover its operational costs by its operational
       revenues despite adverse impacts of exogenous factors on its rail service.
      User satisfaction. User satisfaction was first measured following the operation of the first trains
       acquired under the project in 2014, which was 5.7 out of 10. The target was to increase it to 6.7, and
       the achievement was 6.8 in 2020. However, the user satisfaction rate sharply dropped to 5.0 in 2022
       reflecting the adverse impact of exogenous factors on train services (The user satisfaction was


                                                                                                 Page 10 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR RJ Mass Transit II (P111996)



       measured by a single survey in 2022 following the interruption of survey during the COVID-19
       pandemic).



      Percent of passengers per day from households earning less than four minimum salaries.
       There was no baseline for this indicator. The original and revised targets before and after the
       additional financing were to achieve 65 percent and 80 percent, respectively, of passengers per day
       from lower income households (i.e., households earning less than four minimum salaries per month).
       The actual average achievement was 89 percent. However, it is not clear how this indicator captures
       the improvement in rail service as it only provides the share of the passengers from low-income
       households in train ridership. Therefore, this indicator is not considered in assessing the project’s
       efficacy in achieving Objective 1.

The project successfully completed the acquisition of 106 trains by project closing replacing some of the old
trains and increasing the total number of trains operational on SuperVia lines from 161 to 201 (ICR, p.21).
The project achieved most of its targets related to improved service reliability between 2016 and 2020 but fell
short of sustaining these achievements in service accessibility, quality, and reliability because of exogenous
factors such as the economic crisis in 2016, the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, increased incidents of
cable thefts, and competition from other public transportation modes, such as public buses with subsidized
fares. The project contributed to the improvement in the efficiency of the rail service operation through a
decrease in the consumption of electricity in kWh per train kilometer, which should be expected to contribute
to the increased cost-effectiveness of the rail service. The project fell short of improving the safe operation of
the rail service as the related outputs could not be delivered, such as the construction of safety walls,
installation of barriers on level-crossings and pedestrian crossings, and installation of an automated train
protection system. However, according to the ICR rail ridership is expected to bounce back to pre-COVID-19
levels in the next two years, this should result in fewer buses operating in the city indirectly improving safety
on roads.

The project successfully increased the rail service capacity in the RJMR. The purchase of modern trains
improved the travel comfort, and the project achieved some of its outcomes during project implementation.
Although the exogenous factors adversely affected the sustainability of the project outcomes, such as the
economic crisis in 2016 and the COVID-19 in 2020, the rail service frequency and ridership are expected to
bounce back to pre-COVID-19 levels within the next couple of years as the adverse impacts of these
exogenous factors disappear. The increased rail ridership (i.e., increased revenues) and the more energy-
efficient trains should be expected to contribute to cost-effective delivery of rail service. But the project’s
failure to implement the project activities that would have contributed to the delivery of rail service in a safe
manner was a significant shortcoming.

Overall, given that the project’s intervention resulted in a substantial increase in the rail service capacity in the
RJMR and the ridership is expected to bounce back within the next couple of years, the project’s efficacy in
achieving the project objective “to improve the level-of-service provided to the suburban rail transport users in
the RJMR in a safe and cost-effective manner” is rated Substantial, but marginally so because of significant
shortcomings in improving the safe delivery of the rail service.



Rating

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR RJ Mass Transit II (P111996)



Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To place the suburban rail transport system on a lower carbon growth path.

Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 2

The project inputs—IBRD loan and technical assistance—were to be used to finance the acquisition of
electrical trains and accessories, the preparation of institutional and policy studies (such as Urban Transport
Master Plan, Logistics Master Plan, Transit Oriented Development Project, Climate Change Mitigation and
Adaptation Study, Rail System Sustainability Plan, and Fare Policy Reform Assessment), and the
implementation of the Urban Mobility Center. The project’s outputs would be the delivery of electrical trains to
replace and expand the train fleet running on the SuperVia’s rail network, institutional and policy studies
delivered, and the Urban Mobility Center implemented. The expected outcomes from the acquisition of the
new electrical trains were increased ridership as a result of a shift from busses and other informal modes of
transportation to rail transport and lower electricity consumption because of advanced technology used in the
new trains, such as regenerative braking systems. The development of policies and studies would have been
expected to a better urban planning in accordance with the transport-oriented development principles (TOD)
that would encourage train transport and discourage bus transport. These outcomes should result in a
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions because of less electricity consumption of the trains and fewer
busses running on roads in the short-term and because of the better management of the public transport
modes and urban development in accordance with the TOD principles in the medium and long-term placing
the suburban rail system and the metropolitan transport modes on a lower carbon growth path. However, the
sustainability of low carbon growth path would depend on the continuity in urban development based on
green-growth and TOD principles. Overall, the causal links from project activities and outputs to expected
outcomes were direct and valid, and the achievement of the project objective “to place the rail systems on a
low carbon growth path” could be attributed to the project’s interventions.

Outputs

In addition to the acquisition of the 106 train sets (see Outputs under Objective 1 above), the project delivered
the following outputs aimed at reducing the railway’s carbon footprint:

      SuperVia stations with bus-rail fare integration. Before the project, 30 stations on SuperVia lines
       had integrated bus-rail fare systems. The project installed bus-rail integration systems at an additional
       52 stations against the original and revised targets of 10 and 45, respectively.
      Business plan to increase non-motorized accessibility of the poor to train stations. The project
       delivered a business plan for non-motorized access (bicycle) to the train stations. The project also
       financed the installation of bicycle storage facilities at 17 stations, but five of them were not
       operational when the project closed (see Outputs under Objective 1 above).
      Completion of studies in support of the Integrated Modal Tariff (IMT). The project financed the
       preparation of a study on IMT, which allows users to be charged a single fare for using more than one
       service or mode during a trip within a certain period of time.



                                                                                                  Page 12 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR RJ Mass Transit II (P111996)



Outcomes

      Energy consumption per train-kilometer (kWh). This indicator was added at the time of the
       additional financing when the projective objective was revised to include this second objective. As
       discussed in the Outcomes section of Objective 1 above, the new trains (although equipped with air
       conditioning) resulted in a decrease in energy consumption per train-kilometer from 3.70 kWh to 3.20
       kWh against the target of 3.30 kWh.
      Reductions of transport-related greenhouse gas emission in the SuperVia area of influence
       (Ton CO2). The ICR (p.42) reports that the data provided by CENTRAL could not be extrapolated to
       the closing date as it did not capture the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on rail service. Based on a
       World Bank emissions tool for rail projects, the ICR conducted an independent calculation of the
       reduction in greenhouse gas emissions because of the operation of the new trains purchased under
       the project. The calculation resulted in a 17,703 tons of CO2 reduction at project closing against the
       target of 34,000 tons of CO2. The same simulation shows that the target will be met in 2031 in line
       with the expected increase in train ridership.
      Evidence is insufficient to assess the precise impact of the technical assistance outputs listed above
       (i.e., non-motorized accessibility and IMT) on placing the suburban rail transport system on a lower
       carbon growth path. However, according to the literature, such outputs could contribute to the
       decarbonization of transport in the medium and long-term as people shift from using privately-owned
       vehicles to public transport.

As outlined in the theory of change, the project was expected to achieve a reduction in greenhouse gas
emissions through two channels. The first was through increased energy efficiency because of the purchase
of energy efficient electric trains equipped with regenerative braking systems. The second channel of
greenhouse gas emissions reduction was through the modal shift from fossil-fueled modes of transportation
(buses, unregulated minibuses, and, to a lesser extent, private vehicles) to public transportation (urban rail
system). The integration of bus-rail fare system should be expected to encourage more people to use public
transportation as it would be easier to change from bus to rail and vice versa resulting in a reduction in people
using fossil-fueled modes of transportation. Both of these channels should be expected to contribute to the
decarbonization of transport in the medium and long-terms. Although the project fell significantly short of
achieving the target for reduction in greenhouse gas emissions (despite the achievement of the target for
reduction in energy consumption per train kilometer), it can be argued that the greenhouse gas emissions
would have been higher if the project had not been implemented (counterfactual). The implementation of
transport oriented development principles in urban development should be expected to contribute to a lower
carbon growth path, but shifting political support is a risk for a continuous implementation of these principles
in urban development.

Overall, this review concludes that the project was partially successful in reducing the greenhouse gas
emissions at the project’s close, but it is expected the targets should be achieved in future as the adverse
impacts of exogenous factors on ridership disappear and the train ridership increases to its pre-COVID-19
levels. Therefore, the project’s efficacy in achieving the second objective is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                  Page 13 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR RJ Mass Transit II (P111996)




OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve the transport management and policy framework in the borrower’s territory and in the RJMR.

Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 3

The project inputs—IBRD loan and technical assistance—were to be used to finance the preparation of
institutional and policy studies (such as Urban Transport Master Plan, Logistics Master Plan, Transit Oriented
Development Project, Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation Study, Rail System Sustainability Plan, and
Fare Policy Reform Assessment), implementation of the Urban Mobility Center, and delivery of bicycle-rail
integration program. The project’s outputs would be the institutional and policy studies delivered, the Urban
Mobility Center implemented, and bicycle-rail integration completed. The outcomes expected from these
studies and plans were improved integration of rail service with bus service and non-motorized modes of
transport (i.e., bicycles), implementation of the updated master mobility plan, introduction of an intermunicipal
single fare program, urban development based on TOD principles, implementation of the integrated center for
urban mobility, improved sustainability of urban rail system, and implementation of security measure on level
crossings. These outcomes would have led to an improvement in the transport management and policy
framework in the project area. Overall, the causal links from project’s technical activities and outputs to
expected outcomes were direct and valid, and the achievement of Objective 3 could be attributed to the
project’s interventions; however, the changing political support posed a major risk to the achievement of the
project outcomes.

Outputs

The project delivered the following outputs under the technical assistance component as planned:

      Update of the RJMR Mobility Master Plan (PDTU)
      State Logistics and Freight Master Plan (PELC)
      Development and management of the Integrator Bicycles Program (NMT)
      Design studies for the Urban Restructuring around the Queimados Station (TOD Pilot)
      Development and implementation of the Integrated Center for Urban Mobility (CIMU), but the
       equipment delivery is pending.
      Socioeconomic Impact Evaluation of the project

The development of the “Strategic Plan for Climate and Disaster Adaptation for RJMR Mass Transit Systems”
is currently ongoing.

The project could not deliver the following technical assistance outputs during project implementation (ICR,
p.25):

      Suburban Rail System Sustainability Plan. The procurement could not be initiated during project
       implementation. The plan is currently being developed in-house.
      Level crossing diagnostic study. The successful bidder for the contract declined the contract, and
       the procurement was not reinitiated.
      Studies for the reform of the Intermunicipal Single Fare Program. The contract was signed but
       the work did not start.

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR RJ Mass Transit II (P111996)




      Review of the tender documents related to the bidding of Intermunicipal Bus Lines
       Concessions. The selection of an individual consultant was not initiated.

Outcomes

The project identified two indicators for the achievement of the third objective, but these indicators were
insufficient to capture the improvement in the transport management and policy framework in the State of Rio
de Janeiro’s territory and the RJMR.

      Number of SuperVia stations with bicycle parking facilities. The project increased the number of
       SuperVia stations with bicycle parking facilities from 3 to 20, as targeted, but SuperVia suspended the
       operations in five stations because of issues with the service operator and the low demand during the
       COVID-19 pandemic. The installation of bicycle parking facilities was a result of the Integrator Bicycles
       Program developed under the project, but the evidence is insufficient to assess the impact of this
       program on the improvement of transport management in the RJMR as only a small percentage of the
       stations have bicycle parking facilities, and the operation of some the bicycle parking facilities installed
       under the project was already suspended.
      Number of SuperVia stations with bus-rail fare integration. The project financed the installation of
       bus-rail fare integration systems at an additional 52 stations from a baseline of 30 stations against the
       original and revised targets of 10 and 45, respectively. However, the evidence is insufficient to assess
       the impact of the bus-rail fare integration on the improvement of transport management in the RJMR.

The ICR provides the following information as additional evidence for the achievement of the third objective
(ICR, p.24):

      The Urban Transport Master Plan (PDTU) and the Logistics Master Plan (PELC) developed under the
       project increased “the State’s capacity to plan future investments and operations to optimize urban
       transport and statewide logistics efficiency” and that these plans were submitted to the Legislative
       Assembly of the State of Rio de Janeiro and adopted as “critical background studies for the periodic
       enactment of the Pluriannual Plans.
      The Integrated Center for Urban Mobility (CIMU) developed under the project should be expected to
       enable the conduct of advanced transport analytics by SETRANS, but as noted under the outputs
       section, the equipment for the CIMU has not been delivered yet.
      Under the Enhancing Public Management for Service Delivery in Rio de Janeiro Development Policy
       Loan, a permanent committee was created to implement the PDTU. After the development of the
       PDTU, the committee did not implement any transport project outside of the plan.

The project delivered some key plans for the development and management of logistics and urban transport
in the State of Rio de Janeiro and the RJMR, but failed to deliver some critical studies that would have
improved the transport management capacity for a sustainable and safe operation of the suburban rail system
and further integration of rail and bus systems, such as the financial and operational sustainability plan for the
rail system, the level crossings diagnostic study, the intermunicipal single fare scheme, and a preparatory
study for tendering municipal bus lines. Additionally, although the project was implemented for about 13
years, the evidence is insufficient to assess the project’s outcomes in improving the transport management
and policy framework in the territory of the State of Rio de Janeiro and the RJMR.




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 26
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BR RJ Mass Transit II (P111996)



                            Overall, the efficacy with which the project achieved the third objective is rated Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project successfully completed the acquisition of 106 trains to replace and expand the rolling stock for
                            suburban rail services in the Rio de Janeiro Metropolitan Region (RJMR). The acquisition of new trains
                            initially improved the service quality in the RJMR but because of the economic crisis in 2016, onset of the
                            COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020, and the frequent incidents of cable thefts adversely affected the service
                            quality undermining improvements in the level of services, safety, and system cost-effectiveness. For the
                            similar reasons, the project fell short of achieving the estimated reduction in greenhouse gas emissions, and
                            evidence is insufficient to determine how successful the project was in placing the suburban rail transport
                            system on a lower carbon growth path. However, as the project increased the rail transport capacity and
                            some technical assistance activities resulted in positive outcomes, such as the integration of the bus-rail fare
                            systems and piloting of urban development on TOD principles, according to the ICR it is expected that the
                            project outcomes will be achieved as the train ridership bounces to its pre-COVID-19 levels within the next
                            couple of years. Therefore, the project’s efficacy in achieving the first two objectives is rated marginally
                            Substantial. On the other hand, there were significant shortcomings in the delivery of some important studies
                            and management plans under the technical assistance component. Although there is some evidence that the
                            limited number of plans and studies completed during project implementation had a partial positive impact on
                            the improvement of the transport management and policy framework in the State of Rio de Janeiro and the
                            RJMR, the project fell short of achieving the outcomes expected from the project’s intervention during the 13-
                            year project implementation period. Overall, the efficacy of the project in achieving the project objectives (a)
                            to improve the level of service provided to suburban rail transport users in the RJMR in a safe and cost-
                            efficient manner; (b) to place the suburban rail transport system on a lower carbon growth path; and (c) to
                            improve the transport management and policy framework in the State of Rio de Janeiro’s territory and in the
                            RJMR is rated marginally Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis

   At appraisal, a “with the project” and “without the project” cost-benefit analysis was conducted at appraisal to
   assess the economic viability of the project. The economic benefits of the project were identified as follows: (a)

                                                                                                                              Page 16 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR RJ Mass Transit II (P111996)



Savings resulting from the lower costs of operating all modes through estimates of passenger-km; b) travel time
savings estimated by determining the effect of travel time reduction on the consumer surplus; c) reduction in
road maintenance costs due to the reduction of bus-kilometer; d) reduction in the bus system managing costs
due to avoided costs of expanding the existing public management structure; e) reduction of air pollution costs
due to the reduction of bus-km; and f) reduction of accidents costs estimated. The economic benefits were
mostly identified based on the assumption that there would be a shift in the passengers’ preference from using
public buses to rail network. The economic benefits did not include a modal shift from using privately-owned
vehicle to public transportation since private car ownership in the lower income neighborhoods is low. The costs
were taken as the investment costs for the acquisition of trains and the operating costs including operation and
maintenance personnel for the additional rolling-stocks. Other assumptions were appropriately identified, such
as increase in ridership, train frequency, improvement in signaling systems, and change in average fare. The
project’s economic benefits and costs were appropriate for an economic analysis for a suburban rail project, but
the economic benefits were more conservative as it excluded some economic benefits that could have occurred
because of a modal shift and the avoided costs of investments that would be required if project were not
implemented. The calculations resulted in a robust Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 20.8 percent and
a Net Present Value of US$225.3 million using a discount rate of 10 percent for a 30-year period.

At the time of additional financing, the economic analysis, using the same assumptions, resulted in an EIRR of
24.1 percent and an NPV of US$578 million with a 10 percent discount rate for a 30-year period.

At project closing, the economic analysis was repeated using the actual figures for the economic benefits and
costs whenever available. The EIRR was calculated at 16.31 percent and the NPV at US$243.65 million using a
discount rate of 10 percent for a 30-year period. The decline in the EIRR was due to no reduction in travel time
and significant drop in the demand (because of economic crisis and the COVID-19 pandemic), which was
partially compensated by the avoided operating costs and significantly lower investment cost.

Overall, the project’s economic viability was confirmed by the ex-post economic analysis reported in the ICR, but
the actual achievement was undoubtedly lower than estimated for the base case (for example there was no
reduction in passenger travel time), and the shortcomings of the improved rail system cast doubt on the actual
economic benefits estimated between 2011 when the first new trains became operational and when the project
closed. The assumed benefits in the long-term may be achieved, but their discounted value would decline.

Operational and Administrative Efficiency

The project was approved in 2009 and an additional financing was approved in 2012. The original loan closed in
2019, but the closing date for the additional financing was extended to December 2022. Overall, the project
implementation was around 13 years, but despite this lengthy period the project failed to deliver some important
studies and plans under the technical assistance component in contrast to successful and efficient delivery of
106 trains under both loans. The main reasons for delays in project implementation were the capacity issues in
the project implementation unit in procurement and contract management and "re-works" on a number of trains
under the manufacturer’s warranty (which delayed the issuance of final acceptance by CENTRAL). In addition,
attempts to purchase light rail trains with loan savings failed because of delays in the procurement process. Civil
works added to the project scope to increase safety in the rail network could not be completed because of
delays in obtaining internal approval for the procurement process and the lack of capacity to meet the World
Bank’s safeguards requirements (ICR, p.30). Consequently, the project could not use all the funds, and an
amount of US$80.65 million had to be cancelled. According to the ICR (p.31), the lack of continuity in the
leadership in the State of Rio de Janeiro and frequent changes in the political context and policy direction also



                                                                                                     Page 17 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR RJ Mass Transit II (P111996)



adversely affected project implementation as such changes also led to frequent turn-over of the officials in the
Secretariat of Transport, the project counterpart.

Overall, the project’s efficiency in achieving the project objectives is rated Modest because of arguably lower
economic benefits than the base case for the estimated economic rate of return, and significant shortcomings in
the project's operational and administrative efficiency.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      97.50
 Appraisal                                                  24.10
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      97.18
 ICR Estimate                                               16.31
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project objectives were highly aligned with the World Bank’s strategy for Brazil and relevant to the country
context as the project sought to address the development problem of efficient and safe suburban rail transport in
a mega metropolitan area while supporting the improvement in management capacity and policy framework and
decreasing the carbon footprint of transport in the Rio de Janeiro Metropolitan Region. The project achieved
most of its outcomes in improving the rail service and reducing the greenhouse gas emissions prior to the onset
of external shocks but failed to sustain them because of the economic crisis in 2016, the onset of the COVID-19
pandemic in 2020, and increased incidents of copper cable theft. However, this review concurs with the ICR’s
conclusion that it can be expected that train ridership will increase to its pre-COVID-19 levels as the impact of
external shocks disappear, and the project outcomes will be achieved within the next two years. On the other
hand, the evidence is insufficient to assess the achievement of the project in improving the transport
management and policy framework in the territory of the State of Rio de Janeiro and the RJMR. Overall, the
project’s efficacy in achieving the project objectives is rated marginally Substantial. The analysis of the project's
economic efficiency indicates that economic benefits did not materialize as expected, and there were also
significant shortcomings in the operational and administrative efficiency of the project during its 13-year
implementation period. The efficiency of the project in achieving the project objectives is therefore rated
Modest. While the project objectives were highly relevant, there were moderate shortcomings in the project’s
achievements and efficiency; its overall outcome is therefore rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating


                                                                                                      Page 18 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR RJ Mass Transit II (P111996)



   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Security. The continued incidents of cable theft pose a substantial risk to the operational performance of the
rail network in the RJMR. The public security interventions are insufficient. Cable theft incidents adversely
affect the level of service as they cause unplanned interruptions. The rail network is crucial for suburban
mobility in the RJMR, but the system could be paralyzed if cable thefts continue. If the level of service does
not improve, this is likely to result in a further decrease in ridership and a shift of passengers from rail service
to buses and informal modes of transport in the lower income neighborhoods.

Financial. The user tariffs do not generate sufficient revenue for the concessionaire to sustainably operate
and maintain the rail network. This manifested itself in the concessionaire’s decision to decrease the
frequency of train service and suspension of some bicycle storage facilities. The financial model is extremely
sensitive to shocks to ridership and fare revenue. Without a reform in the financial model, the risk that the rail
service will not bounce back to the pre-COVID-19 pandemic is high. Furthermore, lack of sufficient funds
could result in inadequate maintenance of the trains adversely affecting their energy efficiency. On the other
hand, the authorities and stakeholders have already started the discussion of how to create alternative
revenue sources to fund public transport, such as parking fares, earmarked fuel levies and urban tolls,
revenue from ancillary commercial activities (for example retail space in stations), land-value capture
schemes, and direct recurrent budget outlays (ICR, footnote 26, p.37).

Implementation of transport plans. The project was partially successful in enacting major plans for the
urban transport and logistics development in the State of Rio de Janeiro and the RJMR. The project also
demonstrated the implementation of a transit-oriented development in Queimados station, where rail transit
was prioritized as the main commuting solution from the nearby suburban area. Such suburban
developments could help the RJMR’s transport system follow a low-carbon path. This would be further
supported by the development of transport in line with the RJMR Mobility Master Plan developed under the
project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At appraisal, the improvement of the suburban rail service in the RMJR was of high strategic relevance to
  the State of Rio de Janeiro to improve the suburban mobility for the lower-income population and trigger
  a shift from buses to rail service to reduce pollution. The acquisition of new trains under the first
  component should be expected to contribute to the improvement of the level of service provided to the
  suburban rail transport users in the RJMR, but the project design did not include activities to address the
  other bottlenecks to the service improvement, such as the elimination of unsafe level crossings that
  restricted the speed of trains. Therefore, the project’s design was insufficient to achieve an improvement
  in rail service in a safe and cost-effective way. The only exception was the incremental improvement
  expected in energy efficiency because of the use of new trains. In addition, numerous studies and plans


                                                                                                        Page 19 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR RJ Mass Transit II (P111996)



  were to be prepared under the technical assistance component, but their outcomes were not sufficiently
  clear on how they would support the achievement of the third objective.

  According to the PAD (pp.8-9), lessons learned during the implementation of the World Bank-assisted
  first Rio de Janeiro Mass Transit Project were incorporated into the project design, such as the
  acquisition of new trains rather than the rehabilitation of the existing rolling stock, the minimization of
  counterpart funds, strengthening of policy framework (to minimize distortions resulting from inefficient
  physical and financial coordination between transport modes), and introduction of integrated modal tariffs.
  SETRANS and SuperVia had sufficient capacity to implement the procurement of new trains, but the
  procurement capacity of the project’s implementation entity was not adequately staffed to undertake the
  technical assistance activities. The project had a high implementation readiness because of advanced
  preparation for the procurement of the trains. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) arrangements were in
  place but there were shortcomings in the results framework in capturing the outcomes of the studies and
  plans to be prepared under the project. The project’s safeguards aspects and implementation
  arrangements were adequate. The project adequately identified the major risks and mitigation measures
  were in place, but the fiscal risk was underestimated.

  Overall, the quality at entry was Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 A brief survey of the Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) and Aide Memoirs (AMs) showed
 that performance reporting in those project documents was candid and detailed, and the supervision
 missions were held at least twice a year. The project team’s supervision of safeguards implementation and
 financial management was adequate. When project funds were confiscated because of an injunction of the
 state supreme court, the project team promptly took action to remedy the situation first through requesting
 the immediate refund of the amount, and later by compensating the payments through SETRANS’ account.
 However, there were shortcomings in the supervision of the implementation of the technical assistance
 activities. Despite a 13-year project implementation period, the project failed to deliver four important
 studies and plans that were added to the project scope at the time of additional financing in 2012 (they
 were related to the financial sustainability of the rail service and improvement of safety measures at level
 crossings), and US$80.65 million of loan savings and unused funds were cancelled at the sixth
 restructuring. The shortcomings in the results framework in capturing the project outputs and outcomes
 were not addressed adequately (such as the impact of the plans and studies on the improvement of
 transport management and policy framework). New indicators were only introduced at the last project
 restructuring eight months before project closing to improve the quality of M&E.

 Overall, the quality of supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating


                                                                                                      Page 20 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR RJ Mass Transit II (P111996)



  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s theory of change was based on the premises that acquisition of trains would result in an
 improvement in the level of service, but other interventions were not addressed by the project, such as the
 elimination of level-crossings and improvement of pedestrian crossings. It was also assumed that the
 preparation of numerous studies and plans would lead to an improvement in the transport management
 and policy framework, the outcomes of which were not adequately identified. The indicators (including the
 majority of the intermediate outcome indicators) were sufficient to capture the improvement in the reliability,
 availability, and comfort of the rail service, but the delivery of rail service in a safe and cost-efficient way
 was not captured by the results framework, except the proxy indicator of working ratio of SuperVia. The
 results framework was also insufficient to capture the outcomes expected from the technical assistance
 activities; the related indicators were at the output level. Despite the shortcomings in the M&E design, the
 indicators in the results framework related to the improvement in the rail service were specific, measurable,
 achievable (except the delivery of some plans and studies), mostly relevant, and time bound. The M&E
 arrangements were adequate; SuperVia was responsible for data gathering through its existing monitoring
 system.



b. M&E Implementation
  The data for the baselines of the indicators identified at appraisal were adequately collected. SuperVia
  regularly measured and reported the indicators included in the results framework. However, the initial
  reporting period of two years was not adequate to monitor the progress towards the achievement of
  project outputs and outcomes; the reporting period was later changed to once a year. The Rio de Janeiro
  Transport Regulatory Agency provided additional data. At the time of additional financing, new indicators
  were introduced in accordance with the revision of the project objective to capture the achievement in
  reducing greenhouse gas emissions. The results framework was revised multiple times during project
  implementation (six project restructurings out of eight included revisions to the results framework), but
  these changes did not significantly improve the quality of M&E system. Some revisions were
  unnecessary such as reducing the target value of the indicator measuring the number of stations with
  bicycle storage facilities or changing the category of the indicator measuring the reduction in travel time
  from a project development level indicator to an intermediate outcome indicator, and other revisions were
  very late in project implementation (in May 2022, only eight months before project closing) such as the
  indicator measuring the energy efficiency of trains.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data were communicated to the project stakeholders regularly. Although the project was
  restructured eight times, including an additional financing, the changes in the implementation direction

                                                                                                     Page 21 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR RJ Mass Transit II (P111996)



  cannot be directly attributed to M&E findings; the restructurings were mostly motivated to use loan
  savings. Most of the changes introduced to the project’s scope had not materialized at project closing,
  such as the procurement of seven light-rail trains, rehabilitation of CENTRAL’s building, and the civil
  works to improve safety around the rail lines. The M&E data were used to provide evidence for the
  project’s achievements, but because of the shortcomings in the indicators in adequately capturing the
  project outcomes, the evidence base was insufficient to assess the project’s performance.

  Overall, there were significant shortcomings in the M&E system’s design and implementation making it
  difficult to assess the achievement of the project objectives and test the links in the results chain; the
  M&E quality is rated Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the project was classified as Category B under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and
   triggered the Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09) safeguard policy. At the time of additional financing, the
   project triggered Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
   safeguard policies.

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): At appraisal, the project was classified as Category B because
   of minimal site-specific, temporary, and reversible environmental impacts such as the disposal of oil,
   grease, and sewage. Although the project did not finance any civil works, a detailed assessment of
   SuperVia’s environmental managements policies and procedures for construction, rehabilitation, and
   maintenance of the rail tracks as the trains purchased under the project would use those tracks. After the
   assessment, SuperVia updated its Environmental Management Plan (EMP), which was acceptable to the
   World Bank. During the initial implementation phases of the project, there were coordination challenges in
   the implementation of the environmental safeguard policy because of inadequate communication among
   the state and municipal agencies, and the submission of semiannual environmental reports were often late
   and incomplete. Following the strengthening of the environmental and social management unit within
   SuperVia with more authority and resources, the implementation of the environmental safeguard policy
   improved. The project’s implementation was in compliance with the Bank’s environmental safeguard policy.

   Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09). The project triggered this safeguard policy because SuperVia periodically
   sprays its premises and the rail right-of-way for vegetation and pest control, and against the spread of
   dengue mosquito. No specific plan was required to mitigate the potential impacts (PAD, p.53). The EMP
   included a pest management plan. The procedures included in the plan for procurement and use of
   pesticides were in accordance with the World Bank guidelines and the Brazilian legislation.

   Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): At the time of additional financing, the project triggered this
   safeguard policy because the CENTRAL’s main building, which was to be rehabilitated under the project,
   was registered as an historical building. Because of delays in procurement, the project could not sign a



                                                                                                    Page 22 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BR RJ Mass Transit II (P111996)



  contract for the rehabilitation of the CENTRAL’s main building. Therefore, the safeguard policy was not
  relevant during project implementation.

  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): Although the project did not require the acquisition of any new
  land, an estimated 80 families had been illegally occupying the right-of-way of an auxiliary rail line under
  SuperVia’s concession. The project triggered this safeguard policy for the relocation of these families. The
  State of Rio de Janeiro and SuperVia prepared a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) in consultation with the
  project-affected people living on the right-of-way. The RAP was disclosed on the SETRANS and SuperVia
  websites in June, 2011 and on the World Bank’s Info Shop in July 2011. The project resettled 83 families
  (three more than estimated at the time of additional financing) on the Deodoro and Belford Roso lines. Of
  these families, 70 were rehoused, and 13 were paid compensations in cash.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  The project financial reports that were acceptable to the World Bank were submitted regularly but with
  occasional delays. The opinions of the external auditors were unqualified. There were no issues reported
  related to the counterpart funding. There were no known issues of corruption or misuse of funds
  associated with the project. However, the procurement and contract management of technical assistance
  activities related to the preparation of studies and plans experienced some challenges starting from 2016
  because of the confiscation of project’s operational balance in the project’s designated account following
  an injunction of the State Judicial Court. The injunction was processed because of a petition from a group
  of civil servants of the State of Rio de Janeiro who were not paid their salaries on time because of the tight
  fiscal situation of the state. As this constituted non-compliance with the loan agreements, the World Bank
  requested the immediate refund of the confiscated amounts, but non-compliance continued through to
  project closing. To avoid the confiscation of additional project funds, the parties agreed that the State of
  Rio de Janeiro would pay for eligible expenditures directly and offset the confiscated balances (ICR, p.35).
  The acquisition of the trains was not affected because of this injunction as the payments were directly
  made to the train manufacturer in China. According to the ICR “Audits were carried out effectively, and
  opinions issued were always impartial (ICR, p.36) At project closing, all project funds were accounted for.

  Procurement

  The project was incompliance with the World Bank’s procurement guidelines. Because of high project
  readiness, the procurement of first 30 trains was efficient and fast, and completed in a relatively short
  period of time. However, the procurement of the contracts for the preparation of plans and studies under
  the technical assistance component faced obstacles such as delayed reviews and approvals of the terms
  of references, insufficient technical capacity in preparing bidding documents, and frequent changes in the
  political context. The confiscation of project funds because of an injunction of the State Judicial Court
  created uncertainty about the payments, which led to bidder hesitancy in pending procurement processes.
  Some contracts for studies could not be procured during the 13-year project implementation time.




                                                                                                   Page 23 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR RJ Mass Transit II (P111996)



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                                                                   There were significant
                                                                                   shortcomings in the M&E design
                                                                                   and implementation making it
Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Modest                      difficult to assess the
                                                                                   achievement of the project
                                                                                   objectives and test the links in
                                                                                   the results chain.
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

This review has drawn three lessons based on the information in the ICR.

If the replacement of an aging train fleet with newer trains is not supported by other
interventions to improve the safety, affordability, and accessibility of the service, the
improvement in the level of service and shift to public transport can be limited. The project
successfully financed the acquisition of 106 trains to replace the aging rolling stock of SuperVia and
expanded the fleet to above 200 trains. However, the project did not intervene in other aspects of
the rail service that would holistically improve the service quality, such as safety measures, fare
integration, and non-motorized access to the stations. This resulted in a lower improvement in the
service quality. For example, because safety measures were not implemented, such as barriers
installed at the level-crossings, the operational speed of the trains had to be restricted to avoid
accidents. The project could not complete a plan for fare reform that would make rail transit more
attractive; therefore, when suburban mobility started to bounce back in 2021, passengers preferred
bus transport as the bus fare is subsidized. In conclusion, the replacement of the aging rolling stock
with new trains is necessary, but for a significant improvement in the service quality and a shift to rail
transport, a holistic approach should be adopted encompassing other aspects of rail transport.



                                                                                                      Page 24 of 26
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BR RJ Mass Transit II (P111996)



Inadequate capacity and interest of the counterpart in technical assistance activities can
critically impact the achievement of project outcomes. The project financed various studies and
plans related to suburban rail transit and logistics in the State of Rio de Janeiro and the RMJR, but
some important studies could not be completed. The main reason was the insufficient in-house
technical capacity of the project implementation entities in preparing the necessary technical and
bidding documents. The second reason was insufficient interest from the decision-making authorities
in implementing these plans and studies and frequent turnover in the political context. Therefore, the
project fell short of achieving its objective to improve the transport management and policy
framework in the State of Rio de Janeiro and the RMJR. The high number of projects to be prepared
under the project was also a hurdle; however, given the 13-year project implementation period, most
of the technical assistance activities could have been completed by project closing.

Numerous project restructurings may not be instrumental in improving the project’s
performance. The project was restructured eight times including an additional financing earlier in
project implementation. These restructurings were mostly processed to use significant loan savings
and unused funds to finance additional project activities, but most of those activities could not be
completed and, therefore, cancelled, such as the purchase of seven light-rail trains, rehabilitation of
CENTRAL’s buildings, and the construction of security walls and level-crossings fences to improve
safety. The restructurings were not effective in improving the project’s performance, and, eventually,
US$80.65 million of funds were cancelled.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a candid and detailed overview of a complex project that was implemented over a 13-year
period. The overall narrative is highly evaluative except in a few sections such as the Quality at Entry and the
Quality of Supervision. The narratives in these sections are insufficient to provide a complete critique of the
Bank’s performance in a project that was implemented for 13 years. The report is concise and consistent with
the Bank guidance but did not include a discussion or a figure depicting the theory of change of the project;
instead, the ICR included the results framework from the PAD which is completely inadequate for showing the
project’s results chains. The report is internally consistent as there is a logical linking and integration of the
various parts of the report. It attempts to support the achievements of the project outcomes and objectives
using the evidence available, but some assessments are not sufficiently supported by evidence, such as the
achievement of the third objective to improve transport management and policy framework although the efficacy
of the project in achieving this objective is rated by the ICR as Substantial. The entries in the Lessons and
Recommendations section respond to the experiences of the project, but they are in the form of findings rather
than lessons. The safeguards and fiduciary sections could have benefited from a more detailed discussion.

Overall, despite some shortcomings, the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.




                                                                                                    Page 25 of 26
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BR RJ Mass Transit II (P111996)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                    Page 26 of 26
