     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS) (P085375)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023635

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P085375                                  ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS)

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Indonesia                                Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82590,IBRD-85780,TF-A6336,IDA- 30-Jun-2013                                             560,068,190.13
 42040

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 27-Jun-2006                              31-Aug-2022

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         137,500,000.00                                   26,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                          551,791,146.03                                   25,282,962.87

 Actual                                      560,080,397.23                                   25,282,962.87




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Kishore Laxmikant          Peter Nigel Freeman         Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Nadkarni




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   Original Objective: The Project Development Objective (PDO) was "to increase the number of lower-income
   rural and peri-urban populations accessing improved water and sanitation facilities and practicing improved
   hygiene behaviors as part of the Recipient's efforts to achieve the WSS-MDGs, through programmatic
   mainstreaming and scaling-up of a nation-wide community-driven approach". (Financing Agreement Schedule
   1 dated December 27,2007 and Project Appraisal Document Section 5 dated June 1, 2006). The Recipient


                                                                                                Page 1 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS) (P085375)



  was the Republic of Indonesia. WSS-MDGs refers to Water Supply and Sanitation - Millenium Development
  Goals.

  Revised Objective A: At a Level 2 restructuring in October 2013, the PDO was revised "to increase the
  number of under-served and low-income rural and peri-urban populations accessing improved and sustained
  water and sanitation services facilities and practicing improved hygiene behaviors as a part of the Recipient's
  efforts to achieve WSS-MDG targets through programmatic mainstreaming and scaling-up of a nation-wide
  community-driven approach". The changes in the PDO were made to strengthen alignment with the GoI's
  national program objectives, to emphasize sustainable services, and to expand the scope of the beneficiaries
  beyond poor communities to include under-served populations. (ICR para. 27).

  Revised Objective B: At a Level 2 restructuring in December 2015, the PDO was revised "to increase the
  number of under-served rural and peri-urban populations accessing sustainable water supply and sanitation
  services". The changes in the PDO were made to make the PDO clearer and simpler, and to remove "as part
  of the Recipient's efforts to achieve WSS-MDG targets" as this was assessed to be beyond the scope of the
  Project. The reference to "improved hygiene behaviors" was dropped as this was assessed to be captured
  under the sanitation outcome. (ICR para. 27).

  For the ICRR, the original and revised PDOs are parsed as follows:

  Original and Revised Objective A:

  Objective 1: To increase the number of under-served and low-income rural and peri-urban populations
  accessing improved and sustained water services facilities.

  Objective 2: To increase the number of under-served and low-income rural and peri-urban populations
  accessing improved and sustained sanitation services facilities and practicing improved hygiene behavior.

  For the ICRR, the reference in the Original Objective and Revised Objective A to " as part of the Recipient's
  efforts to achieve WSS-MDGs through programmatic mainstreaming and scaling-up of a nation-wide scaling-
  up of a nation-wide community-driven approach" is dropped as this was assessed to be beyond the scope of
  the Project.

  Revised Objective B:

  Revised Objective 1: To increase the number of under-served rural and peri-urban populations accessing
  sustainable water supply services.

  Revised Objective 2: To increase the number of under-served rural and peri-urban populations accessing
  sustainable sanitation services.

  Split Evaluation: Given the changes in PDO and some of the associated PDO indicators, a split evaluation
  will be undertaken in the ICRR.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS) (P085375)



  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  07-Dec-2015

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   (Reference PAD Section 6 and ICR paras. 11 to 16).

   The project components at appraisal are indicated below. Changes in components are discussed below
   under the project restructurings.

   Component 1: Community Empowerment and Local Institutional Development: (estimated cost at
   appraisal US$4.20 million; revised cost under Additional Financing US$151.96 million; actual cost at project
   closing US$128.00 million). This component was composed of three subcomponents as follows:
   Subcomponent 1: This was to support: (i) at the community level, coordination of the development of
   training programs for Community Facilitators to facilitate development of Community Action Plans (CAPs);
   (ii) at the provincial and district levels, coordination of the development of training programs in health,
   community development/social inclusion and water supply and sanitation (WSS) service delivery; and (iii)
   provision of community level training and skills transfer for mainstreaming Community Driven Development
   (CDD) approaches into WSS service delivery. Subcomponent 1.2: This was to support: (i) strengthening of
   program management for project implementing units, project coordination groups, CAP evaluation teams
   and related programs, including preparation of relevant guidelines, manuals and provision of training for
   these purposes. Subcomponent 1.3: This was to support: (i) capacity building and advocacy activities for
   government and civil society to improve overall water and sanitation services delivery; (ii) reallocations of
   resources towards CDD WSS efforts; and (iii) promotion of post-construction innovations to enhance the
   sustainability of PAMSIMAS-supported WSS services.

   Component 2: Improving Hygiene and Sanitation Behavior and Services: (estimated cost at appraisal
   US$13.40 million; revised cost under Additional Financing US$42.83 million; actual cost at project closing
   US$13.40 million). This component was composed of four subcomponents as follows: Subcomponent 2.1:
   This was to support a phased program of Community-Led Total Sanitation (CLTS) including safe excreta
   management, promotion of hand washing, solid waste and wastewater management, and other related
   activities. Subcomponent 2.2: This was to support (i) generation of consumer demand for improved
   sanitation; (ii) increasing the ability of local markets to respond to that demand; and (iii) promotion of
   improved hygiene behavior. Subcomponent 2.3: This was to support beneficiary communities through
   school sanitation and hygiene improvement grants through the CAP process. Subcomponent 2.4: This was
   to support provincial and district units responsible for environmental health and hygiene provision through
   training and initiatives to promote monitoring of WSS MDG targets, health outcome related community
   audits, program evaluations, and periodic oversight reviews.

   Component 3: Water Supply and Public Sanitation Infrastructure: (estimated cost at
   appraisal US$102.50 million; revised cost under Additional Financing US$230.56 million; actual cost at

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS) (P085375)



  project closing US$275.51 million). This component was to support participating communities by
  funding construction/rehabilitation of rural water supply and public sanitation infrastructure through block
  grants for construction and training and technical assistance for associated activities including planning and
  maintenance. The component was to finance 70 percent of the costs of construction/rehabilitation of
  infrastructure and the associated activities. The remaining 30 percent was to be funded through the district
  budget (10 percent) and the participating villages (20 percent).

  Component 4: District and Village Incentives Grants: (estimated cost at appraisal US$0.0 million;
  revised cost under Additional Financing US$6.00 million; actual cost at project closing US$14.52 million).
  This component was to support provision of incentives through two windows. Subcomponent 4.1: This
  subcomponent was to provide incentive grants to districts selected through a competitive process based on
  assessment of (i) good practice in supporting the CDD WSS and (ii) meeting implementation targets.
  Subcomponent 4.2: This subcomponent was to provide incentive grants to villages selected through a
  competitive process based on assessment of (i) good practice in supporting the CDD WSS and (ii) meeting
  implementation targets in regard to hygiene improvement, community mobilization, and reaching WSS
  targets.

  Component 5: Implementation Support and Project Management: (estimated cost at appraisal
  US$16.10 million; revised cost under Additional Financing US$104.75 million; actual cost at project closing
  US$104.28 million). This component was composed of three subcomponents as follows: Subcomponent
  5.1: This was to finance, for the duration of the Project, a Central management Consultant Team that would
  be responsible for technical implementation support, overall project management, monitoring of
  implementation, financial reporting, preparation of a sector-wide program, and provision of oversight and
  technical guidance to consultants engaged at the provincial and district levels. Subcomponent 5.2 was to
  finance service contracts for Provincial and District Management Consultants. Subcomponent 5.3 was to
  finance, for the duration of the Project, a service contract for an Independent Impact Evaluation Consultant
  who would report directly to the Steering Committee.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: At appraisal, the total project cost was estimated at US$275.10 million. Under the two
  Additional Financings (2013 and 2015), the project cost was increased to US$1,650.97 million. At project
  closing, the actual cost was estimated at US$1,693.42 million. (ICR Annex 3).

  Financing: At appraisal, the project was to be financed through an IDA grant of US$137.5 million. Under
  the two Additional Financings, the World Bank financing was increased to US$563.4 million, including
  through two IBRD loans totaling US$399.90 million and a Trust Fund grant of US$26 million. At project
  closing, the total World Bank financing (including the Trust Fund) was US$560.07 million. (ICR Data Sheet).

  Borrower/Recipient Contribution: At appraisal, the Borrower/Recipient contribution was estimated at
  US$137.60 million inclusive of a Borrower/Recipient contribution of US$101.10 million and a Local
  Communities contribution of US$36.50 million. Under the two Additional Financings, the counterpart
  contribution was increased to US$1.018.93 million. At project closing, the counterpart contribution was
  US$1,064.04 million including a Borrower/Recipient contribution of US$635.15 million and a Local
  Communities contribution of US$428.89 million. (ICR Annex 3).




                                                                                                   Page 4 of 26
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS) (P085375)



Donor Financing: The Australian Department of Foreign Affairs (DFAT) provided co-financing for the
Project in the amount of US$92.4 million towards project preparation and implementation activities.

Dates: The Project was approved on June 27,2006. The planned effectiveness date was September 30,
2006, and the actual effectiveness date was June 6, 2008 (almost 24 months after the date of
approval). The original closing date was June 30, 2013, reflecting a planned implementation period of 84
months (7 years). The closing date was extended six times, and the actual closing date was August 31,
2022, reflecting an implementation period of 194 months (16 years). The overall extension by110 months
(9 years) was to allow for completion of the expanded activities added under the two Additional Financings,
including Trust-Fund financed activities, and to cover some implementation delays.

Mid-Term Review (MTR): Two MTRs were carried out in 2010 and 2019. The ICR does not adequately
report on the findings of the MTRs and how they were utilized in the subsequent project restructurings other
than to indicate that the recommendations of the first MTR were integrated into implementation of the
Project, including a finding that there was an opportunity for the Project to deliver greater impact. This was
incorporated in the subsequent Additional Financing.

Restructurings: During its implementation period of 16 years, the Project underwent six restructurings as
follows:

First Restructuring (November 2012, disbursed amount US$137.17 million). This was to extend the loan
closing date to allow for completion of project activities impacted by implementation delays.

Second Restructuring (May 2013, disbursed amount US$141.92 million). This was a Level 2 restructuring
to allow for Additional Financing. The Project scope was substantially expanded to cover more villages. The
scope of the Project beneficiaries was expanded to include under-served population in addition to low-
income communities. Changes were made to the PDO together with some associated changes in the
Results Framework including significant increases in the targets for PDO indicators and Intermediate
Results Indicators. The closing date was extended to allow for completion of the expanded activities.

Third Restructuring (December 2015, disbursed amount US$209.49 million). This was a Level 2
restructuring to allow for Additional Financing. The Project scope was substantially expanded to cover more
villages. The reference to low-income communities was dropped while "under-served" rural and peri-urban
populations was retained to align the PDO with the GoI's National Medium Term Development Plan for
2015-2019 for universal access to WSS. Changes were made to the PDO together with some associated
changes in the Results Framework including significant increases in the targets for PDO indicators and
Intermediate Results Indicators. Hygiene outcomes were dropped from the PDO level as they were
assessed to be captured under the sanitation outcome. However, intermediate results indicators (IRIs)
related to improvement in hygiene behavior continued to be implemented and tracked under the Results
Framework (RF). One IRI was moved to the PDO indicator level. Three new IRIs were added to better
capture performance at the district and village levels. The closing date was extended to allow for completion
of the expanded activities. Changes in components included: Component 1: (i) revision of title to include
village institutional development; (ii) targeting under the CAPs re-focused on universal access to WSS.
Component 2: (i) additional models developed regarding consumer demand for improved sanitation; (ii)
mainstreaming of a behavior change and communications approach for promoting improved hygiene and
sanitation behavior; (iii) standardized taring implemented through accredited training modules and e-
learning modules. Component 3: (i) 11,000 additional villages financed by counterpart funds and 4,000
additional villages financed through the World Bank financing; (ii) village funds matched with a block grant


                                                                                                 Page 5 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS) (P085375)



   of 10 percent to finance WSS infrastructure and activities. Component 4: (i) IBRD loan proceeds used to
   fiainace incentive grants to districts and villages; (ii) support grants made available to under-performing
   villages. Component 5: (i) additional regional oversight management services financed; (ii) improved Project
   Management Information System (PMIS), knowledge sharing and training content included to help scaling-
   up the PAMSIMAS approach.

   Fourth Restructuring (December 2017, disbursed amount US$303.24 million). The closing date was
   extended to allow for completion of project activities impacted by implementation delays. Reallocations were
   made between some disbursement categories.

   Fifth Restructuring (June 2020, disbursed amount US$481.82 million). The closing date was extended to
   allow completion of project activities impacted by implementation delays. Reallocations were made between
   some disbursement categories.

   Sixth Restructuring (December 2021, disbursed amount US$561.62 million). The closing date was
   extended to allow completion of project activities impacted by implementation delays. Reallocations were
   made between some disbursement categories.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
(Reference PAD Sections 1 to 3 and ICR paras. 1 to 5).

Country and Sector Context: At the time of appraisal in 2006, access to water supply and sanitation
(WSS) services was very low in Indonesia. It was assessed that 24 out of Indonesia's 31 provinces would
fail to reach the Millenium Development Goal (MDG) targets for improved water supply by 2015. In 2004,
access to improved water sources was estimated at about 69 percent in rural areas and about 91 percent in
urban areas. Access to improved sanitation was about 32 percent in rural areas and 39 percent in urban
areas. In rural areas, more than 39 percent of the households used unsanitary open pits or defecated in the
open, posing health hazards through fecal exposure and pollution of drinking water resources. Fecal-borne
illnesses, directly linked to inadequate water supply, sanitation and hygiene, were one of the main causes
of mortality for children under five years of age. The incidence of diarrhea and typhoid were relatively high.
Poor households, especially women and children, had to spend substantial amounts of time fetching water
or incur expenses to purchases safe drinking water. Economic losses due to inadequate sanitation, poor
hygiene practices, and lack of access to safe water supply were estimated at about 2.4 percent of the gross
domestic product (GDP). To address the situation, the Government of Indonesia (GoI) issued a national
development program (PROPENAS) that aimed to increase public participation, improve governance, and
promote economic recovery. The economic reform program under PROPENAS prioritized poverty
alleviation and the development of community-based economic systems and emphasized the need to
establish partnerships between the government, communities and the private sector to help overcome
poverty and social instabilities. In 2005, a national policy for community based WSS was established. The
policy emphasized the need to focus on sustainability and more effective use of WSS infrastructure and
services by scaling up Community Driven Development (CDD) in WSS services. At the central government

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS) (P085375)



level, the Ministry of Public Works (MPW) was responsible for policymaking and coordination in regard to
WSS activities. At the provincial and district levels, designated government departments were in charge of
WSS related matters. At the village and community levels, specially constituted bodies were responsible for
WSS matters.

Alignment with National Priorities: The PDO was well-aligned with the priorities in the national programs
prevailing at appraisal as well as at project closure. At appraisal, the Project was consistent with the
national priorities prevailing under the GoI's PROPENAS program that recognized the need to improve the
quality of, and access to, improved WSS services and the need to follow a Community Driven Development
approach to meet the targets. The Project remained consistent with the GOI's national priorities at project
closure as reflected in the Medium-Term National Development Plan (2020) including (i) developing regions
to reduce inequality and (ii) strengthening infrastructure to support economic development and basic
services.

Alignment with the World Bank Group Country Partnerships Frameworks (CPFs): The PDO was well-
aligned with the WBG's CPFs in effect at the time of appraisal as well as at project closure. The PDO was
consistent with the key themes of sustaining economic recovery, promoting broad-based growth and
delivering better public services for the poor under the CPF for FY2004 to 2007. The PDO remains
consistent with the priorities under the currently prevailing CPF for FY2021 to FY2025 including under its
Engagement Area 2, Objective 1, "to improve infrastructure provision and quality of services" and
Engagement Area 3, Objective 2, "to strengthen quality of equity in nutrition and health". The CPF
recognizes that rural infrastructure gaps lead to lower access to basic services and connectivity; inadequate
sanitation systems and weak solid waste management cause widespread contamination of surface water
and groundwater; community-driven developments which strengthen the role and responsibilities of local
governments can be effective; and direct fiscal transfers to villages and urban local governments play a key
role in supporting locally determined investments. (CPF para. 64).

Prior Bank Experience: The World Bank has been involved in Indonesia's WSS sector since the early
1980s. Prior to the Project, the World Bank had financed two Water Supply and Sanitation for Low Income
Communities Projects (WSSLIC-1 and WSSLIC-2) that improved access to WSS facilities to poor
communities in rural and per-urban areas. The projects were based on a CDD approach and followed
decentralized community-based demand-supply models that channeled financial resources and technical
assistance directly to village management structures. The Project was the third project in the WSSLIC
series (it was referred to as PAMSIMAS III or Community Based Water Supply and Sanitation III) and
represents a scaling-up of the WSS services provided from about 2,800 villages in eight provinces under
the earlier projects to around 15,000 villages in 11 provinces, leading to a cumulative coverage of about
35,000 villages in 34 provinces.

Relevance of Project Development Objectives: Given the country and sector context described above,
the PDO continues to be relevant in regard to the currently prevailing national and CPF priorities. The
Project built on the experience and achievements under the predecessor WSSLIC projects and reflected
greater maturity by setting more challenging objectives than under the previous projects. This is reflected
also in its focus on strengthening the quality of equity in nutrition and health through the Project's
interventions. The PDO was pitched at an appropriate level considering the capacity levels at the national,
provincial, district, and village levels. However, the formulation of the original PDO, which was linked to the
Recipient's efforts to achieve the WSS-MDG targets, was later assessed to be beyond the scope of the
Project, and the PDO had to be revised under subsequent restructurings. Overall, the Project consistently



                                                                                                      Page 7 of 26
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS) (P085375)



               adapted to changes in policies and priorities as reflected in the reformulation of the development objectives
               through restructurings.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase the number of under-served and low-income rural and peri-urban populations accessing
                             improved and sustained water services facilities.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC): A TOC was not articulated in the PAD at appraisal. However, the ICR provides a
                             diagrammatic presentation of a TOC that it has inferred based on the project design and implementation
                             experience including the results captured in the Results Framework and the Project's Monitoring & Evaluation
                             (M&E) system. The overall TOC was that, to increase access to improved and sustainable WSS services for
                             under-served and lower-income rural and peri-urban populations, it was necessary to design and implement
                             Community Driven Development (CDD) that would engage the participating beneficiary villages and
                             communities in determining their needs in regard to WSS services and adopting WSS infrastructure and
                             hygiene practice interventions in line with their preferences. To be able to carry out these interventions, the
                             participating villages and communities would need support through technical assistance and training, and
                             funds to supplement their own resources and to incentivize them to achieve agreed performance targets. The
                             Project would provide financing for (i) necessary technical assistance and training to the national,
                             provincial, and district level government agencies, including development and implementation of M&E
                             systems and a Management Information System (MIS); and to village/community bodies to prepare
                             Community Action Plans and budgetary allocations; (ii) selected WSS infrastructure, particularly for
                             community water supply systems, household connections, and sanitation facilities for schools and other
                             public institutions; and (iii) incentive grants to villages and communities meeting agreed performance
                             targets. In regard to Objective 1, the Project would provide inputs through financing of the above areas. The
                             resulting outputs would be (i) improved water supply systems through construction/rehabilitation as
                             appropriate; and (ii) increase in the number of household connections. The sustainability of the improved
                             systems would be achieved through agreement of the beneficiary villages and communities to set appropriate
                             tariffs and ensure collections of the funds required to operate and maintain the facilities. The intermediate
                             outcomes would be (i) improved water supply systems effectively managed and financed to function to the
                             satisfaction of the communities concerned and (ii) more districts and villages adopt and replicate the
                             PAMSIMAS approach outside the Project's target areas. The outcome would be an increase in the low-
                             income rural and peri-urban populations accessing improved water supply services.

                             In support of achievement of Objectives 1 and 2, the Project would provide technical assistance and training
                             for institutional strengthening and capacity building in regard to (i) CAP preparation; (ii) strengthening of the

                                                                                                                                  Page 8 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS) (P085375)



M&E system and preparation of a Management Information System (MIS); and (iii) supporting the use of
facilitators to work with, and provide guidance to, the targeted villages and communities.

The causal links and full results chain in the TOC were adequate. However, the PAD lists six PDO indicators
in the main text but only two in the Results Framework with the remaining four PDO indicators shown as IRIs
in the Results Framework. In regard to Objective 1, the PDO indicators and Intermediate Results Indicators
(IRIs) adopted were generally relevant, measurable, and appropriate for assessing achievement of the
objective.

Key assumptions underlying the results chain were that: (i) the GoI would continue to prioritize the objective
of increasing access to improved and
sustainable WSS services and provide adequate resources, including funds and technical support, to the
provincial/district/village/community agencies; and (ii) the participating villages and communities would be
committed to ensuring sustainability of the gains, including through setting appropriate levels of tariffs and
ensuring collections to be able to operate and maintain the systems effectively.

Outputs and Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs): (ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework and ICR paras.
41 to 43).

Key outputs included the following:

      125,000 improved water supply systems constructed and rehabilitated.
      4.5 million household connections (70% equipped with water meters) established.
      Capacity Action Plans (CAPs) developed in target villages.
      KPSPAMs (Management Boards for Water Supply Services) established, and training provided.
      Incentive grants provided to villages and districts that met or exceeded pre-determined performance
       targets.
      Comprehensive Management Information System (MIS) developed and implemented.

Intermediate Results Indicators: were measured by three IRIs as follows:

IRI 1.1: Improved community water points constructed or rehabilitated under the Project (number): (target
120,000; actual 125,000; target exceeded).

IRI 1.2: Piped household water connections benefiting from rehabilitation works undertaken by the Project:
number): (target 11,000; actual 117,000; target substantially exceeded).

IRI 1.3: Percentage of villages with improved water supply systems that are functioning to the satisfaction of
the majority of the targeted communities: (baseline 0; target 90%; actual 91%; target achieved).

PDO Indicators (ICR - Results Framework and paras. 41 to 43).

PDO 1.1: Number of additional people with sustainable access to improved water facilities differentiated by
socio-economic class: (baseline 0; target 6 million; actual 24.8 million; target substantially exceeded).

Outcomes: Objective 1 was achieved. As a result of the expanded scope of the Project under the two
Additional Financings and the longer than planned implementation period, the IRI targets in regard to


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS) (P085375)



establishment of new community water points and household piped water connections were
substantially exceeded. The single PDO indicator in regard to the number of additional people with
sustainable access to improved water facilities differentiated by socio-economic class was substantially
exceeded as well. Improved water facilities resulted from the new construction/rehabilitation carried out
under the Project. In regard to sustainability, a water supply system was considered sustainable if: (i) it
functions at more than 80 percent as designed; (ii) tariff levels are sufficient to cover operations and
maintenance (O&M) costs; (iii) the KPSPAM has been established by decree of the village head or other
means; and (iv) an annual work plan for WSS services is available; and (v) a partnership plan setting out the
multi-donor collaboration with other entities has been developed. While a PDO level indicator
measuring sustainability was not included in the PAD, a sustainability related indicator was included under the
restructuring in 2015 "the percentage of villages with improved water supply systems that are effectively
managed and financed" (target 90%; actual 92.25%; target exceeded). As listed below under Revised
Objective 1, additional institutional strengthening and capacity building IRIs were added that contributed to
strengthening sustainability of the outcomes. Targets for all these indicators were achieved or exceeded. In
regard to differentiation of the results by socio-economic class, while the Results Framework does not provide
the relevant information, the ICR reports (para. 37) that the under-served and low-income groups targeted
under the Project accounted for about 44 percent of the Project's beneficiaries.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To increase the number of under-served rural and peri-urban populations accessing sustainable water supply
services.

Revised Rationale
Under the Level 2 restructuring (Additional Financing) in 2015, the PDO was revised to drop the reference to
'low-income" while retaining the reference to "under-served" in regard to the targeted rural and peri-urban
populations. The ICR states that this was done to align the PDO with the National Medium-Term Plan for
2015-2019 which emphasized universal access to WSS. The Project continued to target low-income
communities by prioritizing districts on the basis of (i) high access gaps in water and sanitation; (ii) low and
medium district fiscal capability; and (iii) agreement to prepare five-year investment plans for WSS. (ICR para.
28). Reflecting the expanded scope under the Additional Financing, targets were raised significantly in regard
to the PDO indicators and IRIs.

Theory of Change: The overall theory of change was presented under Objective 1. The changes in the PDO
and indicator targets did not materially impact the TOC. The key underlying assumptions remained the same
as noted above under Objective 1.

Key Outputs: These were as reported above under Objective 1.

Intermediate Results Indicators: Results were measured by five IRIs as follows:



                                                                                                 Page 10 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS) (P085375)



IRI R1.1: Improved community water points constructed or rehabilitated under the Project (number): (baseline
0; target 120,000; actual 125,000; target exceeded).

IRI R1.2: New piped household water connections resulting from the Project's interventions: (number):
(baseline 0; target 1,250,000; actual 4,490,000; target substantially exceeded).

IRI R1.3: Percentage of villages with improved water supply systems that are functioning to the satisfaction of
the majority of the targeted communities: (baseline 0; target 90%; actual 91%; target exceeded).

IRI R1.4: Percentage of village governments incorporating community WSS plans in annual/midterm village
plans to support the achievement of universal access: (baseline 0; target 80%; actual 98.93%; target
exceeded).

IRI R1.5: Percentage of villages that have an increased budget to maintain and expand existing WSS
systems to support implementation of community WSS plans: (baseline 0; target 80%; actual 87.89%; target
exceeded).

In addition to the above five IRIs, the ICR reports (para. 48, Table 6) that there were other IRIs related to
institutional strengthening and capacity building that contributed to strengthening sustainability of the
outcomes. These were tracked and measured although not a part of the Results Framework.

IRI R1.6: Percentage of districts capacity building plans to support adoption and mainstreaming of the
PAMSIMAS approach and progress towards achieving its objectives: (baseline 0; target 70%; actual 95.71%;
target substantially exceeded).

IRI R1.7: Actual Project district WSS expenditure as a percentage of the budget needed to achieve MDG
goals/universal access targets: (baseline 0; target 70%; actual 76.26%; target exceeded).

IRI R1.8: Number/percentage of districts that are replicating the PAMSIMAS approach outside the targeted
communities: (baseline 0; target 90%; actual 99.02%; target exceeded).

IRI R1.9: Number of villages developing Community Action Plans: (baseline 0; target 27,000; actual 38,200;
target substantially exceeded).

IRI R1.10: Percentage of districts exceeding project performance criteria and receiving supplementary grants:
(baseline 0; target 50%; actual 86%; target substantially exceeded).

IRI R1.11: Number of villages exceeding project performance criteria and receiving supplementary grants:
(Baseline 0; target 4,649; actual 8,176; target substantially exceeded).

IRI R1.12: Percentage of districts that have project monitoring structure and tools and provide regular
information on project implementation quality: (baseline 0; target 90%; actual 95.06%; target exceeded).

PDO Indicators (ICR - Results Framework and paras. 41 to 43).

PDO R1.1: Number of additional people with sustainable access to improved water facilities: (baseline 0;
original target 6 million; revised target 22.1 million; actual 24.8 million; target exceeded).



                                                                                                   Page 11 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS) (P085375)



PDO R1.2: Percentage of villages with improved water supply systems that are effectively managed and
financed (percentage): (baseline 0; target 90%; actual 92.25%; target exceeded).

Outcomes: The Revised Objective 1 was achieved. The targets for the two PDO indicators were exceeded.
All related IRI targets were achieved or exceeded. The PDO target for increase in the number of under-
served rural and peri-urban population accessing sustainable water supply services was
exceeded. Sustainability issues received attention with the inclusion of a PDO level indicator and additional
IRIs targets for which were achieved. A water supply system was considered sustainable if: (i) it functions at
more than 80 percent as designed; (ii) tariff levels are sufficient to cover operations and maintenance (O&M)
costs; (iii) the KPSPAM has been established by decree of the village head or other means; and (iv) an
annual work plan for WSS services is available; and (v) a partnership plan setting out the multi-donor
collaboration with other entities has been developed. The PDO indicator for sustainability was "percentage of
villages with improved water supply systems that are effectively managed and financed". The target was
exceeded. In addition, the ICR lists (para.48, Table 6) that, although not included under the Results
Framework, additional IRIs were tracked and measured during implementation, including preparation
of community action plans and allocation of budgetary resources, that contributed to strengthening
sustainability of the outcomes. Targets for these indicators were achieved or exceeded. The ICR reports that
under-served and low-income groups targeted under the Project accounted for about 44 percent of the
Project's beneficiaries. (ICR para. 37).



Revised Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase the number of under-served and low-income rural and peri-urban populations accessing
improved and sustained sanitation services facilities and practicing improved hygiene behavior.

Rationale
Theory of Change (TOC): The overall TOC in regard to the Project was presented earlier under Objective 1.
In regard to Objective 2, the Project would provide inputs through financing for (i) phased implementation of
community behavior change including CLTS (Community Led Total Sanitation), sanitation marketing, hand-
washing, and other relevant hygiene practices; (ii) construction/upgrading of WASH (Water Supply,
Sanitation, and Hygiene) facilities for schools, including hand-washing facilities and facilities for people with
disabilities; and (iii) promotion of hygiene promotion programs for schools and communities. The resulting
outputs would be (i) schools have improved water supply and sanitation facilities and (ii) sanitation and
hygiene promotion programs are implemented in communities and schools. The sustainability of the improved
systems would be achieved through agreement of the beneficiary villages and communities to set appropriate
tariffs and ensure collections of the funds required to operate and maintain the facilities. The intermediate
outcomes would be (i) the target communities are open defecation free (ODF) and (ii) communities and
schools have adopted sanitation and hygiene promotion programs, including handwashing practices. The
outcome would be an increase in the low-income rural and peri-urban populations accessing improved
sanitation services and practicing improved hygiene behaviors.



                                                                                                  Page 12 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS) (P085375)



In regard to Objective 2, the causal links and full results chain in the TOC were adequate. However, in regard
to the PDO indicators and IRIs, while there were adequate indicators for measuring increased access, there
were no indicators for assessing sustainability of the increased access.

Key assumptions underlying the results chain were that: (i) the GoI would continue to prioritize the objective
of increasing access to improved and
sustainable WSS services and provide adequate resources, including funds and technical support, to the
provincial/district/village/community agencies; and (ii) the participating villages and communities would be
committed to ensuring sustainability of the gains, including through setting appropriate levels of tariffs and
ensuring collections to be able to operate and maintain the systems effectively.

Outputs and Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs): (ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework and paras. 44 to
48).

Key outputs included:

      19,100 toilets constructed in schools.
      89,500 handwashing facilities established in schools.

Intermediate Results Indicators: Results were measured by three IRIs as follows:

IRI 2.1: Percentage of target communities free of open defecation: (baseline 0; target 80%; actual 82.50%;
target exceeded).

IRI 2.2: Percentage of schools that have improved sanitation facilities and hygiene programs: (baseline 0;
target 95%; actual 96.60%; target exceeded).

IRI 2.3: Improved latrines constructed under the Project (number): (baseline 0; original target 60,000; actual
30,000; target underachieved). The ICR Results Framework indicates that the actual figures measure only the
public latrines constructed under the Project.

PDO Indicators: (ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework and paras. 45 to 48).

      Number of additional people with sustainable access to improved sanitation services, differentiated by
       socio-economic status: (baseline 0; target 6 million; actual 26 million; target substantially exceeded).

Outcomes: Objective 2 was substantially achieved. As a result of the expanded project scope resulting from
the two Additional Financings and the longer than planned implementation period, the planned outputs in
regard to establishment of toilets and provision of handwashing facilities in schools were exceeded. The IRI
targets in regard to (i) the percentage of targeted communities assessed to be free of open defecation and (ii)
the establishment of sanitation facilities in schools together with the percentage of schools practicing
improved hygiene behavior were exceeded. The single PDO indicator in regard to the number of additional
people with sustainable access to improved sanitation facilities differentiated by socio-economic class was
exceeded as well. The outputs under the Project contributed to several non-quantifiable benefits in regard to
overall well-being including improved convenience and dignity (notably for women and girls in schools);
reduction in unsightliness and odors resulting from open defecation; and improved quality of surface water
and groundwater. The Project also contributed to capacity strengthening in the relevant agencies and
institutions. However, regarding sustainability of the improved sanitation services, the Results Framework

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS) (P085375)



included indicators that were limited to behavior change and improved hygiene practices in schools but did
not include any indicators regarding the sustainability of the improved physical facilities (latrines, toilets, etc.)
provided under the Project to the broader population (other than schools) to encourage improved hygiene
practices, including ODF. In the absence of measures to enable adequate operations and maintenance
(O&M) of these facilities, sustainability of any gains made in respect of improved hygiene practices (including
elimination of ODF) would be unlikely. In regard to differentiation of the results by socio-economic class, while
the Results Framework does not provide the relevant information, the ICR reports (para. 37) that the under-
served and low-income groups targeted under the Project accounted for about 44 percent of the Project's
beneficiaries.

Rating: The outcome target in regard to increased access was substantially exceeded, resulting in significant
benefits in improving the health and well-being of the targeted population. The Project contributed to capacity
building in the relevant agencies and institutions. However, the ICR does not provide adequate information or
evidence on sustainability of the improved facilities (latrines, toilets, etc.) that is essential to sustain the
behavior change and improved hygiene practices in the targeted communities and the longer-term
sustainability of the gains. In view of this shortcoming, the ICRR rates the efficacy in achievement of Revised
Objective 2 as Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To increase the number of under-served rural and peri-urban populations accessing sustainable sanitation
services.

Revised Rationale
Under the Level 2 restructuring (Additional Financing) in 2015, the PDO was revised to drop the reference to
'low-income" while retaining the reference to "under-served" in regard to the targeted rural and peri-urban
populations. The ICR states that this was done to align the PDO with the National Medium-Term Plan for
2015-2019 which emphasized universal access to WSS. Hygiene outcomes were dropped from the PDO
level as they were assessed to be captured under the sanitation outcome. However, intermediate results
indicators (IRIs) related to improvement in hygiene behavior continued to be implemented and tracked
under the Results Framework (RF). The Project continued to target low-income communities by prioritizing
districts on the basis of (i) high access gaps in water and sanitation; (ii) low and medium district fiscal
capability; and (iii) agreement to prepare five-year investment plans for WSS. (ICR para. 28). Reflecting the
Additional Financing, targets were raised significantly in regard to the PDO indicators and IRIs.

Theory of Change: The overall theory of change was presented under Objective 1. The changes in the PDO
and indicator targets did not materially impact the TOC. The key underlying assumptions remained the same
as noted above under Objective 1.

Key Outputs: These were as reported above under Objective 2.



                                                                                                      Page 14 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS) (P085375)



Intermediate Results Indicators: Results were measured by three IRIs as follows:

IRI R2.1: Percentage of target communities free of open defecation: (baseline 0; original target 80%; revised
target 60%; actual 82.50%; target substantially exceeded).

IRI 2.2: Percentage of schools that have improved sanitation facilities and hygiene programs: (baseline 0;
target 95%; actual 96.60%; target exceeded).

IRI 2.3: Improved latrines constructed under the Project (number): (baseline 0; target 60,000; actual 30,000;
target underachieved). The ICR Results Framework indicates that the actual figures measure only the public
latrines constructed under the Project.

PDO Indicators: (ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework and paras. 45 to 48).

      Number of additional people with sustainable access to improved sanitation services (baseline 0;
       original target 6 million; revised target 14.9 million; actual 26 million; target substantially exceeded).

Outcomes: Objective 2 was substantially achieved. The planned outputs in regard to establishment of toilets
and provision of handwashing facilities in schools were exceeded. The IRI targets in regard to (i) the
percentage of targeted communities assessed to be free of open defecation and (ii) the establishment of
sanitation facilities in schools together with the percentage of schools practicing improved hygiene
behavior were exceeded. The single PDO indicator in regard to the number of additional people with
sustainable access to improved sanitation facilities was exceeded as well. The ICR reports (para. 45)
that over 95 percent of the targeted schools benefited from improved WSS facilities and had adopted hygiene
improvement programs. About 92 percent of the targeted communities had adopted handwashing with soap.
Regarding WASH facilities for schools (latrines and handwashing facilities), 97 percent were reported to be
functioning well. However, regarding sustainability of the improved sanitation services, the Results
Framework included indicators that were limited to behavior change and improved hygiene practices in
schools but did not include any indicators regarding the longer-term sustainability of the improved physical
facilities (latrines, toilets, etc.) provided under the Project to the broader population (other than schools) to
encourage improved hygiene practices, including ODF. In the absence of adequate operations and
maintenance (O&M) of these facilities, sustainability of any gains made in respect of improved hygiene
practices (including elimination of ODF) would be unlikely. The ICR reports (para. 37) that the under-served
and low-income rural and peri-urban population benefiting under the Project accounted for about 44 percent
of the Project's beneficiaries.

Rating: The outcome target in regard to increased access was exceeded, resulting in significant
improvements in the health and well-being of the targeted population. The Project also contributed to capacity
building in the relevant agencies and institutions. However, the ICR does not provide adequate information or
evidence on the longer-term sustainability of the improved facilities (latrines, toilets, etc.) that is essential to
sustain the behavior change and improved hygiene practices in the targeted communities and the longer-term
sustainability of the gains. In view of this shortcoming, the ICRR rates the efficacy in achievement of Revised
Objective 2 as Substantial.



Revised Rating


                                                                                                     Page 15 of 26
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS) (P085375)



                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The rating for the Project's overall efficacy is based on the underlying ratings for efficacy in the achievement
                            of Objectives 1 and 2.

                            For Objective 1, the efficacy is rated High since the targets for the relevant PDO indicators were substantially
                            exceeded (due to the expanded project scope and extended implementation period resulting from the two
                            Additional Financings in 2013 and 2015 respectively). Targets for supporting Intermediate Results Indicators
                            (IRIs) were achieved or exceeded as well.

                            For Objective 2, the efficacy is rated Substantial. The PDO target for access to improved sanitation services
                            was substantially exceeded, resulting in significant benefits in improving the health and well-being of the
                            targeted population. The outputs under the Project contributed to several qualitative (but non-quantifiable)
                            benefits in regard to overall well-being including improved convenience and dignity (notably for women and
                            girls in schools); reduction in unsightliness and odors resulting from open defecation; and improved quality of
                            surface water and groundwater. The Project also contributed to capacity strengthening in the relevant
                            agencies and institutions. However, the ICR did not provide adequate information or evidence as to the
                            longer-term sustainability of the improved facilities (latrines, toilets, etc.) provided to the targeted population
                            which would be essential for sustaining the gains made regarding behavior change and improved hygiene
                            practices, including ODF.

                            Based thereon, the overall efficacy is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            The rating for the Project's overall efficacy (revision 1) is based on the underlying ratings for efficacy in the
                            achievement of Revised Objectives 1 and 2.

                            For Revised Objective 1, the efficacy is rated High since the targets for the relevant PDO indicators were
                            substantially exceeded. Targets for supporting Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs) were achieved or
                            exceeded as well.

                            For Revised Objective 2, the efficacy is rated Substantial. The PDO target for access to improved sanitation
                            services was exceeded, resulting in significant benefits in improving the health and well-being of the targeted
                            populations. The outputs under the Project contributed to several qualitative (but non-quantifiable) benefits in
                            regard to overall well-being including improved convenience and dignity (notably for women and girls in

                                                                                                                                  Page 16 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS) (P085375)



  schools); reduction in unsightliness and odors resulting from open defecation; and improved quality of surface
  water and groundwater. The Project contributed to capacity building in the relevant agencies and institutions.
  However, the ICR did not provide adequate information or evidence as to the longer-term sustainability of the
  improved facilities (latrines, toilets, etc.) provided to the targeted population which would be essential for
  sustaining the gains made regarding behavior change and improved hygiene practices, including ODF.

  Based thereon, the overall efficacy (revision 1) is rated Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
(Reference ICR paras. 50 to 55 and Annex 4).

Economic Efficiency

At Appraisal: A cost-benefit analysis was carried out at appraisal using the Economic Internal Rate of Return
(EIRR) and the Economic Net Present Value (ENPV) as the principal economic viability indicators. Since the
Project was a continuation in the WSSLIC series of projects and represented mainstreaming and scaling up of
activities under the earlier project (WSSLIC-2), costs and benefits were extrapolated based on the WSSLIC-2
experience. Quantified economic benefits included productivity gains from time savings and estimated health
benefits, and the incremental water supply under the project. EIRRs were estimated for a range of villages and
communities and ranged from 9 percent to 35 percent. The estimated average EIRR for the project was 24
percent.

Post-Completion: An incremental cost-benefit analysis was carried out based on the difference between the
'with-project' and 'without-project' scenarios. The economic viability indicators estimated were the EIRR and
ENPV using a discount rate of 6 percent and a project time horizon of 30 years. The analysis followed a bottom-
up approach to calculate the costs and benefits of the water supply and sanitation investments separately and
then aggregated them at the project level. The project costs included the capital costs and operating and
maintenance (O&M) costs, of the facilities and costs of associated technical assistance in regard to institutional
strengthening and capacity building in respect of planning and implementing the investments. The monetized
project benefits included (i) benefits from health improvements resulting from improved access to and quality of
water supply and access to improved sanitation services in the project areas and (ii) time savings due to the
availability of adequate water supply. Based on the foregoing, the post-completion estimates were: EIRR of
52.11 percent and ENPV of US$10,074 million.

Rating of economic efficiency: Based on the foregoing, the ICRR rates the Project's economic efficiency as
High.

Implementation Efficiency




                                                                                                    Page 17 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS) (P085375)



Project Cost: The project cost at completion was substantially in line with the costs estimated at appraisal and
revised during the two Additional Financings. The actual project cost at completion was US$1,693.42 million
compared to the revised cost of US$1,650.97 million. Targets for almost all of the results and outcome indicators
were achieved or exceeded.

Project Duration: The implementation period estimated at appraisal was 84 months (7 years). The actual
implementation period was 194 months (16 years). The extension of the implementation period was largely due
to (i) compensate for the delay of about 18 months (over the originally planned date) in project effectiveness and
(ii) the additional time required to complete the substantially expanded scope of activities under the two
Additional Financings. However, there were also some delays in implementation.

Project Management Costs: At appraisal, the cost was estimated at US$16.10 million (6 percent of the total
cost). At completion, the actual cost was US$104.28 million (6 percent of the total cost). The actual costs were
proportionately in line with those estimated at appraisal.

Rating of implementation efficiency: Based on the foregoing, the ICRR rates the Project's implementation
efficiency as Substantial with moderate shortcomings.




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                 24.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              52.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

A split evaluation has been carried out for assessing the Project's outcome.

                      Assessment of Project Outcome
                               Before 2015            After 2015
        Indicator
                              Restructuring          Restructuring
Relevance                High                    High
Efficacy                 Substantial             Substantial

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS) (P085375)



Objective 1              High                       Not rated
Objective 2              Substantial                Not rated
Revised Objective 1      Not rated                  High
Revised Objective 2      Not rated                  Substantial
Efficiency               Substantial                Substantial
Outcome Rating           Satisfactory               Satisfactory
Outcome Value            5                          5
Disbursement             US$209.49 million          US$350.58 million
Disbursement
                         37%                        63%
percentage
Weight value             1.85                       3.15
Total weight             1.85 + 3.15 = 5.00
Overall outcome
                         Satisfactory
rating

a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical and Operational Risks: These are rated Moderate. The water supply and sanitation facilities
constructed are under the management of village- and community-level agencies. For proper operation and
maintenance (O&M) of the facilities, these agencies will likely require technical and operational support. The
concerned provincial and district level agencies will need to respond to the needs in a timely and effective
manner. There is a risk that this may not always be the case.

Institutional and Management Risks: These are rated Moderate. The Project design and outcomes are
based on planning and implementation through a Community Driven Development (CDD) based approach.
While the participating villages and communities have prepared Community Action Plans (CAPs), there is a
risk that commitment to execution of the CAPs may diminish and the initial gains may be eroded over time.

Financial Risks: These are rated Moderate. Sustainability of the improved water supply and sanitation
facilities will require adequate O&M activities which would be dependent on availability of the required
financing. There is a risk that the commitment of the villages and communities to ensuring adequacy of
financial resources, including through appropriate tariffs and revenue collections, may diminish over time.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


                                                                                                   Page 19 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS) (P085375)



  The strategic relevance and the PDOs were well-aligned with the national and CPF priorities at appraisal
  and at project closure. The project design was built on an adequate theory of change and the Results
  Framework, with some shortcomings (discussed in Section 9), was adequate for the purposes of
  monitoring and evaluating implementation progress. Project design benefited from the experience and
  lessons learned from earlier projects. The Project was the third in a series of WSSLIC projects based on
  a Community Development Driven (CDD) approach and followed generally the same approach as the
  predecessor project. The focus was on developing simple and affordable options that would permit tariff
  levels that were affordable but would still enable cost-recovery. Given the multiple agencies involved at
  the national, provincial, district and village/community levels, project design recognized the need to set up
  from the outset a multi-agency Project Coordination Steering Committee (PCSC). Given the limited
  capacity at the village and community level for planning and implementation, the Project provided for
  Community Facilitator Teams (CFTs) that would provide guidance in designing and implementing
  Community Action Plans and other activities. Poverty and gender aspects were taken into account in the
  design. Technical, financial and economic aspects were generally well covered. Safeguards and fiduciary
  arrangements were adequate. The main risks were appropriately recognized, and relevant mitigation
  measures proposed. However, there were some shortcomings in ensuring the Project's readiness for
  implementation as effectiveness was delayed by almost 18 months beyond the originally planned date.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 During project implementation, the Bank supervision team remained adequately focused on development.
 The team established well-organized implementation arrangements and employed experienced staff and
 consultants to provide the implementing agencies with implementation support, including practical training
 on procurement, financial management, safeguards and project management. The task team contributed to
 promoting coordination and data sharing between the water supply and sanitation sectors and supported
 the GoI in setting up the coordination mechanism in regard to project implementation. Despite the efforts of
 the supervision team, effectiveness was delayed by about 18 months. Implementation in the early years
 was also impacted by delays in selection of project consultants and led to inappropriate selection of
 districts eligible to receive incentive grants (ICR para. 71). Two Mid-Term Reviews (MTRs) were carried out
 in 2010 and 2019. Modifications were made to the Results Framework although some shortcomings
 remained unaddressed e.g. the inclusion of indicators to assess the sustainability of the achievements
 under Objective 2.

 During the project implementation period of 16 years, the supervision team carried out a total of 26
 missions. Supplementary missions and visits were carried out as required. During the COVID-19
 pandemic, virtual missions and consultations were carried out as needed. The missions were adequately
 staffed with the required technical, safeguards, and fiduciary specialists. Over its course, the Project had
 three Task Team Leaders (TTLs). Several key staff were stationed locally, and this facilitated interaction
 with the counterparts. Implementation progress issues, guidance and action plans agreed with the
 counterparts were recorded in Aide-Memoires and Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs)
 which were filed generally in a timely manner. The Back-to-Office reporting was candid and adequately
 highlighted key issues requiring the management's attention. The Project's Implementation Status rating


                                                                                                    Page 20 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS) (P085375)



 was maintained at Moderately Satisfactory in the period May 2017 to May 2021 in view of issues that
 needed to be resolved.

 Rating: The Bank team's supervision efforts contributed to the overall Satisfactory outcome for the Project.
 The quality of supervision is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 As acknowledged in the ICR (para. 75), the original PDO was formulated at a time when the World Bank's
 and the implementing agencies' knowledge of the required M&E arrangements and results-focused
 implementation was still evolving, and thus the Results Framework (RF) was more descriptive, containing
 sections that were not project outcomes per se. Regular field monitoring was expected to be carried out by
 the communities and schools with the support of government at different levels. the data were expected to
 be collected by facilitators and undergo multi-level verification processes to ensure accuracy. The Project's
 MIS was a manual/paper-based system with a plan to be upgraded during implementation. As designed,
 the RF lacked some important indicators e.g. there were no indicators to assess the sustainability of the
 achievements under Objective 2 (sanitation and hygiene improvement).



b. M&E Implementation
  The Results Framework was revised during project restructurings to better capture implementation
  progress and achievement of outcomes. During the 2015 restructuring, the PDO was simplified, and the
  RF was adjusted to better align it with the Project's objectives. Hygiene was dropped from the PDO given
  that sanitation includes hygiene; however, activities and indicators related to hygiene improvement
  continued to be tracked and measured. Project monitoring was done through the MIS with spot-checking
  by consultants to verify the accuracy of the data. The complaints handling system was used to ensure
  beneficiary satisfaction. Regular beneficiary surveys were carried out to complement the data collected
  by the MIS. (ICR para. 76). The shortcoming in regard to sustainability-related indicators for Objective 2
  remained unaddressed during implementation.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data and analyses were used to inform project management and adaptive implementation.
  The M&E data were used to (i) identify and remedy quality problems and incorporate better controls as
  the project progressed; (ii) fine-tune the targeting of resources to the areas with the greatest needs; and

                                                                                                    Page 21 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS) (P085375)



  (iii) ensure transparency. The PAMSIMAS M&E was later integrated into the operating structure of the
  Ministry of Public Works and Housing (MPW). The MIS data were used by the GoI to (i) assess project
  progress; (ii) report achievement of the program at the provincial, district and village level; and (iii)
  assess the performance of consultants and facilitators. (ICR para. 77).

  Rating of M&E Quality: Indicators in regard to sustainability of Objective 2 were not included in the
  Results Framework as designed nor was the shortcoming addressed during implementation, The ICRR
  rates the M&E quality as Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards

   (Reference ICR paras. 79 and 80).

   At appraisal, the Project was classified as Category B - Partial assessment and triggered two safeguards
   policies, Environmental Assessment (EA) OP/BP 4.01 and Indigenous Peoples (IP) OP/BP 4.10.

   Environmental: Environmental assessment was triggered given the nature of the project activities
   (particularly the community water supply component) and associated impacts on the environment. The
   Project did not finance land acquisition (but it did receive voluntary land donations). Thus, it did not trigger
   additional safeguards related to environmental assessments. An Environmental and Social Safeguards
   Framework (ESSF) was prepared and disclosed and included procedures and guidance to ensure inclusion
   and involvement of indigenous peoples in the project. The technical implementation guidelines of the ESSF
   were prepared and were reviewed annually. (ICR para. 79). The ICR does not report any compliance-
   related issues in regard to environmental safeguards. (ICR para. 79).

   Social: Indigenous Peoples was triggered as the Project had a nation-wide scope and engaged with
   indigenous communities in several project locations. An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF)
   was prepared as part of the ESSF. There was no stand-alone Indigenous Peoples Plan prepared during
   implementation as the Project used a CDD approach, and indigenous peoples, if present in the project
   areas, were part of the beneficiaries. The ICR does not report any issues related to the IP safeguard policy.
   (ICR para. 79).

   The ICR does not report the E&S safeguards rating at project closure. The rating was Satisfactory in the last
   ISR filed before project closing.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

                                                                                                     Page 22 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS) (P085375)



  (Reference ICR paras. 81 and 82).

  Financial Management (FM): While the Project had a generally adequate FM system to provide accurate
  and timely information that the Project-related loans, credit and grants were being used for the intended
  purposes, there were weaknesses in payment verification processes in several implementing agencies.
  The ICR does not report specific cases of non-compliance. FM was rated Moderately Satisfactory at
  project closure. (ICR para. 81).

  Procurement: Procurement of all packages under the Project was completed before project closing with
  no pending contracts and was carried out satisfactorily in line with the guidelines and provisions. The ICR
  does not report any case of mis-procurement or other non-compliance. Procurement was rated
  Satisfactory at project closing. (ICR para. 82).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  Disability Inclusion: The ICR reports (para. 64) that mainstreaming of Disability Inclusive Development
  (DID) was one of the impacts. Pilot activities were carried out in 59 villages. Operational guidelines were
  issued in 2018 that require mandatory DID facilities in all public facilities financed under the PAMSIMAS
  program.



d. Other
  c(Reference ICR paras. 58 to 63).

  Gender: Gender mainstreaming was a feature during all phases of the implementation of the Project. In the
  targeted villages and communities, 55 percent of all households participated in activities related to planning,
  implementation and maintenance. 27 percent of the participants were women and the share of female
  members in the KPSPAMs was 35 percent. Around 49 percent of the participants in trainings provided to
  the villages and communities were women. A Gender Action Plan was developed and adopted for the
  Project. (The ICR does not provide any information on the content of the plan and how it was implemented).
  (ICR para. 58).

  Institutional Strengthening: This was a key feature under the Project. Technical assistance and training
  were provided to the implementing agencies at the national, provincial, district and village levels. In addition,
  the Project also provided support to district health departments and local clinics. Almost 2 million members
  of KPSPAMs were provide training in various aspects including O&M, health and hygiene promotion, and
  accounting/bookkeeping. (ICFR para. 60).

  Mobilizing Private Sector Financing: Although this was not a key feature under the Project, about 250
  KPSPAMs were able to obtain loans from commercial banks and 25 micro-finance institutions had provided
  518 loans to 453 KPSPAMs in the amount of IDR 18.1 billion (US$1.24 million). (ICR para. 61).




                                                                                                    Page 23 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS) (P085375)



   Poverty Reduction and Prosperity Sharing: The Project targeted increasing access to WSS services to
   under-served and low-income groups in rural and peri-urban areas. These accounted for about 44 percent
   of the total number of beneficiaries under the Project. (ICR para. 37).



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                   The ICRR rates the Project's
                                                                                   efficacy as Substantial which
Outcome                          Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory
                                                                                   results in the overall outcome
                                                                                   rating of Satisfactory.
                                                                                   Both quality at entry and quality
                                                                                   of supervision had some
Bank Performance                 Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory
                                                                                   shortcomings which results in
                                                                                   ratings of Satisfactory.
                                                                                   The Results Framework had
Quality of M&E                   High                  Substantial                 some shortcomings in regard to
                                                                                   adequacy of indicators.
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

(Reference ICR paras. 90 to 94).

The ICR lists a number of lessons derived from the Project's experience. Based thereon, IEG
derives the following lessons relevant for similar projects carried out in comparable environments.

A nation-wide CDD approach can be successful if it is formally acknowledged and
streamlined into a government program. One of the key aspects of the success of the
PAMSIMAS multi-sectoral program was the fact that the GoI officially acknowledged the CDD
approach as a nation-wide program. Given the multiplicity of agencies involved at the various levels
(central, provincial, regional, district, and villages/communities), this required support to be provided
through appropriate policies and guidance/guidelines that adequately empowered communities to
make decisions and plans; access financing; and take charge of ensuring the availability of WASH
facilities. (ICR para. 90). This was achieved to a significant extent through the execution of the CDD
program.

Well-conceived and coordinated multi-sector stakeholder platforms can help deal with the
special challenges posed by WASH programs. The PAMSIMAS evolved into a platform that
enabled collaboration between departments at the central, provincial and local governments, NGOs
(non-government organizations), and the private sector. This collaboration helped achieve the
sanitation related targets under the Project.




                                                                                                      Page 24 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS) (P085375)



A strong sense of ownership can motivate villages to take better care of the WSS facilities,
including keeping them functional and sustainable. Clarity and transparency about the technical,
financial and managerial aspects of the WSS services enhances their sustainability. This requires
good collaboration between the front-line service delivery providers (village governments, water user
group leaders, facilitators, and consultants). Sufficient budgetary funds need to be allocated to
finance the entire project management structure including support to the front-line actors to continue
supporting the program.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  The Project successfully utilized the Community Driven Development approach on a nation-wide scale. An
  assessment of the experience would provide information and guidance on the project design and
  implementation aspects (both positive and negative) that contributed to the overall successful implementation.
  This could be of relevance for future projects in Indonesia, including in other sectors, and provide lessons and
  guidance for similar projects to be undertaken in comparable environments in other countries.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written, candid and generally follows the OPCS guidelines (except in regard to length -
24 pages compared to the recommended 15 pages or less). It provides an adequate theory of change in regard
to the causal links and the full results chain. The reporting is outcome focused. The analysis is generally
evidence based but constrained to some extent by some weaknesses in the Project's M&E system. The ICR
provides lessons learned from the Project's experience that have broader relevance for similar projects
executed in comparable environments. The ICR does have some shortcomings. It does not provide adequate
information as to the findings of the MTR missions and how they were utilized in the project restructurings. In
rating Outcome as Highly Satisfactory, the ICR does not provide evidence in regard to sustainability of the
sanitation outcomes under Objective 2 which was a part of the PDO. While the ICR rates Bank performance
(both quality at entry and quality of supervision) as Highly Satisfactory, it does not provide sufficient justification
in support of these ratings. The ICRR rates the quality of the ICR as Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                        Page 25 of 26
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
ID-WSSLIC III (PAMSIMAS) (P085375)




                                                                  Page 26 of 26
