     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     3A-OMVS - Transmission Expansion Project (P147921)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023624

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P147921                                   3A-OMVS - Transmission Expansion Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Western and Central Africa                Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-60330                                 31-Dec-2020                                        93,054,474.30

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 12-May-2017                               30-Dec-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              97,000,000.00                                          0.00

 Revised Commitment                               97,000,000.00                                          0.00

 Actual                                           93,054,474.30                                          0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator       Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan           Kishore Laxmikant           Ramachandra Jammi            IEGSD (Unit 4)
                              Nadkarni




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to both the International Development Association (IDA) Financing Agreement (p.6) dated July 6,
   2017, and the Project Appraisal Document (p.9) dated April 21,2017, the project objective was “to enhance
   electricity trade among Mali, Mauritania, and Senegal.”

   These three countries are members of the Senegal River Basin Development Organization (OMVS –
   Organisation pour la Mise en Valeur du fleuve Sénégal). The OMVS developed an interconnected electricity
   grid among these three countries consisting of the Manantali Interconnected Network (RIMA - Réseau

                                                                                                Page 1 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     3A-OMVS - Transmission Expansion Project (P147921)



   Interconnecté de Manantali) and the national electricity networks of the three countries. The Manantali Energy
   Management Company (SOGEM - Société de Gestion de l’Energie de Manantali) is a regional power utility
   formed under the OMVS and manages the RIMA. The national power utilities of the three countries are as
   follows: The Energy of Mali (EDM - Énergie du Mali), the Mauritania Electricity Company (SOMELEC -
   Société Mauritanienne d'Electricité), and the National Electricity Company of Senegal (SENELEC – Société
   National d'Éléctricité du Sénégal).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project consisted of two components:

   A. RIMA (Réseau Interconnecté de Manantali – Manantali Interconnected Network) Reinforcement
   and Expansion. (Appraisal cost: US$94.0 million; actual cost: US$81.35 million)

   This component consisted of two subcomponents:

   A.1. Kayes-Tambacounda Transmission Line. This component was to finance the construction of a new
   228 km long 225 kV double-circuit transmission line from Kayes in Mali to Tambacounda in Senegal with an
   electricity transmission capacity of 400 MW along with the associated 225 kV bays at the existing substation
   at Kayes and the future substation in Tambacounda, which was under construction under the World Bank-
   financed OMVG Interconnection Project (P146830). OMVG is the Gambia River Basin Development
   Organization (Organisation pour la Mise en Valeur du fleuve Gambie). The subcomponent was also to
   finance the installation of a fiber optic cable and equipment for shield wiring to connect the villages along
   the transmission line to the grid.

   A.2. SCADA (Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition) System. This subcomponent was to partially
   finance the installation and implementation of a SCADA system for joint operation and coordination
   between the three entities namely Senegal River Basin Development Organization (OMVS – Organisation
   pour la Mise en Valeur du fleuve Sénégal), national power utilities (EDM, SENELEC, SOMELEC), and the
   Manantali Energy Management Company (SOGEM - Société de Gestion de l’Energie de Manantali). The
   project activities consisted of the following: (a) the upgrading of the communication and data acquisition
   facilities to enable real-time information exchange with the load dispatching center at Manantali and the
   three national power utilities; and (b) the acquisition of the necessary software licenses with relevant
   training to support optimization and scheduling of the combined hydro and thermal power generation
   capacity of RIMA.

   B. Technical Assistance. (Appraisal cost: US$9.0 million; actual cost: US$12.91 million)


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    3A-OMVS - Transmission Expansion Project (P147921)



  This component was to provide training, consultancy services, and financing of operating costs to
  strengthen the project implementation capacity of SOGEM including procurement, supervision, and
  implementation of safeguards policies. SOGEM, the project implementation entity, is a public company the
  shares of which are equally owned by Mali, Mauritania, and Senegal; the company is in charge of the
  operations and maintenance of RIMA’s power generation and transmission assets.

  Revised Components

  At the first restructuring in November 2020, the scope of the subcomponent A.1. was expanded to include
  the wiring of the second circuit of the Kayes-Tambacounda transmission line and the reinforcement of the
  two associated substations, while the electrification of the villages along the transmission line using the
  shield wire technology was dropped from the project scope upon the request of the SENELEC and EDM
  after having received negative feedback from other utilities in the sub-region about their experience in using
  this technology.

  The subcomponent A.2. SCADA was also dropped because, following a major incident on its network,
  SOGEM decided to finance the installation of the SCADA system from its own resources to accelerate the
  process. A new subcomponent was added to the project scope as follows:

  New A.2. Reinforcement of RIMA’s Optical Ground Wire (OPGW). This subcomponent was to finance
  the acquisition and installation of 1,700 km of optical ground wire to reinforce the OMVS’ OPGW network.

  At the same restructuring, the following subcomponents were added to the project scope to utilize credit
  savings from the procurement of the transmission line:

  A.3. Supply and installation of 20 MVA 225/90/30 kV transformers at the Bakel, Matam and Dagana
  substations (all in Senegal) on the existing RIMA line from Kayes to Dagana.

  A.4. Acquisition of a 20 MVA 225/90/30 kV mobile substation.

  A.5. Acquisition of a washing truck for high voltage lines.

  At the second project restructuring in May 2020, the acquisition of an optical ground wire and additional
  spare parts for the transmission line were added to the first component to utilize parts of the credit savings.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project cost was originally estimated at US$103.0 million. The project closed on
  December 30, 2022 with an actual cost of US$94.36 million.

  Financing: At appraisal, the IDA credit amount was estimated at US$97.0 million. By the project closing in
  December 2022, the project had disbursed US$93.05 million of the credit. The undisbursed amount was
  cancelled at the third restructuring, and all project funds were accounted for at the time of project
  evaluation.

  Borrower’s contribution: At appraisal, the borrower’s contribution was estimated at US$6.0 million to
  partially finance the installation of the SCADA system. As this activity was dropped at the first restructuring,
  the borrower did not provide funds to the first component. The borrower’s actual contribution at project

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     3A-OMVS - Transmission Expansion Project (P147921)



   closing was US$1.21 million, which partially financed the technical assistance activities under the second
   component.

   Project Restructurings: The project was structured three times:

         First Restructuring (November 12, 2020): To utilize the significant credit savings from the
          procurement of the transmission line between Kayes and Tambacounda of around US$48 million
          (equivalent to EUR 44.51 million—the currency used in the financing agreement), the project was
          restructured to expand its scope (see Revised Components above) and reallocate funds among
          disbursement categories to finance the newly added activities. Consequently, the project closing
          date was extended by 18 months from December 31, 2020 to June 30, 2022 to allow time for the
          completion of the new project activities and the ongoing project activities that were delayed because
          of longer than estimated time required to prepare the technical specifications for the bidding
          documents and the onset of COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020. The target values of the key
          performance indicators were revised to capture the project’s increased impact as a result of the
          expansion of the scope, such as the amount of electricity transmitted from Mali to each of Mauritania
          and Senegal from 147 GWh per year to 200 GWh per year and the annual duration of power
          outages on the RIMA system per year from 60 to 40 hours.
         Second Restructuring (May 24, 2022): The project was restructured to reallocate funds in the
          amount of around US$15 million (equivalent to EUR 14 million) to finance new project activities (see
          Revised Components above). The project closing date was extended by six months from June 30,
          2022 to December 30, 2022 to allow time for the supply and installation of the 20 MVA transformers
          at the Bakel, Matam, and Dagana substations (which was delayed because of the time to
          manufacture these transformers), the implementation of the livelihood restoration program for the
          project-affected people, and the expansion of the compensatory reforestation program under the
          safeguard implementation.
         Third Restructuring (February 23, 2023): This restructuring was processed after project closing to
          cancel an undisbursed credit amount of around US$6.5 million (equivalent to EUR 6.0 million).

   Dates: The project was approved on May 12, 2017. The IDA Financing Agreement was signed on July 6,
   2017, and the project became effective on December 21, 2017. The Mid-Term Review was conducted in
   November 2021. The original project closing date was December 31, 2020. The project closing date was
   extended by two years, and the project closed on December 30, 2022. The reasons for project closing date
   extensions are given in the project restructuring entries above.

   Reasons not to undertake a split assessment of the project’s performance: At the first restructuring
   the targets of the key performance indicators were revised upwards in accordance with the expanded scope
   of the project. Such revisions because of an expanded scope, while the financing amount remains the
   same, do not require a split assessment. Therefore, this review will assess the project’s performance based
   on the revised targets of the key performance indicators.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     3A-OMVS - Transmission Expansion Project (P147921)



The project objective was aligned at differing levels with the current World Bank country partnership
frameworks (CPFs) at the time of project closing for Senegal and Mauritania, and the CPF for Mali that
ended at the end of the World Bank Fiscal Year 2019 (Because of the fragile and crisis situation in Mali, a
new CPF could not be finalized for the fiscal years from 2020 to 2023. A new CPF is under preparation,
which will cover the fiscal years from 2024 to 2026). The project aimed at addressing the development
problem of insufficient availability and low reliability of electricity supply in the RIMA system because of low
transmission capacity. The overloading of the RIMA system was a bottleneck to the transmission of clean
and cheaper hydropower from Mali to Senegal and Mauritania. The project was also to contribute to
increased electricity supply to the system from Mauritania after the completion of gas-to-power generation
plants in the country. Regarding regional power pool development, the project was to support the
integration of the OMVS and OMVG power networks under the WAPP system. These outcomes were to be
achieved through the construction of a 225 kV transmission line between Kayes in Mali and Tambacounda
in Senegal and the installation of a new SCADA system to improve the operation efficiency of the project.
While the project objective “to enhance electricity trade among Mali, Mauritania, and Senegal” was broadly
defined and output-oriented and did not capture the outcomes expected from the project’s intervention, it
supported the achievement of the following objectives defined in the CPFs of Mali and Senegal:

      Mali: Objective 2.3. Improve infrastructure and connectivity for all Malians under Focus Area 2.
       Create Economic Opportunities of the CPF FY2016-19. The project was to support the achievement
       of this objective through the improved connection of the national electricity network in Mali with that
       of Senegal through the RIMA system, which would allow the transmission of surplus hydropower to
       the OMVS sub-region and allow the import of cheaper electricity generated by gas in Mauritania
       when needed.
      Senegal: Objective 2.2. Lower energy cost and carbon footprint and optimize the energy mix under
       the Pillar 2. Boost Competitiveness and Job Creation Through Private Sector-Led Growth of the
       CPF FY2020-2024. The project would be expected to support the achievement of this objective by
       increasing the availability of cheaper and cleaner hydropower transmitted from the OMVS
       hydropower generation plants in Mali. The alignment of the project objectives with the Senegal CPF-
       FY2020-24 was high.

The alignment of the project objective with the World Bank Country Partnership for Mauritania for FY2018-
2023 was modest. The previous CPF for Mauritania for FY2014-16 included objective 3.b. Increased
electricity export to Senegal and Mali. This objective was to be achieved through the construction of the
Banda Gas Power Plant, which would generate electricity for domestic consumption and for export of
electricity to Senegal and Mali through the RIMA system. The project was to support the achievement of
this objective by increasing the transmission capacity in the RIMA system. Since the Banda Gas Power
Plant could not be constructed, this objective could not be achieved, although the TEP increased the
transmission capacity. The current CPF for Mauritania for 2018-2023 does not include a specific objective
in electricity generation and transmission sectors within the OMVS or WAPP systems. However, the project
indirectly supports the achievement of the CPF objective 1.3. Promote the development of productive cities
and adjacent territories in the context of decentralization; one of the CPF outcomes related to the
achievement of this objective is “increased access to electricity services in intermediate cities and adjacent
rural areas.” The improvement in the RIMA system under the project should be expected to increase the
amount of electricity Mauritania receives from the system, which would increase the availability of electricity
supply—a necessary condition to increase access to electricity.

The project objective is highly aligned with the World Bank’s regional strategy as defined in the Regional
Integration and Cooperation Assistance Strategy Update for FY2021 and 2023 for Africa. The World Bank

                                                                                                      Page 5 of 23
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      3A-OMVS - Transmission Expansion Project (P147921)



               strategy aims at achieving universal access to electricity in Africa by 2030 and prioritizes the development
               of regional power pools to increase the availability of reliable electricity supply in the continent. The World
               Bank has been actively supporting the development of WAPP since its inception in 1999 through its
               financing of cross-border transmission lines and generation investments. The project was to support the
               strengthening of regional power integration in West Africa by financing a 225 kV transmission line between
               Kayes and Tambacounda, a strategic connection identified in the WAPP Master Plan between the OMVS
               and OMVG power networks that would create redundancy and improve regional power security.

               The project objective was substantially relevant to the country context in Mali, Mauritania, and Senegal.
               While the project was adequately pitched for the development status and capacity in each country and
               aligned with their electricity sector priorities, such as increasing access to electricity, the project objective
               was output-oriented rather than outcome-oriented. The formulation of the project objective did not
               adequately capture the development outcomes expected from the project’s intervention, such as increased
               availability and improved reliability and quality of electricity supply, increased regional integration, and was
               restricted with increased power trade among the countries.

               The World Bank has been a long-term development partner of the countries in West Africa in the
               development of national electricity sectors and the development of a power market through regional power
               pools. The World Bank has extensive experience in the electricity transmission sector worldwide, and
               country experience in the three project beneficiary countries. Therefore, the project objective, as explained
               in the previous sector, could have been more ambitious to reflect the full development impact of the
               project’s intervention.

               While there were moderate shortcomings in the project objective’s alignment with the World Bank country
               strategies and the formulation of the project objective was output-oriented, the project’s intervention was
               critical in increasing the availability and improving the reliability of electricity supply in the RIMA system and
               strengthening the integration of the WAPP system. Overall, the relevance of the project objective is rated
               Substantial.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To enhance electricity trade among Mali, Mauritania, and Senegal.

                             Rationale


                                                                                                                           Page 6 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   3A-OMVS - Transmission Expansion Project (P147921)



Theory of Change

The project objective was output-oriented, and its formulation did not capture the outcomes expected from the
project intervention’s in reinforcing the capacity and reliability of the transmission system for Mali, Mauritania,
and Senegal, increasing the availability of electricity supply, and establishing the infrastructure for the
development of larger generation projects and integration within the WAPP market. The inputs—IDA funds—
were to be used for the construction of a 225 kV transmission line (including the upgrading of the associated
substations) creating a second interconnection between the national grids of Mali and Senegal and the
installation of a new SCADA system. The project’s output would be increased electricity transmission capacity
between these two countries by 600 MW, which would alleviate the transmission bottleneck in the existing
RIMA transmission line (150 MW transmission capacity) from Kayes in Mali to Dagana in Senegal and from
Dagana to Dakar. The improved transmission capacity would also allow the evacuation of power from the
Banda Gas Power Station (140 MW) in Mauritania and the Albatros Heavy-Fuel Oil Power Station (92 MW)
and Gouina Hydroelectric Power Station (140 MW) in Mali following their commissioning. The other project
output would be the operation of a new SCADA system.

The outcomes expected from the project’s outputs would be a substantial increase in the amount of electricity
transmitted to Senegal through the new transmission line, supply of more electricity from Mauritania to the
RIMA system because of the reduced load in the existing line, a reduction in the number and duration of
outages because of the increased availability of electricity and the reduced load on the existing line (improved
reliability), and interconnection of the OMVS with OMVG power networks that would complete the integration
of national electricity grids of the West African nations under the WAPP. The redundant capacity to be
created by the project and integration under the WAPP would also allow project countries to receive electricity
from other countries in the region if there were a drop in the electricity supply from OVMS generation plants,
such as low hydropower generation because low hydraulicity. In the medium and long-terms, the increased
availability of reliable electricity supply would be expected to lead to higher electrification rates in the region.

The project did not include any technical assistance activity in capacity strengthening other than the support
to the project implementation entity for procurement and safeguards and supervision through the hiring of an
owner’s engineer.

The project’s theory of change was built on the critical assumptions that there would be sufficient power
supply in the RIMA system and that the national utilities of the three countries and the regional utility would
have sufficient funds to adequately operate and maintain the electricity network.

Overall, the causal links from project activities and outputs to expected outcomes were direct and valid, but
the attribution was weak as there were other regional and national transmission line investments being
implemented that would contribute to the achievement of the project objectives. The transmission line to be
constructed under the project constituted a part of a larger regional electricity sector development under the
WAPP in power generation and transmission, but it was a critical investment in improving the backbone of the
RIMA system.

The addition of new activities to the project scope did not change the project’s theory of change. The
installation of the 20 MVA transformers on each of the three substations on the existing Kayes-Dagana
transmission line would increase the redundant capacity on the line and contribute to the achievement of the
project outcomes. The availability of spare parts and the washing truck purchased under the project would
contribute to the sustainability of the operation and maintenance of the RIMA system.


                                                                                                      Page 7 of 23
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  3A-OMVS - Transmission Expansion Project (P147921)



Outputs

     Transmission lines constructed or rehabilitated under the project (km). The project successfully
        completed the construction of the 285.30 km 225 kV Kayes-Tambacounda double-circuit transmission
        line and the associated 20 MVA transformers at the Kayes and Tambacounda substations, as
        targeted. The transmission line was partially commissioned on October 28, 2022, and full
        commissioning took place on December 9, 2022.
       New transformers installed in the RIMA. The project was to install a 20 MVA transformer at each of
        the three substations in Bakel, Matam, and Dagana (all in Senegal) on the existing RIMA transmission
        line from Kayes (Mali) to Dagana where it splits into two towards Dakar (Senegal) and Nouakchott
        (Mauritania). The project completed the installation of the transformer at the Bakel substation, which
        was commissioned on February 16, 2023, after project closing. The commissioning of the
        transformers at the Matam and Dagana substations was expected in November 2023 but has not
        materialized at the time of this review.
       New mobile substation. The project was to finance the delivery of a 225/30 kV mobile substation, but
        the delivery of the mobile substation had not happened by project closing. The ICR does not provide
        information about when the mobile substation will be delivered to SOGEM.
       New Optical Ground Wire (OPGW) cables. The project financed the delivery of the 1,700 km cables,
        as targeted, to the port of Dakar. These high-capacity optical cables will replace the existing low-
        capacity ones and will be delivered to the Rosso substation in Mauritania (464 km), Manantali
        substation in Mali (643 km), and the Dagana substation in Senegal (593 km).
       Additional spare parts. The project utilized credit savings to purchase additional spare parts for 225
        kV high voltage switchgear, 225 kV disconnectors, insulators for pantograph disconnector,
        disconnector control cabinet, current transformers, voltage transformers, lightning arresters,
        differential protection, and distance protection terminals for 225 kV line, and metering cabinet with four
        energy meters plus accessories.
       New washing truck. The project financed the purchase of a washing truck to be used for the cleaning
        of the high voltage line insulators and a training in its use. The system operator received the truck on
        October 31, 2022.
       Implementation of a SCADA system. This activity was dropped as SOGEM decided to accelerate
        the installation of the new system using its own funds outside of the project. The SCADA system is
        operational; the new transformer bays constructed under the project are integrated to the Manantali
        Dispatching SCADA, and the numerical command control system is installed in the Kayes-
        Tambacounda transmission line substations. However, the achievement of this output is not
        attributable to the project’s intervention.
       The project was to connect the villages along the transmission line using the shield wire technology,
        but this activity was dropped from the project scope upon the request of the SENELEC and EDM after
        having received negative feedback from other utilities in the sub-region about their experience using
        this technology.

Outcomes

     Additional annual electricity traded between Mali and Senegal (GWh). This indicator was defined
        as “The quantity of electricity flowing to the Senegalese national power grid as a result of the project”
        (PAD, p.24). The Manantali (200 MW) and Felou (60 MW) hydroelectric power plants of the OMVS are
        on the Senegal River in Mali. The power plants had been transmitting electricity to Senegal and
        Mauritania through the existing Kayes-Dagana transmission line of the RIMA system (with a 150 MW

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 23
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
3A-OMVS - Transmission Expansion Project (P147921)



   capacity). Therefore, the construction of the Kayes-Tambacounda double-circuit transmission line
   between Mali and Senegal significantly increased the electricity transmission capacity between the
   two countries from 150 MW to 750 MW (by 600 MW), which will allow more power to flow from Mali to
   Senegal through the RIMA. The ICR (p.36) reports that Senegal’s electricity import from the RIMA
   system increased by about 168 GWh in 2022 compared to the import amount in 2021. However, this
   achievement cannot be fully attributed to the project’s intervention as the Kayes-Tambacounda
   transmission line was partially commissioned on October 28, 2022, and fully commissioned on
   December 9, 2022. The increase was because of the increased availability of more hydropower after
   the commissioning of the Gouina Hydroelectric Power Plant (140 MW) in March 2022. However, the
   availability of additional capacity through the Kayes-Tambacounda transmission line starting from
   October 28, 2022, should have been expected to have facilitated the transmission of power from the
   Gouina Hydroelectric Power Plant. According to the Interconnection Permanent Technical Committee
   (IPTC) report, Senegal’s electricity import from the RIMA system is expected to increase by about 247
   GWh in 2023. The project’s target was 200 GWh. Although the evidence provided in the ICR is
   insufficient to establish attribution between the increase expected in Senegal’s electricity import in
   2023 and the commissioning of the Kayes-Tambacounda transmission line, the significant increase in
   the electricity transmission capacity between the two countries (from 150 MW before the project to
   750 MW after the project) should be expected to have a positive impact on increasing Senegal’s
   electricity imports from Mali in the medium and long-terms. The project team additionally reported that
   according to the data gathered from the RIMA system operated, a total of 501.4 GWh of electricity
   was transmitted from Mali (Gouina, Felou, and Manantali hydroelectric power plants) to Senegal and
   Mauritania through the Kayes-Tambacounda transmission line between November 2022 and
   November 2023 (Regional Director’s email dated December 14, 2023). This achievement was higher
   than the target of 400 GWh (i.e., 200 GWh for each of Senegal and Mauritania) of power transmission
   per year through the Kayes-Tambacounda transmission line. It can also be argued that without the
   excess transmission capacity created by the commissioning of the Kayes-Tambacounda transmission
   line, the supply of electricity from the 140 MW Gouina Hydroelectric Power Plant, which was
   commissioned in March 2022, could have further overload the existing only RIMA transmission line
   from Kayes to Dagana with a transmission capacity of 150 MW.
  Additional annual electricity traded between Mali and Mauritania (GWh). This indicator was
   described as “The additional quantity of electricity flowing to Malian national power grid as a result of
   the project” (PAD, p.24). However, the ICR (p.10) defines this indicator as “Annual additional increase
   in the Mali energy export to Mauritania.” The definitions of the indicator given in the PAD and the ICR
   contradict each other. Because the Banda Gas Power Station in Mauritania had not been constructed,
   Mauritania did not supply electricity to the RIMA system but received electricity from Mali through the
   system. Therefore, this review will take the definition in the ICR into consideration in assessing the
   achievement of this indicator. Similar to the achievement of the previous outcome above, the increase
   of around 194 GWh in the amount of electricity Mauritania received from the RIMA system in 2022
   compared to 2021 cannot be fully attributed to the project as the Kayes-Tambacounda transmission
   line was partially commissioned on October 28, 2022, and fully commissioned on December 9, 2022.
   The increased availability of power after the commissioning of the Gouina Hydroelectric Power Plant
   in March 2022 was the main reason for the increase in the electricity transmission from Mali to
   Mauritania. However, the availability of additional capacity through the Kayes-Tambacounda
   transmission line starting from October 28, 2022, should have been expected to have facilitated the
   transmission of power from the Gouina Hydroelectric Power Plant. The IPTC report estimates that the
   amount of electricity Mauritania imports from the RIMA system will increase by around 218 GWh in
   2023. The project’s target was 200 GWh. Although the evidence is insufficient to establish attribution
   between the expected increase in Mauritania’s electricity import and the commissioning of the Kayes-

                                                                                              Page 9 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   3A-OMVS - Transmission Expansion Project (P147921)



       Tambacounda transmission line, the significant increase in the electricity transmission capacity on the
       RIMA system (from 150 MW before the project to 750 MW after the project) and the flow of electricity
       to Dakar through the Kayes-Tambacounda transmission line resulting in a reduction in the load on the
       existing Bakel-Dagana transmission line should be expected to have a positive impact on increasing
       the amount of electricity transmitted to Mauritania. Furthermore, as the commissioning of the three 20
       MVA transformers (in November 20223) in each of the Bakel, Matam, and Dagana substations on the
       existing Kayes-Dagana transmission line will further increase the transmission capacity of the system,
       this should be expected to have a positive impact on increasing the amount of electricity transmitted to
       Mauritania in the medium and long-terms. As noted in the assessment of the achievement of the
       previous indicator above, the project team reported that according to the data gathered from the RIMA
       system operated, a total of 501.4 GWh of electricity was transmitted from Mali (Gouina, Felou, and
       Manantali hydroelectric power plants) to Senegal and Mauritania through the Kayes-Tambacounda
       transmission line between November 2022 and November 2023 (Regional Director’s email dated
       December 14, 2023). This achievement was higher than the target of 400 GWh (i.e., 200 GWh for
       each of Senegal and Mauritania) of power transmission per year through the Kayes-Tambacounda
       transmission line.
      Average annual duration of power outages on the RIMA system per year (hours). The ICR
       (footnote 18 on p.16) defines this indicator in hours as a ratio “between the undistributed energy
       during long outages and the average power distributed over the course of a year, for all the
       consumers.” The baseline in 2016 was 72 hours per year. The duration of outages per year dropped
       to about 26 hours per year in 2021 (before the commissioning of the Kayes-Tambacounda
       transmission line in December 2022 and the to-be-commissioned transformers on the Kayes-Dagana
       transmission line under the project) against the original and revised targets of 60 and 40 hours per
       year, respectively. The ICR (p.37) lists the reasons for this significant reduction in the duration of
       outages on the RIMA system as the following: (a) The coordination of the protection system at the
       level of the WAPP area and the interconnection of electricity networks of the WAPP space, (b) the
       strengthening of the production capacities of the RIO (the dual powerplant of 180 MW of SOMELEC,
       the hybrid powerplant of 120 MW of Malikunda of SENELEC, the solar powerplants of SENELEC and
       EDM-SA, the hydroelectric powerplant of 140 MW of Gouina), and (iii) the doubling of the capacity of
       power transformers in certain strategic high voltage substations of RIMA outside of the project’s
       intervention. Therefore, the achievement in the reduction of the duration of outages on the RIMA
       system cannot be fully attributed to the project’ intervention, but the Kayes-Tambacounda
       transmission line should be expected to contribute to the reliability and stability of the RIMA system as
       it has significantly increased the transmission capacity between Mali and Senegal resulting in a
       reduction of the load on the existing Kayes-Dagana transmission line and also satisfies the N-1
       contingency criterion by establishing a second link between the Kayes substation in Mali and the
       national grid in Senegal (The N-1 contingency criterion is defined as the capability of delivering
       electricity from one point to another, i.e., from a generation site to a substation or from one substation
       to another, without any load loss in case of a failure in one of the two transmission lines between
       those two points). Based on the information received from the project beneficiaries, the project team
       reported that because of the increased availability and improved reliability of electricity supply
       following the commissioning of the Kayes-Tambacounda transmission line, the end-users in Senegal
       had not needed to turn on their diesel-fired generators (Regional Director’s email dated December 14,
       2023).

The project successfully completed the construction and commissioning of the Kayes-Tambacounda
transmission line strengthening the backbone of the RIMA system by significantly increasing the transmission
capacity between Mali and Senegal from 150 MW to 750 MW, but the commissioning of the 20 MVA

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 23
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                3A-OMVS - Transmission Expansion Project (P147921)



                            transformers at each of the three substations on the existing Kayes-Dagana transmission line could not be
                            completed before project closing (currently one of them has been commissioned; the commissioning of the
                            remaining two transformers was expected in November 2023). The Kayes-Tambacounda transmission line
                            connected the OMVS and OMVG power networks completing their integration under the WAPP system. The
                            transmission line is expected to play a critical role in the improvement of system security in the WAPP
                            system, the reliability and quality of the electricity supply, and the electrification rates of the countries in the
                            region. However, because the transmission line was partially commissioned in October 2022, and fully
                            commissioned in December 2022, the achievements in increasing the electricity supply from Mali to Senegal
                            and Mauritania in 2022 and the reductions in the number and duration of outages in the system measured in
                            2021 cannot be fully attributed to the project’s intervention. The ICR does not provide data that could have
                            been collected for the first quarter of 2023 to compare the amount of electricity transmitted through the
                            existing line (i.e., Kayes-Dagana transmission line) before the project and after the project and assess the
                            impact of the project on creating redundant transmission capacity. Similarly, the ICR does not provide data
                            related to the amount of electricity transmitted through the newly built Kayes-Tambacounda transmission line
                            during the first quarter of 2023. Such data would have provided evidence to assess the project’s impact.
                            However, the project team provided additional data related to the amount of electricity transmitted through the
                            Kayes-Tambacounda transmission line between November 2022 and November 2023 showing that the
                            transmission line transmitted a larger quantity of electricity than targeted. According to the end-user
                            testimonies, there was a significant improvement in the reliability of electricity that made the use of diesel-
                            fired generators redundant.

                            Overall, although the ICR did not provide sufficient evidence to assess the achievement of the outcomes
                            expected from the project’s intervention, this review rates the efficacy of the project in achieving the project
                            objectives as Substantial taking into consideration the additional data provided by the project team in their
                            email dated December 14, 2023, and the project’s impacts on significantly increasing the power transmission
                            capacity between Mali and Senegal and the further integration of the regional power pool under the WAPP
                            system, which are expected to result in an increased availability and improved reliability of electricity supply in
                            the region.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project successfully completed the construction of the Kayes-Tambacounda transmission line, which
                            resulted in a significant increase in the electricity transmission capacity in the RIMA system. The impact of the
                            transmission line and the 20 MVA transformers to be commissioned on the existing Kayes-Dagana
                            transmission line on improving the system security and the reliability and quality of the electricity supply in the
                            RIMA system is expected to be critical. Although the ICR did not provide sufficient evidence for the
                            achievement of the project outcomes, the project team provided additional data that allowed the assessment
                            of the project’s impact on increasing Mali’s electricity export to Senegal and Mauritania and reducing power


                                                                                                                                 Page 11 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      3A-OMVS - Transmission Expansion Project (P147921)



  outages in the RIMA system. Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective to enhance
  electricity trade among Mali, Mauritania, and Senegal is rated Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis

The cost-benefit analysis conducted at appraisal included quantifiable economic benefits, which were relevant
and adequate to assess the economic viability of the project’s intervention. These economic benefits consisted
of the following: (a) increased efficiency in electricity supply (reduced transmission losses, security N-1, reduced
outages, and voltage fluctuations); and (b) increased supply of electricity to Senegal and Mauritania to meet
existing suppressed demand and expected growth in demand. These benefits were quantified by using the
average costs of power supplied from thermal generation sources in Senegal and Mauritania. The investment
cost of the transmission line and the operation and maintenance (O&M) costs (two percent of the investment
cost per year) were included as costs in the analysis. The transmission line’s economic lifetime was taken as 40
years. Based on these assumptions, the calculations resulted in an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of
24.95 percent with a net present value (NPV) of US$305 million at a six percent discount rate.

A similar cost-benefit analysis was conducted at project evaluation during the first half of 2023 based on the
actual investments costs and estimated economic benefits as the transmission line was fully commissioned only
in December 2022. The maximum electricity transmission capacity of the existing Kayes-Bakel transmission line
was recorded at 572 GWh in 2021 and following the commissioning of the Kayes-Tambacounda transmission
line, the capacity in the RIMA system increased to 971 GWh, which corresponds to a 200 GWh of increase in
the availability of electricity supply for each utility in Senegal and Mauritania. The calculations resulted in an
EIRR of 26.41 percent and an NPV of US$219.33 million. If the economic benefits from the reduction of
greenhouse gas emissions (avoided thermal production and deforestation emissions) are included in the
calculations (which were not included in the analysis at appraisal), the EIRR and NPV increase to 27.0 percent
and US$287.28 million, respectively.

The economic analyses conducted both at appraisal and at the time of project closing confirm the economic
viability of the project’s intervention.

Financial Analysis

At appraisal, a financial analysis was conducted to assess the net financial return of the Kayes-Tambacounda
transmission line. The financial benefit of the project to the utilities in Senegal and Mauritania was calculated as
the cash inflows generated by selling the incremental electricity as a result of a reduction in transmission losses.
However, loss in financial benefits because of commercial losses were not included in the calculations at
appraisal or project evaluation (ICR, p.64). The project costs were taken as the investment cost of the
transmission line and O&M costs (two percent of the investment cost). The analysis calculated a financial



                                                                                                      Page 12 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      3A-OMVS - Transmission Expansion Project (P147921)



internal rate of return (FIRR) of 18.35 percent and a financial net present value (FNPV) of US$672.0 million at a
discount rate (i.e., IDA grant fees rate) of 0.75 per cent.

The financial analysis conducted at the time of project evaluation using the same methodology resulted in an
FIRR of 17.24 percent and an FNPV of US$146.57 million at a discount rate of five percent (the 2023 interest
rate for bonds in Senegal). The higher discount rate used for the financial analysis at project closing is the main
reason for a much lower FNPV compared to the FNPV calculated at appraisal. The use of a higher discount rate
at project closing was more relevant to assess the financial return of the transmission line rather than the IDA
grant fees rate used at appraisal.

Operational and Administrative Efficiency

Project implementation faced serious delays because of the slow progress in forming the project implementation
unit (PIU) and hiring a consultant for the preparation of safeguard documents. The project completed the
Resettlement Action Plans for Mali and Senegal two years after the approval of project. This resulted in a delay
in acquiring the parts of the right-of-way for the construction of the transmission line where there were
settlements or agricultural activities. The procurement capacity of the PIU was insufficient through to project
closing which resulted in delays in the completion of the procurement processes of the main contracts (i.e., the
Kayes-Tambacounda transmission line) and the contracts for the project activities added to the project scope to
utilize the credit savings. Because of procurement delays, some project activities could not be completed before
project closing such as the commissioning of the three 20 MVA on the Kayes-Dagana transmission line. The full
commissioning of the transmission line was delayed because of the time required to design the transmission line
and the transformers to be installed at the Kayes and Tambacounda substations. The cost of the Kayes-
Tambacounda transmission line was significantly overestimated at appraisal, which led to a credit saving of
around 50 percent of the investment cost estimated at appraisal. The project was restructured to utilize the
credit savings to finance additional project activities (increased scope), but around US$6.5 million (equivalent to
EUR 6.0 million) of the total commitment of US$97 million (equivalent to EUR 91.5 million) could not be utilized
and was cancelled at the third restructuring in December 2022. Exogenous factors slowed down project
implementation and adversely affected the administrative and operational efficiency of the project—the onset of
the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020, and the military coups in Mali in August 2020 and May 2021.

Overall, because of significant shortcomings in the administrative and operational efficiency in forming the PIU,
the procurement of contracts, the implementation of the safeguard policies, and the preparation of technical
designs, the project’s efficiency in achieving the project objective is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      100.00
 Appraisal                                                 24.95
                                                                                       Not Applicable


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      3A-OMVS - Transmission Expansion Project (P147921)



                                                                                       100.00
ICR Estimate                                                26.41
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

While the alignment of the project objective was weak with the country strategy for Mauritania, and the project
objective was output-oriented, the project objective’s alignment with the World Bank country strategies for Mali
and Senegal was substantial and high, respectively, and the project significantly supported the World Bank
strategy of power integration in Africa. Therefore, the relevance of objectives is rated Substantial. The evidence
in the ICR was insufficient to establish attribution between the project’s intervention and the achievement of
project outcomes of increased availability and improved reliability of electricity supply in the RIMA system.
However, the project team provided additional data related to the achievement of the project outcomes in
increasing the amount of electricity transmitted from Mali to Senegal and Mauritania. Additionally, the project
resulted in a significant increase in the transmission capacity between Mali and Senegal, which should be
expected to contribute to the reliability of the regional WAPP system. Therefore, the project’s efficacy in
achieving the project objective is rated Substantial. Lastly, although the cost-benefit analyses resulted in high
economic internal rates of return before and after the project, there were significant shortcomings in the hiring of
staff for the project implementation unit, implementation of safeguards policies and procurement, and
preparation of technical designs. Therefore, the project’s efficiency in achieving the project objective is rated
Modest. Overall, the project’s outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical. The technical aspects of the project were robust. International sector standards were used in the
construction of the transmission line and the associated transformers. The economic lifetime of the
transmission line is 40 years. As SOGEM has adequate experience in the operation and maintenance of high
voltage transmission lines, and the project acquired sufficient number of spare parts, the technical risk to the
sustainability of the project outcomes is low.

Financial. A worsening in the financial situations of SOGEM and the national power utilities could jeopardize
the sustainable operation and maintenance of the transmission line, but this risk is low. The OMVS
transmission system is one of the most advanced sub-regional networks in Africa, which had been gradually
growing. The project successfully integrated the OMVS system with the OMVG network under the WAPP
system. The increased regional integration of the electricity transmission networks in West Africa will
facilitate more electricity trade among the countries in the region and improve the system security. This
should be expected to provide sufficient funds to the utilities from the sale of electricity to adequately operate
and maintain the regional electricity network.

Political and economic. Some countries in the region have been experiencing recurring political instability
that adversely affects the economic activities. For example, there were two military coups in Mali in 2020 and

                                                                                                      Page 14 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      3A-OMVS - Transmission Expansion Project (P147921)



2021. Although the OMVS system continued its operation and growth during political instability times, such
political uncertainties and instabilities could adversely affect economic activities and result in underutilization
of the transmission network because of lower demand for electricity. Political instabilities could also
jeopardize the proper operation and maintenance of the transmission network.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Expansion of the RIMA system’s transmission capacity to ease the overloading at the existing line and
  allow more electricity to flow among Mali, Senegal and Mauritania and the integration of the OMVS and
  OMVG to increase the regional system security and reliability under the WAPP were of high strategic
  importance of the project countries and the other West African nations. The project’s approach was
  simple consisting of the construction of a critical 225 kV transmission line to create a second
  interconnection between Mali and Senegal together with the installation of a new SCADA system. The
  technical aspects of the project were adequate as international standards were to be used in the
  construction of the transmission line, and the design included excess capacity to accommodate future
  electricity supply increases. The economic analysis was sufficient to assess the economic viability of the
  project’s intervention based on increased electricity supply assumptions. The project benefited from the
  experiences and lessons learned during the implementation of cross-border transmission line projects
  such as the implementation of the project by a single entity (i.e., SOGEM) rather than by national utilities,
  the construction of the transmission line under one contract, and sufficient pre-project consultations with
  the stakeholders to ensure commitment and ownership. However, because of the regional nature of the
  project, the implementation arrangements were complex including SOGEM, OMVS, the three
  governments, and their utilities. The main risks were adequately identified, i.e., political and security
  situation, utilities’ financial viability, complex implementation arrangements, and allegations and
  corruption, and mitigation measures for some of the risks were in place, such as one project
  implementation entity and the World Bank’s close supervision of the fiduciary aspects of the project. As
  SOGEM already had experience in implementing World Bank-financed projects, it was assessed to have
  sufficient capacity to implement the project with additional training to the PIU staff in World Bank
  procedures and the support of an owner’s engineer. The procurement risk was adequately assessed, and
  the mitigation measures were identified in detail (PAD, pp.45-46), but these measures were not fully
  effective in mitigating the procurement risk during project implementation. The project’s preparedness in
  safeguards implementation was insufficient; the Resettlement Action Plan could not be prepared because
  the design of the transmission line including its route was to be completed with the support of the owner’s
  engineer after the start of project implementation. The results framework included indicators to measure
  the improvement in the RIMA system, but they were insufficient to establish attribution between the
  project’s intervention and the achievement of the expected outcomes. The cost of the transmission line
  was significantly overestimated, which was double the amount of the actual cost.

  The quality at entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory because of moderate shortcomings in the
  identification, preparation, and appraisal of the project.




                                                                                                        Page 15 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     3A-OMVS - Transmission Expansion Project (P147921)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank project team held supervision missions twice a year until the onset of the COVID-19
 pandemic in March 2020, after which virtual supervision missions were held. There was continuity in the
 project team as one of the three co-Task Team Leaders (TTLs) had been with the project from appraisal
 until project closing. A review of the Implementation Status and Results Reports and the Aide Memoires
 showed that the performance reporting was candid and detailed with minor shortcomings in the reporting of
 the safeguards implementation. The project team’s supervision of the financial management of the project
 was adequate; there were no known issues of corruption or misuse of funds. The project team was
 proactive in restructuring the project twice to use credit savings to expand the scope of the project through
 the purchase of transformers that would further increase the transmission capacity of the RIMA system and
 spare parts to ensure proper maintenance. However, there were moderate shortcomings in the supervision
 of the safeguards policy implementation; because of the delays in the preparation of the RAP for about two
 years, the construction of the transmission line fell behind schedule (ICR, p.33). Despite the project team’s
 close support to the SOGEM and the PIU, procurement of main contracts was delayed because of the
 PIU’s insufficient procurement capacity, which continued through to project closing and resulted in
 uncompleted project activities. The project team’s focus was on the completion of the project outputs, but
 the weaknesses in the results framework were not addressed to adequately capture the project outcomes
 and establish attribution between the project’s intervention and the achievement of the outcomes and
 project objective.

 The quality of supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory because of moderate shortcomings in the
 proactive resolution of threats to project implementation and delivery of project outputs.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project objective was output-oriented, rather than outcome-oriented—to enhance electricity trade
 among Mali, Mauritania, and Senegal. The project’s theory of change was simple and straightforward; the
 causal chains form project activities and outputs to outcomes were valid and direct but the results
 framework did not include indicators to adequately capture the outcomes that could be attributed to the
 project’s intervention. The outcome level indicators measured the increase in the electricity traded between
 Mali and Mauritania and between Mali and Senegal, and the reduction in the average annual duration of
 power outages on the RIMA system. The indicators were insufficient to establish attribution as there were
 other transmission projects implemented simultaneously with funding from other international donors to

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     3A-OMVS - Transmission Expansion Project (P147921)



 increase the transmission capacity of the RIMA system, such as the 225 kV Manantali-Kita-Kati
 transmission line and the 225 kV Kayes-Kifa-Titane transmission line towards Nouakchott, Mauritania (ICR,
 p.8). The results framework did not capture the impact of the project on easing the overload on the existing
 Kayes-Dagana transmission line or improving the reliability of electricity supply in Dakar, Senegal, and
 Nouakchott. The results framework included only one intermediate indicator measuring the length of the
 transmission line constructed. The other intermediate indicator was deleted as the installation of the
 SCADA system was dropped from the projects scope. M&E arrangements were adequately embedded
 institutionally as SOGEM had sufficient capacity for M&E.



b. M&E Implementation
  The weaknesses in the M&E design in accurately capturing the achievement of the outcomes that would
  be attributable to the project were not addressed during project implementation. The indicators could only
  measure the improvements in the RIMA system without establishing attribution to the project. No new
  outcome-level indicator was added to the results framework, but new intermediate indicators were added
  to the results framework to follow the implementation of the project activities added to the project scope.
  The progress in the construction of the transmission line was adequately monitored and measured during
  project implementation along with the implementation of other activities added at the project restructuring
  such as the commissioning of the three 20 MVA transformers and one mobile transformer, acquisition of
  a washing truck, and delivery of optical ground cables. Because of the nature of such transmission
  projects, the impact of the project on the electricity supply could only be measured after the
  commissioning of the line. The ICR reports the additional increase in the electricity transmitted from Mali
  to Senegal and Mauritania and the reduction in the average annual duration of the outages in the RIMA
  system as of end of 2022. Since the Kayes-Tambacounda transmission line was fully commissioned on
  December 9, 2020, it is not possible to assess the impact of the project on the improvement of the
  system security and reliability.



c. M&E Utilization
  The progress in the construction of the Kayes-Tambacounda transmission line was regularly
  communicated to the stakeholders. The M&E findings did not play a role in the project restructurings
  which were processed to use credit savings to finance additional activities. The measurements taken at
  the end of 2022 were used to provide evidence of the achievement of outcomes, but as explained in the
  paragraph above, these measurements did not adequately capture the impact of the project on the
  improvement of the security and reliability of the RIMA system since the transmission line was fully
  commissioned on December 9, 2022. Furthermore, the outcome-level indicators were insufficient to
  measure the achievement of the outcomes that were attributable to the project’s intervention.



  Overall, the M&E quality is rated Modest. There were significant shortcomings in the design and
  implementation of the M&E system making it difficult to assess the achievement of the stated objectives,
  test the links in the results chain, and establish attribution between the project’s intervention and the
  outcomes achieved.




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     3A-OMVS - Transmission Expansion Project (P147921)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the project was classified as Category B under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and
   triggered the Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP
   4.11) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) safeguard policies.

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): At appraisal, the project was classified as Category B because
   of minimal site-specific, temporary, and reversible environmental impacts of the civil works related to the
   construction of the transmission line and related substations. The project prepared an Environmental and
   Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) at appraisal and disclosed it in the project countries and on the World
   Bank’s InfoShop. An Environmental and Social Management Plan was prepared following the finalization of
   the transmission line design and disclosed in the project countries and the World Bank’s InfoShop. Two
   environmental specialists of the owner’s engineer hired under the project supervised the implementation of
   environmental safeguard policy and produced monthly reports. The project closed without any accident at
   project sites that would have required the work stoppage (ICR, p.30).

   Forests (OP/BP 4.36). The project triggered this safeguard policy because the transmission line was
   expected to pass through four protected forest areas in Senegal near Tambacounda—the Goudiry
   Protected Forest, the Bala East, the Bala West, and the Botou Protected Forests. It was estimated that 200
   ha of forests would be lost because of the construction of the transmission line. After the finalization of right-
   of-way of the transmission line, the civil works also affected the Paparah Forest in Mali. Under three
   programs, the project reforested a total of 1,000 ha of area in four forests in Senegal and one forest in Mali.
   Additionally, the project constructed or rehabilitated a total of 500 km of firebreaks in these five forests. The
   forestation programs consisted of enrichment planting, conservation planting, assisted artificial
   regeneration, and village groves and orchards (ICR, p.30).

   Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04). The project triggered this safeguard policy because there were noncritical
   natural habitats in the forests through which the transmission line was to pass. By reforesting the damaged
   areas because of the construction of the transmission line, the project was to achieve zero net biodiversity
   loss. As explained in the paragraph above, the project reforested a total of 1,000 ha of area in Senegal and
   Mali. The project did not have any impact on critical natural habitats, and noncritical natural habitats
   damaged by the project had been restored by project closing.

   Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): At appraisal, there was no known archaeological or sacred
   sites in the project areas, but the project triggered this safeguard policy to prevent any accidental loss or
   damage to cultural sites that could be found by chance during construction. A Physical Cultural Resources
   (PCR) report was prepared to identify the archaeological and cultural sites along the right-of-way of the
   transmission line. Based on the findings of the report, the right-of-way of the transmission line was rerouted
   to avoid cultural heritage sites.

   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): The project triggered this safeguard policy because land
   acquisition was required for the right-of-way of the transmission line. As the exact locations of the towers


                                                                                                      Page 18 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    3A-OMVS - Transmission Expansion Project (P147921)



  and the alignment of the transmission line were not known at appraisal, the project prepared a Resettlement
  Policy Framework (RPF) and disclosed it in the project countries and on the World Bank’s InfoShop. The
  project was to prepare a detailed Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for each of Senegal and Mali following
  the hiring of a consultant during project implementation, which was significantly delayed because of
  insufficient procurement capacity at the PIU. The project could only finalize the RAPs in about two years
  after project approval. This delayed the construction of the transmission line. Once the RAPs were finalized,
  the project appropriately processed the compensation payments to project-affected people (PAPs)
  according to the schedule. By project closing, the project had completed the compensation payments to 575
  PAPs. SOGEM deposited the compensation payments of three untraceable PAPs to an escrow account.



  While there were significant delays in the implementation of the Involuntary Resettlement safeguard policy,
  it improved following the finalization of the RAPs for Senegal and Mali, and the overall implementation of all
  five safeguard policies was in compliance with the World Bank safeguard requirements at project closing.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  At appraisal, SOGEM’s financial management arrangements were assessed to satisfy the minimum
  requirements of the World Bank’s financial management guidelines. The project provided support to
  SOGEM in financial management. SOGEM submitted the project’s interim financial reports according to
  schedule but with occasional delays. The opinions in the external audit reports were unqualified. Internal
  audit arrangements were in place, but the submission of internal audit reports was often delayed. There
  were no issues reported related to the counterpart funding. There were also no known issues of corruption
  or misuse of funds associated with the project. A credit amount around US$6.5 million was cancelled at the
  third restructuring. At project evaluation, all project funds were accounted for.

  Procurement

  Procurement faced significant delays at the start of project implementation because of insufficient capacity
  at the project implementation unit (PIU) under SOGEM, which lasted through to project closing. The World
  Bank project team extensively supervised the procurement process and provided training to the SOGEM
  staff in charge of procurement, and the Procurement Unit coordinator at the OMVS headquarters regularly
  supported the PIU in procurement, but some project activities could not be completed before project
  closing because of persistent delays in procurement, such as the commission of the 20 MVA transformers
  on the Kayes-Dagana transmission line. The delay in the preparation of the Resettlement Action Plan also
  adversely affected the procurement process and contract management.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None.


                                                                                                  Page 19 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     3A-OMVS - Transmission Expansion Project (P147921)




d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
                                                                              The project’s efficacy in
                                                                              achieving the project objective
                                                                              was substantial. Although the
                                                                              cost-benefit analyses based on
                                                                              estimates resulted in high
                                                                              economic internal rate of return,
                                                                              there were significant
                                                                              shortcomings in the
                                                                              administrative and operational
Outcome                        Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory   efficiency of the project because
                                                                              of delays in forming the PIU and
                                                                              the preparation of the RAP, and
                                                                              the PIU’s insufficient
                                                                              procurement capacity. Therfore,
                                                                              the efficiency of the project in
                                                                              achieving the project objective is
                                                                              also rated Modest. Overall, the
                                                                              outcome rating is Moderately
                                                                              Satisfactory.
                                                                              There were moderate
                                                                              shortcomings in project’s
                                                                              preparedness, identification of
                                                                              measure to mitigate risks (i.e.,
                                                                              procurement), and the M&E
                                                                              design at entry.There were also
                                                                              moderate shortcomings in the
Bank Performance               Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                              proactive resolution of threats to
                                                                              project implementation and
                                                                              delivery of project outputs that
                                                                              resulted in uncomplete project
                                                                              activities. Therefore, the Bank
                                                                              Performance is rated Moderately
                                                                              Satisfactory.
                                                                              There were significant
                                                                              shortcomings in the design and
Quality of M&E                 Substantial          Modest
                                                                              implementation of the M&E
                                                                              system making it difficult to

                                                                                                Page 20 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     3A-OMVS - Transmission Expansion Project (P147921)



                                                                                assess the achievement of the
                                                                                stated objectives, test the links
                                                                                in the results chain, and
                                                                                establish attribution between the
                                                                                project’s intervention and the
                                                                                outcomes achieved.
Quality of ICR                 ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

This review has drawn three lessons based on the information in the ICR.

The construction of transboundary electricity transmission lines under one contract and
hiring of a single owner’s engineer for the project can be critical in the successful completion
of the infrastructure investment. This project procured one contract for the construction of the
high voltage transmission line between Kayes (Mali) and Tambacounda (Senegal). This was critical
in preventing any construction delays that could have occurred if the construction of the transmission
line had been contracted under two contracts, one for the Mali portion and the other for the Senegal
portion. Similarly, one owner’s engineer designing the project and supervising the civil works was
also critical in avoiding any implementation delays because coordination issues. In this project,
SOGEM being the single project implementation entity facilitated the procurement and management
of one contract and working with the owner’s engineer. However, other similar transboundary
electricity transmission projects implemented by two national utilities with one contract for the
construction of the transmission lines also proved to be a more efficient method compared to two
separate contracts, such as the Bolgatanga (Ghana)-Zagtouli (Burkina Faso) transmission line
implemented by two national power utilities under one contract with one owner’s engineer.

Lack of procurement capacity of the PIU and insufficient preparedness for the
implementation of the safeguards policies can adversely affect the project implementation
and decrease the project’s efficiency in achieving the project objectives. At appraisal, the
project could not complete a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) because the exact route of the
transmission line had not been decided. The RAP was to be prepared along with the design of the
transmission line. The PIU had insufficient procurement capacity, which resulted in significant delays
in the hiring of the owner’s engineer (responsible for the design of the transmission line) and the
consultants for the preparation of the RAP. It took about two years for the PIU to finalize the RAP
after which the civil works could start on the transmission line right-of-way where land acquisition
was required. The Kayes-Tambacounda transmission line was fully commissioned on December 9,
2022, only a couple of weeks before project closing. Despite the project team’s close supervision of
the procurement activities, the insufficient procurement capacity of the PIU continued through to
project closing. As a result, some project outputs could not be completed before project closing such
as the commissioning of the two 20 MVA transformers on the Kayes-Dagana transmission line.

Weaknesses in the results framework can make it difficult to test the links in the results chain
and establish attribution between the project’s intervention and the outcomes achieved. The
project was designed on a simple and straightforward theory of change where the causal links from
the project activities and outputs to outcomes were direct and valid, and the achievement of the
outcomes could be attributed to the project. However, the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) design

                                                                                                  Page 21 of 23
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       3A-OMVS - Transmission Expansion Project (P147921)



had significant shortcomings in adequately capturing the project outcomes and establishing
attribution between the project’s intervention and the outcomes achieved. The indicators measured
the increase in the amount of electricity transmitted from Mali to Senegal and Mali at the system
level. The results framework did not include indicators that would provide evidence for what has
occurred as a result of the project’s intervention—attribution. The project’s results framework was
not sufficient to provide evidence of the achievement of the project outcomes that could be attributed
to the project.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a comprehensive overview of the project. The narrative is candid but loosely supports the
ratings; there are significant gaps in evidence (stemming from the shortcomings in the M&E design) that is
insufficient to confirm the achievement of the project objectives and establish attribution with the project’s
intervention. It does not provide a sufficient discussion of how activities informed outcomes that could be linked
to the impact of the project’s intervention. The report broadly follows and responds to the Bank guidance in
performance narrative. The information provided in Annex 1. Results Framework and Key Outputs and Annex
2. Key Outputs is detailed and useful to understand what outputs were achieved as a result of the project and
which ones are still pending. However, some sections of the report could have benefited from a more evaluative
and detailed discussion in accordance with the Bank guidance such as the Key Factors That Affected
Implementation and Outcome, the Bank Performance, and the Quality of M&E sections. The narrative is
internally consistent but mostly descriptive rather than evaluative. The entries in the Lessons and
Recommendations section respond to the specific experiences of the project, but they are in the form of
findings rather than lessons.

Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated Modest.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                    Page 22 of 23
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
3A-OMVS - Transmission Expansion Project (P147921)




                                                                                  Page 23 of 23
