     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Electricity Access Project (P163777)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023593

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P163777                                     Emergency Electricity Access Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Yemen, Republic of                          Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D3010                                  30-Jun-2021                                         48,076,480.49

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Apr-2018                                30-Dec-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            50,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             50,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                         48,076,480.49                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Joel J. Maweni              Dileep M. Wagle              Ramachandra Jammi               IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (FA) between the United
   Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) and the International Development Association (IDA) dated April
   27, 2018, was to “increase access to electricity in rural and peri-urban areas within the Republic of Yemen”
   (FA, Schedule 1).” The PDO statement in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p.13) was identical to that
   in the FA, except for the use in the PAD of the word “improve” instead of the word “increase” access to
   electricity in rural and peri-urban areas within the Republic of Yemen.


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Electricity Access Project (P163777)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Financing for Off-grid Solar (Cost estimate at appraisal - US$42.00 million, Actual
   cost -US$34.41 million).

         i. Subcomponent 1.1: Off grid solar solutions for rural and peri-urban households. Under this
             subcomponent micro finance institutions (MFIs) were to set up financing windows for solar home
             products, administer grant payments provided through UNOPs to beneficiaries to subsidize the
             product retail prices to make them affordable to the targeted poor rural and peri-urban households.
             Initially the MFIs were expected to provide both financing and solar products. As the market
             developed the MFIs would gradually cede the role of equipment provision to private sector supply
             chains and focus on their financing role and administration of grant payments. The grant component
             of the retail price would also be adaptable to market conditions and would gradually reduce, be
             eliminated by project closure, or continue with the support of local administration agencies replacing
             UNOPs.
         ii. Subcomponent 1.2: Restoring electricity supplies to critical services facilities. The critical services
             facilities included health clinics, schools, water supply corporations and rural electricity services
             providers with initial priority being given to clinics and schools. UNOPS was to identify the priority
             institutions and to develop pre-defined solutions in consultations with other development partners
             and local stakeholders. The subcomponent was designed to bundle the supply, installation,
             warranties, after sales service, and local training and to facilitate operation and maintenance of the
             facilities.

   Component 2: Implementation Support and Market Development (Cost estimate at appraisal -
   US$8.00 million, Actual cost - US$7.47 million).

         i. Subcomponent 2.1 Project implementation and management support. This subcomponent financed:
             (a) general management costs for UNOPS; (b) direct management and supervision costs for
             implementation of the Project; (c) independent audits of project activities, as required; and (d) the
             establishment of a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) in the UNOPS Sana’a Office to document
             complaints and ensure follow-up.
         ii. Subcomponent 2.2 Third-Party Monitoring (TPM). This subcomponent provided funding for UNOPS
             to hire a third-party agent for independent verification and field monitoring of activities supported by
             the Project.
        iii. Subcomponent 2.3 Market development capacity building and technical assistance to strengthen the
             delivery capacity of the solar value chain. The beneficiaries of the capacity building and TA along the


                                                                                                       Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Emergency Electricity Access Project (P163777)



          solar supply chain included financial institutions, retailers, installers, and other service providers. The
          specific aims of the capacity building and TA were to: (a) support awareness campaigns and
          consultations with stakeholders on various matters; (b) develop de-risking mechanisms for
          commercial lending for solar; (c) define and disseminate technical standards and establish testing
          centers in cooperation with local stakeholders, and (d) support the recycling of batteries from the
          project as well as the market, more generally, to minimize the environmental risks from the disposal
          of hazardous materials.

  Component 3: Contingent Emergency Response (CERC) (Cost estimate at appraisal - US$0.00
  million, Actual cost - US$5.95 million). This component was intended to strengthen the country’s
  response capacity in the event of an emergency. It had no funding allocation at appraisal and would be
  capitalized through reallocations from other components, additional financing or other funding sources
  following occurrence of an emergency event.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Total project cost at completion was US$47.83 million (ICR, p.9 and Annex 3) compared to
  US$50.00 million estimated at appraisal (PAD, p. 21). There is a discrepancy of US$0.25 million between
  the US$48.08 million total project costs shown in the ICR data sheet and the amount reported by the ICR.
  This is due to the exchange rate fluctuations between the financing currency (SDR) and the US$ over the
  project implementation period.

  As expected at appraisal the total project cost was fully funded by the IDA grant of SDR 34.60 million (Grant
  no. D301-RY). No contribution was expected from or made by the Recipient.

  Dates

  The project was approved on April 13, 2018, and it became effective on May 15, 2018. The project’s original
  closing date was June 30, 2021. It closed on December 31, 2022, after an extension of eighteen (18)
  months. The project was restructured three times in March 2020, October 2020, and May 2021. The main
  purpose of the first restructuring in March 2020 was to disaggregate the indicator for the number of
  household beneficiaries provided with electricity under subcomponent 1.1 to include the number of female
  household beneficiaries, a core indicator which had been missed at project appraisal. An additional
  indicator was also incorporated to measure the number of people served by critical services facilities which
  had received new or improved electricity services. Other changes included the addition of targets for the two
  new indicators (ICR, Table 2), an update of the project costs and reallocation of funds among disbursement
  categories.

  The second restructuring reallocated funding to component 3 (CERC) which had been triggered as part of
  the World Bank’s Covid-19 response in countries affected by Fragility, Conflict and Violence (FCV). The
  reallocation was made to two newly created subcomponents; subcomponent 3.1: Pico solar units for front
  line Covid-19 health workers and subcomponent 3.2: Solar units to support Covid-19 isolation units.
  The reallocations resulted in changes in component costs as well as in outcome targets, primarily a
  substantial reduction in the number of household beneficiaries (50% reduction).

  The third restructuring (May 2021) extended the project closing date by 18 months to December 31, 2022.
  The extension was needed to include a 12-months defect notification period for equipment purchased by

                                                                                                       Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Electricity Access Project (P163777)



   UNOPS from suppliers under Subcomponent 1.2 and to compensate for a slowdown in implementation due
   to supply, transportation, and construction delays during COVID shutdowns and periods of active conflict.
   Other changes during this restructuring were a reduction in the number of female households based on
   lessons learned in the earlier part of implementation.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. In 2014 armed hostilities broke out in Yemen and continued throughout the
implementation period of this project. The World Bank approved this project for Yemen in 2018 in an
environment of fragility, conflict, and violence that had devastated Yemen’s infrastructure, economic and
social fabric. Access to critical infrastructure services such as healthcare facilities, schools, and water
supply and sanitation which was limited for many Yemenis prior to the conflict deteriorated further due to
conflict-related disruptions.

Sector context. Before the conflict Yemen had the lowest access to electricity rate in the region at about
78% (about 66% supplied by the public system and the balance by the private sector). Several sources
quoted in the PAD (p.8) indicated that major deterioration had occurred since 2014 – access to grid-based
electricity decreased to about 10%, electricity consumption decreased by 75% by 2017, and electricity
generation capacity declined by 77% by 2015. Many Yemenis who were not served by the public electricity
system prior to the conflict had relied on remittances from their family members working in neighboring
countries to purchase diesel generators and fuel. When the conflict broke out many Yemen nationals
working in these countries were forced to return home. Apart from financing constraints caused by the
drying up of remittances, the purchase of generators and fuel became more difficult also because of
importation and logistic challenges in an environment of conflict.

The collapse of the public electricity supply system and the difficulties of obtaining and/or fueling generators
led many households to resort to solar for lighting and powering appliances. A market for solar power aided
by falling global prices of solar equipment grew rapidly. A World Bank Assessment in 2016 showed that in
selected urban areas about 75% of the households had solar systems. Estimates also suggested that about
US$200 million was being invested in the solar market every year since the breakout of hostilities. Yemen’s
nascent solar industry was driven by a private sector supply chain of trading houses that imported the
equipment and retailers that supplied customers.

However, the thriving solar market benefited the wealthier households, small and medium enterprises, and
farmers who could afford them and even then, the systems were of low quality and there were no after
sales services. For low income rural and peri-urban households, affordability was a major constraint,
especially because of the unavailability of debt financing requiring most customers to pay cash for their
solar system purchases.

Alignment with World Bank Strategies

At closure, the Project was aligned to the World Bank’s Country Engagement Note (CEN) for Yemen for
FY2022/23 (Report 169022-YE) dated April 14, 2022. The CEN’s two focus areas (CEN, p.19) were to: (a)
provide “. support for basic services delivery and preservation of human capital; and (b) promote food

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Emergency Electricity Access Project (P163777)



               security, resilience, and livelihood opportunities through “a continuum of support.” Focus area (a) included
               “. assuring access to energy for clean drinking water, safe schools, and health care” – an objective that the
               Project directly contributed to through financing of off-grid solar systems for critical services facilities under
               subcomponents 1.2 and 3.2. In addition, the Project contributed to the CEN’s access objective by financing
               off-grid solar systems for households under Subcomponent 1.1. The Project was, thus specifically, shown
               as part of the Bank’s ongoing portfolio (Annex 1).

               The ICR also appropriately cites several other World Bank and Middle East and North Africa (MENA)
               Regional strategies to which the Project objectives were aligned. The relevant corporate level strategies
               included: (a) supporting the Bank’s twin objectives of ending extreme poverty and improving shared
               prosperity by focusing support on the rural and peri-urban areas which are home to two thirds of Yemen’s
               population and which suffered from disproportionately low access rates (53% compared to 78% national
               average before the conflict); (b) one of the four transformational areas of the World Bank’s Green, Resilient
               and Inclusive Development approach in line with the Climate Change Action Plan, 2021-2025 –
               decarbonizing the energy and transport sectors through renewable energy, amongst other methods; and (c)
               World Bank Strategy for Fragility, Conflict and Violence. Specific key MENA strategies supported by the
               PDO were the Regional Gender Action Plan for FY2018/23 which advocated for attention to the different
               development needs of women and men during times of conflict and the Climate Change Action Plan for
               2021-2025.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             “increase access to electricity in rural and peri-urban areas within the Republic of Yemen" and associated key
                             targets before restructuring.

                             Rationale
                             The Project’s objective was to increase access to electricity services in the rural and peri-urban areas within
                             the Republic of Yemen. The Project’s theory of change (TOC) from the PAD is presented in the ICR
                             (Figure 1, p.8) with some modifications. The revised TOC appropriately describes the main Project activities
                             that were expected to lead to increased access to electricity – the financing of off-grid solar power in rural and
                             urban areas (Component 1), and capacity building and technical assistance to help strengthen the delivery
                             capacity to the solar market value chain (Subcomponent 2.3), but does not include the contingent emergency
                             response component (component 3) which was triggered and implemented during the project and also
                             contributed to the PDO.

                             At appraisal, the Project had two PDO outcome indicators as follows:


                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Emergency Electricity Access Project (P163777)




     i. Outcome indicator #1: Number of people with new or improved electricity services broken down by
        number of females and number of households. The number of households was further broken down to
        include those headed by females during the first restructuring in March 2020.
    ii. Outcome indicator # 2: Critical service facilities provided with new or improved electricity services.
        This indicator was revised during the first restructuring to the number of people served in critical
        services facilities which were provided with new or improved electricity services.

There are some shortcomings in the TOC. First, the TOC (Figure 1) shows enhanced delivery capacity of the
solar value chain arising from the market development activities (Subcomponent 2.3) as an intermediate step
towards achievement of both outcome indicators #1 and #2 but does not show an intermediate indicator for
the improved capacity. There are, however, other intermediate indicators included in the results framework
such as the number of participating MFIs and the number of persons reached with financial services,
including transactions accounts which are indicative of the development of the Market. The Task Team
confirmed that the single most important indicator of market capacity development which the Project closely
tracked was the number of MFIs. Other potential indicators of market development could have included
wholesale and retail suppliers of solar equipment, installation contractors, and other services providers, but
this again would have overloaded the requirements for MFIs and was not considered.

Second, a minor shortcoming was the exclusion of CERC (Component 3) as part of the TOC at completion,
although this component had been triggered and provided an important contribution to both PDO indicators.
The exclusion of the CERC component in the TOC is mitigated by the inclusion of its contributions in the
realized PDO outcome targets.

Subject to these limitations overall, the TOC provides a credible theory of transformation from project
activities to the PDO of increased/(improved) access to electricity in rural and peri-urban areas, and to the
higher-level objective of alleviating the direct impacts of conflict on households and the improvement of critical
services delivery.

Given the revisions in the outcome indicators and targets a spilt evaluation methodology was used to
evaluate the achievement of the PDO by comparing: (a) the actual outcome indicator values to the
original targets at appraisal; and (b) the actual outcome indicator values to the revised targets after the
second and third restructurings.

PDO ASSESSED AGAINST ORIGINAL TARGETS

Outputs and intermediate outcomes

     i. Beneficiaries reached with financial services – 4,257 compared to a target of 120,000 of which:
            o Female borrowers – 1,870 compared to a target of 48,000.
    ii. Number of previously unbanked adults reached with transactions accounts – 2,065 compared to a
          target of 80,000 of which:
               o Female borrowers – 292 compared to a target of 25,000.
   iii.   Number of MFIs with active windows for solar – 6 compared to a target of 5.
   iv.    Health facilities with new or improved electricity services – 220 compared to a target of 400.
    v.    Schools with new or improved electricity services – 234 compared to a target of 800.
   vi.    Grievances related to delivery of project that are addressed – 100% compared to a target of 95%.



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Emergency Electricity Access Project (P163777)




   vii. Qualitative assessment of the impact of feedback from focus groups on technical specifications of
       household solar products – Yes compared to a target of Yes.
  viii. Number of focus groups on electricity needs – 13 compared to a target of 12.
           o of which groups with majority female participation – 6 compared to a target of 6.

Outcome indicators assessed against original targets.

     i. People with new or improved electricity services – 787,987 against a target of 1,340,000.
            o Of which Females – 389,289 against a target of 663,300.
    ii. People provided with electricity by the project by household connections (grid or off grid) – 110,000
        compared to a target of 200,000.
              o Of which Females – 36,157 compared to a target of 50,000.
   iii. Critical service facilities provided with new or improved electricity services – 454 compared to a target
        of 1,200 of which:
              o Health facilities – 220 compared to a target of 400.
              o Schools – 234 compared to a target of 800.

As the above figures indicate only about 50% of the original intermediate/output targets were achieved and
these were the process indicators such as the collection of feedback from stakeholders and the convening of
focus groups on electricity needs. The reasons for the underperformance relative to original targets were the
findings, during implementation, that the sizes and, therefore, the costs of solar units required by both
households and critical services facilities were much higher than expected. Reallocations were made from
Subcomponent 1.1 (household connections) to Subcomponent 1.2 (critical services facilities) and to
component 3 (CERC) and in response to the Covid-19 pandemic. This reduced the level of investments for
Subcomponent 1.1 and, hence the original Outcome Indicator #1 target (number of people provided with
new or improved electricity services households and sub indicators) could not be achieved. The original
Outcome indicator target # 2 could also not be achieved as fewer but bigger facilities were supported.
Therefore, achievement of the PDO prior to restructuring is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
“increase access to electricity in rural and peri-urban areas within the Republic of Yemen" and associated key
targets after project restructuring

Revised Rationale
PDO ASSESSED AGAINST REVISED TARGETS (AFTER SECOND RESTRUCTURING)

Outputs and intermediate outcomes

     i. Beneficiaries reached with financial services – 4,257 compared to a target of 10,000:
            o Of which female borrowers – 1,870 compared to a target of 2,500.

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 20
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Emergency Electricity Access Project (P163777)




                                ii. Number of previously unbanked adults reached with transactions accounts – 2,065 compared to a
                                      target of 7,500 of which:
                                            o Female borrowers – 292 compared to a target of 1,500.
                               iii.   Number of MFIs with active windows for solar – 6 compared to a target of 5.
                               iv.    Health facilities with new or improved electricity services – 220 compared to a target of 220.
                                v.    Schools with new or improved electricity services – 234 compared to a target of 233.
                               vi.    Drinking water wells and rural water user associations with new or improved electricity – 40 compared
                                      to a target of 40.
                               vii.   Health workers provided with portable solar solutions – 2,247 compared to a target of 2,500.
                              viii.   Grievances related to delivery of project that are addressed – 100% compared to a target of 95%.
                                ix.   Qualitative assessment of the impact of feedback from focus groups on technical specifications of
                                      household solar products
                                x.    Number of focus groups on electricity needs – 13 compared to a target of 12.
                                            o of which groups with majority female participation – 6 compared to a target of 6.
                               xi.    Number of isolation units supplied with solar systems under CERC – 23 compared to a target of 23.

                            Outcome indicators assessed against revised targets.

                                   i. People with new or improved electricity services – 787,987 against a target of 677,000
                                          o Of which Females – 389,289 against a target of 331,650
                                          o People provided with electricity by the project by household connections (grid or off grid) –
                                             114,167 compared to a target of 100,000.
                                          o Of which Females – 36,157 compared to a target of 15,000.
                                ii. People served in critical facilities which were provided with new or improved electricity services –
                                      3,231677 compared to a target of 3,000,000.

                            Nine out of eleven of the intermediate/output indicators targets were achieved. The two intermediate
                            indicators whose targets were not achieved were the number of beneficiaries reached with financial services
                            (about 40% target achieved) and the number of health workers provided with portable solar units (90% target
                            achieved). However, outcome indicators #1 was exceeded by about 16% and the indicator’s three
                            subcomponents (number of female beneficiaries, households, and number of female households) were also
                            exceeded. The number of female households was exceeded by a massive 140% suggesting that, the target
                            which was set at a disproportionately low level than other sub indicators, was unambitious. Outcome indicator
                            #2 (people served with new or improved electricity services in critical services facilities) was also exceeded
                            with the number of people at 3, 231,677 compared to the target of 3,000, 000.

                            The achievement of the project's objective post-restructuring is rated High because actual outcome indicators
                            values exceeded the targets and almost all intermediate indicators (nine out of 11) were achieved.



                            Revised Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 20
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             Emergency Electricity Access Project (P163777)




         OVERALL EFFICACY
         Rationale
         The Modest rating for the PDO evaluation against the original targets reflects the extent to which the
         outcome indicators were aligned with the PDO, were adequate to assess their efficacy, and the associated
         targets were relevant, measurable, and achieved. The pre-restructuring outcome targets could not be
         achieved because the larger solar units preferred by the market and the reallocations of funds to other
         compoents resulted in fewer units and beneficiaries than expected, although this was mitigated, to some
         extent, by the decreasing global prices of solar systems. Hence, the nonachievement of both PDO outcome
         indicators prior to project restructuring and the Modest rating of efficacy.



         Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
         Modest                                                   Low achievement
 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         The post-restructuring project exceeded both outcome indicators on the number of people provided with
         new or improved access to electricity services and those served in critical facilities provided with new or
         improved electricity services. In addition, nine of out 11 intermediate indicators were also achieved. Hence,
         the post restructuring project is rated High for efficacy.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         High



 5. Efficiency
At appraisal, the economic justification of the project was that it would deliver direct net economic benefits to
beneficiaries by replacing higher cost fossil fuel-based energy with solar energy systems. In addition, the project
would also produce social benefits in the form of avoided carbon emissions. A cost-benefit analysis conducted
at appraisal estimated ranges of economic internal rates of return (EIRR) as follows:(a) 83% - 98% for
subcomponent #1 (household solar; (b) 10% - 25% for health facilities and 16% - 32% for schools.

The same methodology was applied to the ex-post economic analysis at project completion, including use of a
discount rate of 10%. The revised EIRRs were much higher at 26% - 34% for health facilities and 28% - 34% for
schools. For household solar systems breakeven was, on average, achieved during the first year of operation.

The targets for the number of people provided with electricity access by household connections were reduced
by about 50% during restructuring not only because of the reallocation of financing to the CERC component and
to institutional solar PV systems, but also because of the larger sizes and more expensive Solar Home Systems
(SHS) than had been expected at appraisal. The reallocation to institutional solar systems did not lead to
increased targets for those instalaltions becasue they were also larger and more expensivce than expected at



                                                                                                          Page 9 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Emergency Electricity Access Project (P163777)



appraisal. The reductions in targets and achievements would have been even higher had decreasing global
prices of solar systems not been a mitigating factor.

 The combined impact of the econmies of scale resulting from larger size SHS and institutional PV systems,
decreasing global costs of solar systems as the technology matured, and the higher benefits of avoided costs of
diesel as fossil fuel prices increased (ICR, p.17) was higher EIRRs than at appraisal. Both at appraisal and at
completion EIRRs would have been higher if it had been feasible for the analysis to also capture other benefits
such as improvements in air quality and health services due to restoration of electricity to health centers and
improved access to clean drinking water.

Overall, administrative efficiency was strong given the FCV environment and the impact of Covid -19 restrictions
on the supply chain and some periods of active conflict. UNOPS’s knowledge and experience of the ground
situation in Yemen and its record of implementing projects in FCV contexts enabled it to effectively address
procurement and other issues and to minimize delays in project execution. Thus, the project was completed,
and the grant fully disbursed with only an 18-month closing date extension despite these factors. The eighteen
months closing date extension was needed to include a 12-months defect notification period which had been
overlooked at project preparation and only 6 months of the extension period was needed to compensate for
implementation delays.

Given the project’s strong internal economic rates of return and administrative efficiency, the project is rated
Substantial for efficiency.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO was rated High because of its full alignment with the World Bank’s Country
Engagement Note for Yemen (FY2022/23) at closure and because it was designed to directly address the acute
electricity supply situation which had become a binding constraint to service delivery and the preservation of
human capital; and also because of its consistency with various corporate level and MENA regional strategies
on climate change, gender and poverty reduction. Project efficiency was rated Substantial because economic
rates of return were higher than estimated at appraisal, and because of the experience and record of UNOPS in

                                                                                                      Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Emergency Electricity Access Project (P163777)



implementing projects in conflict environments, administrative efficiency was also high. Economic rates of return
were boosted by declining global prices for solar PV equipment, the higher avoided costs of diesel fuel due to
increasing fossil fuel prices and the inclusion in the portfolio of solar systems of larger and more economic sizes
than had been expected at appraisal.

A Modest efficacy rating was assigned to the pre-restructuring project since both outcome indicator targets and
most intermediate indicators were not achieved. A High rating was assigned to the post restructuring project
because both indicator outcome targets were achieved and so were most intermediate indicators.

A split rating assessment was conducted for the project prior to restructuring and post-restructuring because of
the significant changes that had been made to the PDO’s key associated outcome targets. The split evaluation
uses the actual disbursement figures made by UNOPs to the beneficiaries at the time of the restructuring which
were much lower than the amounts disbursed to UNOPs by the Bank and, hence, the difference between these
figures and those shown in the data sheet. Due to the conflict environment large disbursements were made to
UNOPS to enable them to manage procurement of equipment and other project needs flexibly in response to
variable supply chains and logistics conditions.

The pre-restructuring project with a High rating for PDO relevance, Modest for Efficacy and Substantial for
Efficiency was rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. The post-restructuring project with a High rating for PDO
relevance, High rating for Efficacy and Subsntial for Efficiency was rated Satisfactory. Using the disbursement
weighted evaluation criteria, the overall rating for the Project was Satisfactory (Table below).

                                       PDO and targets          PDO and targets
                                       before restructuring     after restructuring
    Relevance of PDO                   High
                                       Modest
    Efficacy                                                    High
    Efficiency                         Substantial
                                       Moderately
1 Outcome ratings                                               Highly Satisfactory
                                       unsatisfactory
    Numerical values of outcome
2                                      3.0                      6
    ratings
    Disbursement amount (US$
3                                      9.8                      38.28
    million)
4   Share of disbursement (%)          20.4                     79.6
    Weighted value of outcome rating
5                                      0.612                    4.776
    (row 2 x row 4)
6   Final outcome rating               Satisfactory (5.388)

Note: Highly Satisfactory = 6, Satisfactory = 5, Moderately Satisfactory = 4, Moderately Unsatisfactory = 3,
Unsatisfactory = 2,

Highly Unsatisfactory = 1




                                                                                                    Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Emergency Electricity Access Project (P163777)




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The Project included significant capacity building support for key players along the solar value chain,
including MFIs, retailers, contractors, and other service providers with the objective of facilitating the
inclusivity and sustainability of the project’s reach, provision of required financing and the continued growth
of the solar market. There are risks, however, that, beyond the EEAP implementation period: (a) institutions
along the value chain will not grow at an adequate rate to keep pace with demand and with changes in
consumer preferences for larger capacity solar units and the larger financing requirements; (b) adherence to
E&S, solar equipment standards and other systems introduced to support development of the solar market
could falter; and (c) technical and financing constraints could also impact the ability to finance and maintain
the units delivered under the project.

As the ICR noted (p.28) the World Bank’s continued support to the sector through the follow-up project
(EAAP II) provides an opportunity for capacity and systems strengthening to continue and to partly mitigate
these risks. A risk outside the control of the World Bank’s lending program is the possibility of damage to the
installed equipment by continued conflict.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Strategic approach and relevance. The Project was appropriately designed to increase/improve access
  to electricity services for households and for critical services facilities such as health centers, schools,
  and water supply organizations in rural and peri-urban areas with a disproportionate percentage of poor
  people. Electricity services were essential for the restoration of livelihoods and service delivery. The
  Project concept and design were consistent with the Country Engagement Note for Yemen (FY2017/18,
  Report No.106118-YE), which prioritized facilitating the restoration of critical services facilities. The
  Project was also consistent with other World Bank Group and MENA regional strategies, as described in
  Section 3 above.

  Overall, the causal linkages between the project components, activities, intermediate and outcome
  indicators, and targets were credible. The one significant shortcoming was the assumption on sizes and
  costs of solar units which was based on experience in the Africa Region and which turned out not to
  reflect the larger sizes and costs required for the Yemen market.

  The inclusion of a CERC was a particularly smart design feature given the FCV environment in which the
  Project was to be implemented. It enabled the project to make a swift response to the Covid-19 pandemic
  through a reallocation of funds from other components to finance pico solar units for health care workers

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Electricity Access Project (P163777)



  and covid isolation units in health care facilities. Another strong feature of the project design was the
  flexibility to gradually shift the procurement risk from UNOPS to the MFIs over time, thus, providing the
  opportunity for the MFIs to grow their ability to manage procurement and sales of solar units and for the
  reduced subsidy to be compensated through a results-based mechanism.

  Preparation facilitation. A strong Bank team was put in place to support project preparation in all the
  relevant areas – technical, financial, economic, environmental, and social safeguards, fiduciary aspects,
  monitoring and evaluation, solar business. Still there were some shortcomings in the project design as
  noted above. An implementation support plan was developed during preparation and included an equally
  strong Bank team for the supervision phase. Risk assessment was conducted using the Bank’s
  Systematic Operations Risk Assessment Tool, and given the FCV context, the overall risk rating was
  High.

  Implementation arrangements. Given the prevailing conflict environment it was not possible for the
  Bank to provide funding for the project through the Internationally Recognized Government (IRG) or the
  de facto Government in the North or to rest implementation oversight responsibility with either
  government. In addition, experience from past operations in the country’s energy sector had shown the
  challenges of placing project implementation responsibilities on public sector institutions. Hence, the
  decision was made to rely on existing MFIs and contractors for implementation and to use UNOPS as
  both the recipient of IDA funds and the implementing agency. UNOPS was selected because of its
  considerable experience in implementing complex projects (including solar) in FCV environments, record
  in project management, procurement, and compliance with the Bank’s safeguards; and financial
  management, ability to quickly scale up in FCV conditions and its operational presence in Yemen (PAD,
  p.22). UNOPS was to be supported by a Third Party Monitoring Agency (TPM).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The PAD (p.23) described the World Bank’s implementation support as decided at project appraisal as
 comprising day-to-day monitoring provided remotely and quarterly supervision missions at UNOPS’s
 offices in Amman Jordan (or other suitable location). The supervision activities were to focus on:(a) reviews
 of implementation progress and achievement of PDOs and intermediate indicators; (b) provision of
 technical support related to implementation, achievement of results and capacity building; (c) close
 coordination with UNOPS to ensure adequate oversight mechanisms;(d) monitoring of risks and mitigation
 measures; and (e) monitoring overall project performance through reviews of progress and financial
 reports, and field visits, if they became possible.

 The ICR reports that quarterly supervision missions were carried out in person (in Amman) as planned and
 sometimes virtually when necessitated by Covid-19 restrictions, that the close working arrangements with
 UNOPS ensured that the World Bank team was regularly updated and well-informed, despite the FCV
 context, and that the World Bank’s expertise was made available to UNOPS throughout the implementation
 period.



                                                                                                  Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Electricity Access Project (P163777)



 The World Bank supervision mission comprised all the relevant skills, including specialists on solar power,
 private sector, safeguards, gender, procurement, and financial management. The team, led by two co-
 Team Leaders, was distributed in Amman, Cairo, and Washington. IEG noted that there was team
 continuity with several of the team members participating in both the preparation and supervision phases,
 including the Team Leaders.

 A mid-term review conducted in November 2019 noted that the World Bank team was proactive in
 addressing issues and in restructuring the Project when the CERC component was triggered and in other
 two restructurings (ICR, p. 27). IEG also noted from the ICR that the team was proactive in facilitating
 measures to address social and other constraints to female participation in the Project, thus eventually
 improving their participation rate above the target.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E system, as designed at appraisal, placed responsibility for project monitoring and evaluation on
 UNOPS (PAD, p.23). UNOPS was required to prepare quarterly progress reports incorporating regular
 reports by MFIs based on an agreed template which included the following: (a) summary of progress,
 including the context in which the project was being implemented; (b) activities carried out during the
 reporting period; (c) challenges encountered and measures taken; (d) changes made during
 implementation, including changes in the budget; (e) achievements and results of the Project with
 reference to the identified indicators; and (f) the workplan for the subsequent reporting period. UNOPS was
 also required to prepare geospatial maps of project areas to help monitor the progress of activities
 supported under Subcomponent 1.2. UNOPS would also share with the World Bank, the reports on
 independent verification of project activities by the TPM and include information on measures taken to
 address any issues raised by the TPM.

 The World Bank would monitor and evaluate project performance based on UNOPS’s progress reports,
 financial reports, mission findings and field visits if they became possible. The World Bank would also
 undertake a detailed mid-term review of the project at midterm (PAD, p.24).

 These M&E arrangements were satisfactory. The only shortcoming was the uncertainty of field visits by the
 World Bank missions and of access to project sites by the TPM, but this was an understandable constraint
 given the FCV environment of the Project.

 As discussed earlier in Section 4 (Efficacy) the TOC shows credible causal relationships between project
 activities, intermediate and outcome indicators, and the objective of increasing/improving access to
 electricity in the rural and peri-urban areas in Yemen. A shortcoming of the TOC was that the market


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Electricity Access Project (P163777)



 development subcomponent’s intermediate indicators could have been made stronger by incorporating
 more intermediate indicators related to the capacity strengthening of the players in the solar value chain
 (retailers, contractors) in addition to that of the MFIs, if this were practical in the FCV context.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E was implemented satisfactorily as designed. UNOPS prepared quarterly progress reports as
  required and submitted both these reports and the independent verification reports prepared by the TPM
  to the World Bank. The reports were adequate to enable the Bank to rely on them for its supervision of
  the Project, including for planning supervision missions, preparation of ISRs and recommending
  restructuring actions to Bank management. As expected, the TPM faced some challenges in accessing
  project sites,



c. M&E Utilization
  Data and information provided by the M&E reports provided the basis for the World Bank’s decisions on
  project restructurings, triggering of the CERC component, grant reallocations, and market demand for
  higher capacity solar units, thus enabling the World Bank to adjust flexibly to project needs. The ICR
  also notes that various aspects of the M&E system helped to inform the design of the successor project
  (EEAP II), especially regarding the scale of the operation, the sizing and costing of solar units,
  modalities for obtaining beneficiaries feedback, the need for productive uses of electricity, amongst
  others.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, E&S risk was assessed as Moderate and, hence, the Project was classified as an EA category
   B project triggering the World Bank operational policy: OP 4.01 – Environmental Assessment. Since the
   Project was prepared following emergency procedures, preparation of an Environmental and Social
   Management Framework (ESMF) was deferred to allow sufficient time for the implementation agency,
   UNOPs, to undertake the ESMF, public consultations and battery recycling and disposal assessment. A
   Safeguards Action Plan was prepared which laid out the period for the preparation of relevant safeguards
   instruments.

   There were no serious issues regarding compliance with environmental regulations. There were some
   issues concerning awareness of the disposal paths for solar systems for household beneficiaries and
   overall compliance for both households and critical services systems which were resolved.

   Social Safeguards


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Emergency Electricity Access Project (P163777)



  Since the Project did not require resettlement OP 4.12 – was not triggered. The Project had broad social
  benefits, including the provision of pico-solar systems to the poor and vulnerable in rural and peri-urban
  areas as well as rooftop systems on properties adjacent to supported critical services facilities. The
  distribution of solar systems was based on transparent eligibility criteria and on inputs from beneficiary
  assessments on electricity needs and equipment specifications. During implementation there was an issue
  regarding awareness of the grievance redress mechanism, but this had improved by project closure.

  Overall compliance with safeguards was rated Satisfactory in the last ISR dated May 19, 2022




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  The Project’s financial management arrangements were to be governed by the Financial Management
  Framework Agreement (FMFA) between the World Bank and the UN, which provided for the use UNOPS’s
  Financial Rules and Regulations. The FMFA rules and regulations were adhered to, and adequate interim
  financial and unqualified independent audit reports were submitted on time. As of project closure there
  were no outstanding audit reports.

  Procurement

  UNOPS ‘s procurement procedures were used under the project in line with the trigger of Operational
  Policy 2.30 (Development Cooperation and Conflict). The Bank assessed UNOPS’s procurement
  procedures during appraisal and found them acceptable. No major procurement issues affected project
  implementation except for some delays related to Covid-19, logistics, security clearances, and fuel
  shortages. UNOPS was able to address these issues, including one case of disputed import
  documentation with a supplier.

  Overall fiduciary risks were rated high at project appraisal because of risk factors related to various stages
  of technical project implementation, procurement, and financial management cycles (PAD, p.27). The risks
  remained high throughout the project implementation period.

  Both procurement and financial management performance were rated Satisfactory in the final ISR dated
  May 19, 2022.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  From the ICR summary of the unintended impacts and outcomes of the Project the following are notable:

       i. Replication by other market participants of the environmental and social safeguards, quality control,
         and procurement practices introduced by the Project which are now supporting sustainable
         development of the solar market.



                                                                                                   Page 16 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Emergency Electricity Access Project (P163777)



      ii. Sharing of high-quality solar PV systems designs with private sector and UN agencies/entities
          facilitated by the Project led to importation of high-quality solar equipment and implementation of
          sustainable industry designs initiative in the country; and
     iii. establishment by UN agencies of a Solar Energy Working Group co-chaired by UNOPS and the
          United Nations Development Programme.



d. Other
  Gender

  The Project was gender-tagged at Board approval and had several gender specific intermediate and
  outcome indicators. Outcome indicator #1 – the number of people with new or improved
  electricity services had a sub indicator for the number of females. The other sub indicator – the number of
  people by household connections was also disaggregated during restructuring to include the number of
  female-headed households. Both gender related targets under outcome indicator #1 were exceeded
  although the target for female headed households was unambitious as mentioned earlier. In addition to
  outcome indicator #1 the following three intermediate outcome indicators also had gender related sub
  indicators: (a) beneficiaries reached with financial services; (b) number of previously unbanked adults
  reached with transactions accounts; (c) number of focus groups on electricity needs. 1,870 female
  beneficiaries out of a target of 2,500 (75%) were reached with financial services; 292 previously unbanked
  female borrowers compared to a target of 1,500 were reached with transactions accounts (19%); and 6
  focus groups on electricity needs representing 100% of the target had a majority female participation.

  The “Impact Story“ conducted for the Project observed that gender-targeted efforts had resulted in a
  doubling of the percentage of females among MFIs’ staff and that MFIs were making serious efforts to
  improve women’s access to financial services, including adopting Pay-As-You-Go schemes to make it
  easier for women to afford solar PVs units (ICR, p. 19).

  Institutional Strengthening

  The Project design envisaged that significant institutional strengthening would be provided through TA,
  capacity building and training to enhance the inclusivity and sustainability of the solar market in Yemen
  (Subcomponent 2.3, PAD, p,19).The specific measures included: (a) interviews, focus groups and
  awareness campaigns with citizens, local and community leaders and organizations on electricity needs,
  solar products provided by the project, and availability of financing and eligibility criteria; (b) capacity
  building and training of the various parties along the solar value chain (retailers, installers, financial
  institutions and service providers); (c) TA to the financial sector to support the development of de-risking
  instruments and facilitate increased commercial lending to the solar market; (d) support for the definition
  and dissemination of technical standards, establishment of testing centers in cooperation with local
  universities; and (e) support for recycling of solar batteries to reduce the environmental risks associated
  with the disposal of hazardous materials. The ICR indicates that these measures were successfully
  implemented as designed. An important addition to the original design was the addition of support for
  productive uses of electricity which strengthened the MFI interest in increased lending to the solar market
  and for larger projects (ICR, p 20). A noted deficiency in institutional strengthening was the inadequate
  participation of both the de facto government in the north and the Internationally Recognized Government
  (IRG).


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Electricity Access Project (P163777)



   Private Sector Financial Mobilization.

   The Project was intended to leverage the existing private sector-driven solar supply chain to crowd-in rather
   than to replace private financing (PAD, p 15). This was to be done in three ways as follows: (a) capitalizing
   on the geographical reach of the solar supply chain to reach otherwise hard-to-reach rural and peri-urban
   areas; (b) engaging MFIs as financial intermediaries to leverage IDA financing to enable private investment
   by households; and (c) through the TA and capacity building support (Subcomponent 2.3 ) to help develop
   a stronger solar market and business development in the country. Grant financing was to be limited to
   product categories that were not yet established in the market (Subcomponent 1.1 – household) and with
   the expectation of gradually phasing them out over time. The ICR reports that by project closure MFIs were
   managing the procurement of solar units (Stage 3) and receiving only a partial subsidy ranging between
   US$40 and US$110 per unit depending on the size of the unit. In Stage 1 procurement solar kits
   were procured by UNOPS and provided as in-kind grants to the MFIs who then distributed them to
   households and charged a fee to cover their operating costs and small margin.

   Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity

   According to the PAD (p. 8) access to modern energy was seen as central to restoring livelihoods and
   alleviating the impact of the crisis on the poorest and most vulnerable. The collapse of publicly provided
   electricity services and the scarcity and excessive cost of imported liquid fuels had a disproportionately
   large negative impact on employment and incomes for the poor. The ICR reports that by
   increasing/improving access to electricity in rural and peri-urban areas the Project had a significant impact
   in replacing liquid fuels with the more sustainable solar power (ICR, p. 21). During ICR consultations
   stakeholders cited the following impacts as evidence of the benefits of the poverty alleviation benefits of the
   Project: (a) job creation; (b) improved health facilities; (c) improved water supply and less time spent
   fetching water; (d) better school attendance; and (e) increased business in solar supply and other business
   lines.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR contains a rich list of lessons learned from the preparation and implementation of the
project, lessons which were incorporated into the design of the follow-up project (EEAP II). IEG has



                                                                                                    Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Emergency Electricity Access Project (P163777)



identified the following key lessons, some of which overlap or amplify the excellent lessons drawn by
the ICR:

    1. Relying on project implementation and monitoring agencies with strong records of
       collaborating with local authorities and communities in FCV countries is key to
       achieving successful outcomes. Despite the persistence of conflict throughout the project
       implementation period, UNOPS and a local third-party agency were able to successfully
       implement and monitor the Project. This was one of the first projects supported by the Bank
       in which a UN agency was responsible for implementing the project on the ground, managing
       all the procurement, disbursement, and the administration of the subsidy scheme. The strong
       support provided to UNOPs by the Bank team, which was not permitted to visit Yemen, and
       the cooperation between the two agencies were also critical factors in the success of the
       Project.
    2. The inclusion of contingent emergency response components (CERC) in project
       designs can enable swift responses to disasters without having to process additional
       financing or new operations. The EEAP’s CERC enabled the Project to be fitted with new
       subcomponents that provided personal pico-solar units to health care workers and solar PV
       units to Covid-19 isolation units in response to the outbreak of Covid-19. The project design
       had provided that in the event of the CERC being triggered the funding could be secured
       from a reallocation of the grant from other categories, additional financing or from other
       sources. When the CERC was triggered, it was faster to reallocate the grant proceeds to the
       component rather than pursuing additional financing or funding from other sources.
    3. While the CERC provided the swiftest option for responding to the Covid-
       19 emergency through a reallocation of funds within the financing facility the result
       was a reduction of financing for solar household connections contributing to a
       reduction of the number beneficiaries and a substantial revision of outcome
       targets. An alternative approach could have been to replace the reallocated funds with
       additional financing to avoid this impact on the SHS.
    4. A project involving financing of solar PV requires a robust assessment of market
       demand to determine the capacity needs of various categories of beneficiaries or
       alternatively a flexible approach that allows for adjustments during implementation,
       the latter approach being more suited to emergency situations in which project
       preparation speed is critical. At project preparation, reliance was placed on norms for solar
       unit sizes from the Africa Region. The Yemen market demand proved to be for larger size
       units than the norms across all beneficiary categories. This shortfall was addressed as new
       procurement batches were better tailored to emerging patterns of market demand.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


                                                                                                 Page 19 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Emergency Electricity Access Project (P163777)




This detailed ICR presents a strong storyline on the rationale for the project, the coherence of its design with
the PDO, the innovative implementation and monitoring arrangements that enabled the Project to succeed, and
the rich list of lessons that can be learned for similar projects in FCV environments.

There are only minor inconsistencies, including: (a) showing the actual number of people provided with
electricity by the project using household solar systems as 114,167 in the main text of the ICR (p.15, Table 3)
and as 117,610 in the results framework, Annex 1, p. 31); and (b). reversing the contribution of subcomponents
3.1 and 3.2 to PDO outcome indicators (ICR, para. 20). The para. states that pico-solar units for health care
workers provided (3.1) contributed to the number of people served in critical services facilities while solar units
to Covid -19 isolation units (3.2) contributed to the number of beneficiaries reached with household solar
systems. Other paras such as 45 state the correct accounting of the outcome impacts of these two
subcomponents.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 20 of 20
