     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MR Public Sector Governance Project (P146804)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023613

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P146804                                   MR Public Sector Governance Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Mauritania                                Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D1030,IDA-D3450                       15-Feb-2020                                          24,128,723.69

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Mar-2016                               31-Dec-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           10,300,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            24,800,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        24,128,723.69                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Paul J. Kaiser             Clay Wescott                 Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA) dated 13 April 2016, the project development objective (PDO) of
   the Mauritania Public Sector Governance Project was: "to improve monitoring and transparency of selected
   government entities and the administration of property and mining taxation.”




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MR Public Sector Governance Project (P146804)



   According to the Additional Financing (AF) Agreement and first project restructuring dated 16 August 2018,
   the revised PDO was: "to enhance transparency and improve the mobilization, allocation and management of
   public resources." For this ICR Review, the objective is parsed into three sub-objectives:

        1. Improve the Allocation of Public Resources;
        2. Improve the Mobilization of Public Resources and
        3. Improve the Management of Public Resources.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The original project comprised three components (FA, pages 4-6).

   Component 1: Improved Transparency and Control in Public Resource Management (US$ 5.20 million
   estimate at appraisal) to (i) enhance transparency and reporting in public resource management to improve
   the Government Financial Management Information System (GFMIS), (ii) increase monitoring of state-
   owned enterprises (SOEs) and Autonomous Public Agencies through improved performance and
   accountability, (iii) improve accounting and auditing standards and internal and external oversight, and (iv)
   enhance the public procurement system by implementing reforms for the new institutional and legislative
   framework relating to public procurement.

   Component 2: Strengthen the Administration of Property Registration and Taxation and Mining Taxation
   (US$ 4.70 million estimate at appraisal) to (i) strengthen tax administration and compliance by supporting
   ongoing tax reforms aimed at increasing domestic revenue mobilization and widening the tax base, (ii)
   develop a national cadaster, (iii) improve fiscal management in the mining sector, and (iv) enhance the
   management of the Mineral Registry and Geoscientific Data.

   Component 3: Project Management (US$ 1.70 million estimate at appraisal) to support the Government of
   Mauritania (GoM) to manage the project.

   The revised project (AF and First Restructuring dated 16 August 2018) scaled up and expanded the scope
   of the original project to (i) add US$14.50 million to the project’s financing envelope (increasing it to
   US$27.0 million), (ii) revise the PDO statement, (iii) add one component, and (iv) introduce changes to other
   components and subcomponents (as described below).

   Revised Component 1: Enhancing Transparency and Efficiency in Public Resource Management (US$10.7
   million estimate at AF). This component was renamed and significantly scaled up (by US$5.5 million), and
   its sub-components were revised by (i) (re)allocating US$5.5 million in additional funding to subcomponent
   1.1. and changing its name to Enhancing the Systems for Transparent Public Financial Management

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  MR Public Sector Governance Project (P146804)



and Reporting, (ii) (re)allocating US$0.72 million in additional funding to subcomponent 1.2 focusing on
monitoring SOEs and Autonomous Public Agencies, (iii) dropping subcomponent 1.3 on improving
accounting and auditing standards and internal and external oversight and reallocating the remaining funds,
and (iv) renumbering subcomponent 1.4 focusing on enhancing the public procurement system to
subcomponent 1.3.

Revised Component 2: Strengthening the Administration of Land Registration and Mining Taxation (US $9.0
million estimate at AF). This component was renamed and significantly scaled up (by US$ 4.8 million). Its
four subcomponents were consolidated into 2.1 Strengthening the Administration of Land Registration and
2.2 Broadening the Tax Base and Strengthening Fiscal Management in the Mining Sector. The scale-up
included support for land registration pilots to increase the number of formally registered land parcels.
Under the Second Restructuring, US$0.5 million was reallocated from this component to Component 4 after
the procurement process for a US$1.125 million contract under sub-component 2.2 for the equipment
purchase and training program for the General Tax Directorate (DGI) resulted in an unsuccessful bid.

Revised Component 3: Project Management (US$3.55 million). The closing date was extended to reflect an
expanded scope, institutional arrangements were modified, and resources allocated to this component were
increased (by US$1.5 million).

New Component 4: Strengthening National Statistical Capacity, Medium-term Programming, and Annual
Budget Processes (US$3.75 million). This component was added to strengthen national statistical capacity
and enhance macroeconomic and fiscal analysis to strengthen the linkages between medium-term
programming and annual budgeting processes. Three sub-components were originally included: 4.1
Enhancing the Capacity of the National Statistical System to Produce Timely and Quality Statistics
(US$2.55 million); 4.2 Improving Medium-term Planning and Budgeting (US$0.4 million) and 4.3 Enhancing
Access to Statistical Information (US$0.3 million). A fourth sub-component, 4.4, Supporting Government
Capacity in Strategic Planning and Implementation Monitoring Through the New Delivery Unit (US$0.5
million), was added under the Second Restructuring.

The Second Restructuring (Amendment to AF FA dated 10 June 2021) introduced activities to support the
operationalization of the Presidential Delivery Unit (CSEPS), which had the mandate to monitor GoM
priorities. The CSEPS developed a digital monitoring tool with clear indicators that enable it to
systematically assess progress and implementation challenges – 145 presidential engagements, equivalent
to 1185 projects, were monitored, covering 16 sectors (45 percent in education and 16 percent in
agriculture). CSEPS also began organizing regular briefings for the Council of Ministers chaired by the
President, providing updates on program implementation and highlighting specific projects for deeper
discussion and strategic decision-making.

The AF and First and Second Restructuring reinforced the public sector's capacity to mobilize, allocate, and
manage public resources transparently. The AF and First restructuring (i) enhanced the capacities and
functionalities of the GFMIS through the modernization and interfacing of two core budgeting and treasury
accounting information systems, (ii) strengthened statistical, macroeconomic, and fiscal forecasting capacity
and enhanced medium-term programming and budgeting processes, and (iii) expanded the tax base and
optimized revenue mobilization through scaled-up support for land registration pilots and improved audit
capacity in the mining sector. The Second Restructuring further strengthened strategic planning and
monitoring of GoM priorities by operationalizing CSEPS and strengthening its capacity in strategic planning
and implementation monitoring.



                                                                                                Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MR Public Sector Governance Project (P146804)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The original total project cost was US$11.60 million (US$10.30 million IDA-D1030 and US$1.3
   million in counterpart funds). An AF (P165501) and First Restructuring were approved in July 2018 for
   US$16.40 million (US$14.5 million IDA-D3450 and US$0.9 million in counterpart funds). The final project
   cost estimate was US$27 million, with an actual disbursement of US$26,328,724, representing 97.3
   percent. The ICR did not provide the reason for the difference between the revised project cost estimate
   and the actual disbursement.

   Financing: IDA (IDA-D1030) financed SDR 7.5 million (US$10.30 million equivalent), and an additional IDA
   Grant (IDA-D3450) funded SDR 10.1 million (US$ 14.50 million equivalent).

   Borrower Contribution: The GoM provided US$ 1.3 million in counterpart funding for IDA-D1030 and US$
   0.9 million for IDA-D3450.

   Dates: The project was approved on 28 March 2016, became effective on 24 June 2016, and was
   restructured two times along with one AF. The AF and First Restructuring (approved on 16 August 2018)
   consolidated and scaled up activities, expanded the project’s scope and extended the closing date to 31
   December 2022. The Second Restructuring (approved 10 June 2021) reallocated funds from Component 2
   to Component 4 and added a new sub-component to Component 4.

   A split evaluation will not be undertaken because the project’s revised PDO and activities continued to
   reflect the original PDO. The two restructurings expanded the project's scope and ambition.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The quality of overall public spending needed to be improved due to weak planning, programming,
monitoring, and control. According to the ICR, there were significant differences between budgeted and
actual expenditures within and among budget categories, with underspending in some categories and
overspending in others. There was also uncertainty about the eligibility of spending, and almost a third of
government spending was devoted to ‘unspecified expenses’, with no information available on which
sectors received these funds or what type of expenditures they financed. Information and communication
technology (ICT) systems did not provide a real-time picture of budget execution; oversight institutions did
not effectively audit public accounts; there were increased fiscal risks for parastatals due to poor internal
and external controls; procurement systems and processes were inefficient; and mining tax volatility
demonstrated the need to expand the tax base and improve tax collection.

Political Context: At the time of approval, the country faced several governance-related challenges that
impeded fiscal and economic management. Medium-term planning and programming were at a nascent
stage, the quality of public spending was affected by variations in the composition of expenditures and poor
monitoring and control over public spending, and budget information systems did not provide a clear, real-
time overview of budget execution. The GoM recognized the need to develop a public sector that can plan,

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MR Public Sector Governance Project (P146804)



budget, execute, and account for public resources in a more effective manner. This was a key condition for
Mauritania to consolidate social stability, create jobs, and reduce poverty. The GoM expressed its
commitment to addressing these issues.

Economic Conditions: At the time of approval, Mauritania was a lower-middle-income country with a gross
national income per capita of US$1,270, driven by a thriving extractive sector and high international
commodity prices. The PAD notes that a decline in mineral export prices and international demand showed
how Mauritania’s strong economic performance was based in part on favorable external factors such as
strong demand for high commodity prices. Annual real gross domestic product (GDP) growth was projected
to decelerate markedly to 3.2 percent in 2015 from 6.4 percent in 2014, and real GDP growth was expected
to return to rates observed before the commodity price boom (2011–2014), slowing down to 4.5 percent in
2016 and 2017. Total public spending doubled between 2009 and 2014 in nominal terms or by 57 percent
in real terms, yet 2015 poverty data demonstrated a modest decrease in absolute poverty from 46.8 percent
to 41.2 percent and extreme poverty from 16.5 percent to 9.9 percent between 2008 and 2014. This was
impacting the delivery of essential services as well, with development indicators in health, education, water
and electricity access, and food security lagging behind Millennium Development Goal (MDG) targets and
Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) averages. The GoM recognized that despite the recent strong economic growth
performance, there was a need to put in place programs to ensure shared growth and poverty reduction,
specifically focusing on supporting a public sector that could effectively plan, budget, execute, and optimize
public spending.

Development Priorities: The project directly aligned with the GoM’s “Strategy for Accelerated Growth and
Shared Prosperity 2016‐2030” (Stratégie de Croissance Accélérée et de Prospérité Partagée) overarching
aim to strengthen governance in all its dimensions and to inform policy reforms in the areas of economic
governance, institutional accountability, and investment climate. The project also supported GoM priorities
to complete the upgrade and expansion of critical budget (TAHDIR, RACHAD) and tax (JIBAYA)
information systems, strengthen the alignment between Medium-Term Expenditure Frameworks (MTEFs)
and Annual Budget estimates, ensure the timely transmission of budget execution bills, and broaden the tax
base/modernize tax administration for more predictable and stable revenue sources.

The project was also aligned with, and effectively contributed to, the World Bank Group’s (WBG’s)
FY14‐FY16 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) Pillar 2: Economic Governance and Service Delivery, and
specifically CPS Objective 2.3 Public Sector Development, Outcome 10 – Efficient Management of Public
Financial Resources. The Completion and Learning Review (CLR) for the FY14‐16 CPS noted that the
project supported the GoM in advancing reforms to optimize public spending, reinforce control over the
parastatal sector, and enhance compliance with the country’s procurement framework (FY18–FY23 Country
Partnership Framework, p.66). The project also directly aligned with the WBG’s FY18–FY23 CPF Focus
Area 3: Strengthen Economic Governance and Private Sector‐Led Growth, and specifically CPF Objective
3.1: Strengthen Fiscal Management.

With the AF/First Restructuring, the project also became a core element of the WBG’s FY18–FY23 CPF for
Mauritania – both were processed in parallel and approved on June 4 and 13, 2018, respectively, with the
revised PDO and CPF Objective 3.1. Strengthen Fiscal Management, sharing much of the same wording.
The Second Restructuring in May 2021, which occurred in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic,
responded to an emerging need to further strengthen strategic planning and monitoring of GoM priorities
and entailed support for the operationalization of the recently established CSEPS mandated to enhance
public sector performance.



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      MR Public Sector Governance Project (P146804)




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve Allocation of Public Resources

                             Rationale
                             Improvements in planning, programming, procurement, monitoring, control, and oversight were required to
                             improve the quality of public spending in Mauritania. ICT tax and budget systems needed to be upgraded and
                             expanded to improve functionality and positively impact the quality of public spending, which was not
                             adequately coordinated or cohesive.

                             There was no theory of change (ToC) in the PAD. It was developed for the ICR. The ToC assumed that
                             project support to improve expenditure controls through an updated, more integrated GFMIS, combined with
                             measures to enhance accounting, auditing, oversight, and procurement standards, would constitute
                             necessary steps toward addressing these constraints.

                             There were three intermediate results indicators (IRIs).

                                        Core Budget and Treasury Accounting Management Information Systems upgraded, integrated and
                                         interfaced with other principal financial management information systems. Baseline: No (30 June,
                                         2016). Target: Yes (31 December, 2021). No (2 December, 2022). Partially achieved. The new
                                         Treasury accounting system could not be completed due to procurement issues. Nevertheless, the
                                         project supported the GoM to upgrade and expand critical budget and tax information systems, along
                                         with relevant modules, interfaces, servers, and licenses. This IRI measures an essential area of
                                         project support linked to the two PDO indicators described below.
                                        Share of Procurement Committee Leads (Personnes Responsables des Marches Publics) certified
                                         through a procurement certification scheme. Baseline: 0% (30 November, 2015). Target: 40% (30
                                         December, 2022). Achieved: 96% (2 December, 2022). The project supported increasing the capacity
                                         of procurement authorities by increasing the percentage of tender committee members certified under
                                         the training and certification program.
                                        Delivery Unit Matrix of Policy Priorities. Baseline: A matrix of policy priorities monitored by the Delivery
                                         Unit is unavailable (29 April 2021). Target: A matrix of policy priorities monitored by the Delivery Unit
                                         is prepared and agreed upon (30 December 2022). Achieved: A matrix of policy priorities monitored by
                                         the Delivery Unit is ready and agreed upon (2 December 2022). The project helped finance the Unit,
                                         including an ICT-based monitoring system and regular briefings for the Council of Ministers chaired by
                                         the President.



                                                                                                                                       Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MR Public Sector Governance Project (P146804)



There were two PDO indicators.

Transmission of the budget execution bill (Projet de loi de Reglement) for the preceding year to the Court of
Accounts within the mandated timeframe (31 December). Baseline: After 31 December (30 June, 2016).
Target: Yes, on or before 31 December 2022. Achieved: Yes, on 2 December, 2022. By providing support to
enhance the functionality of GFMIS core modules that enable the timely and automated production of reliable
information on budget execution, the project helped the GoM to submit the budget execution bill starting in
2018. This significantly improved the comprehensiveness of the GoM’s aggregate fiscal position and controls
over public spending..

Alignment between Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) estimates and Annual Budget estimates in
two selected sectors. Baseline: No alignment (20 April 2018). Target: 95% (30 December, 2022). Partially
Achieved: 89.7% alignment (2 December, 2022). The MTEF estimates for 2021-2023 of two selected
ministries, the Ministry of Equipment and Transport (MET) and the Ministry of Social Affairs, Childhood, and
the Family (MASEF), were prepared and transmitted on 31 March 2021. While achieving this represented a
significant improvement, the final alignment rate of these MTEF estimates with the disclosed budgets was
calculated at 89.7 percent, slightly lower than the end target of 95 percent. The variation between the MTEF
and annual budget estimates was due to a downward revision of all budgets because of COVID-19. The
improved alignment between the MTEF and budget estimates helped make the annual allocation of resources
for these ministries significantly more evidence-based and results-focused.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve Mobilization of Public Resources

Rationale
This component was initially designed to (i) broaden the tax base and modernize tax administration to create
a more predictable and stable source of revenue, (ii) improve mining sector taxation by using a tax model and
a risk-based methodology for audits to combat Base Erosion and Profit Shifting, and (iii) modernize the
mining registry and strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Mining for geoscientific analysis. Under the AF
and First Restructuring, this objective was renamed and significantly scaled up support for land registration
pilots to increase the number of formally registered land parcels in Mauritania.

There were three IRIs.

      Tax census in 3 largest cities (properties and businesses). Baseline: None (30 November, 2015).
       Target: Nouakchott, Nouadhibou, and Rosso tax censuses are completed. Achieved: Nouakchott,
       Nouadhibou, and Rosso tax censuses completed in 2020 by the DGI. By using the additional data on
       businesses (turnover, staff, plants/equipment etc.) and properties (size, value, use), DGI expanded
       the tax base with reliable information to increase tax revenue collection.
      A risk-based annual action plan conducts mining sector tax audits. Baseline: 0 (30 March, 2018).
       Target: 80 (30 June, 2022). Achieved: 86 (2 December, 2022). This action plan enabled the GoM to

                                                                                                 Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MR Public Sector Governance Project (P146804)



       identify high-value tax revenue collection mining companies for targeted tax audits. Mauritania’s three
       principal mining companies, along with 16 of 19 main subcontractors, were subject to risk-based
       audits.
      Geological database system accessible to the public on-site and online. Baseline: No (30 November,
       2015). Target: Yes (30 June, 2022). Achieved: Yes (2 December, 2022). These databases helped the
       GoM achieve Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative compliance in 2019 and 2020, positively
       impacting the country’s investment and building accountability in resource governance.

There were two PDO indicators.

      Urban land parcels with use or ownership rights are recorded in a land information system (gender
       disaggregated). Baseline: 35,000 (20 April, 2018). Target: 75,000 (30 December, 2022). Achieved:
       207,763 (2 December 2022). By increasing the number of parcels registered in the land management
       information systems, the GoM was able to build a more reliable database to increase property tax
       receipts sustainably. According to Annex 1 of the ICR, the indicator achieved the target of 30 percent
       female and 70 percent male.
      Mining companies are subjected to tax audits. Baseline: o (30 March, 2018). Target: 80% (30
       December, 2022). Achieved: 86% (2 December, 2022). Based on the risk-based annual action plan
       described above, the additional tax audits will enable the GoM to increase mining sector tax receipts
       over time and help combat Base Erosion and Profit Sharing.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve the Management of Public Resources

Rationale
To improve the management of public resources, this object focused on strengthening the GoM’s audit
function, specifically focusing on state-owned enterprises. At the time of approval, GoM oversight institutions
needed to be adequately equipped to audit public accounts and systematically follow up on audit
recommendations. The inadequate control of the parastatal sector also heightened financial risks. Financial
statements and reports needed to be more frequent, complete, and standardized. The procurement system
had gaps in the legal framework, including operational regulations and standard bidding documents. The
institutional framework suffered from overlapping mandates, limited procurement capacities, a lack of controls
and audits, ineffective mechanisms to report allegations of corruption, and an absence of civil society
participation. The improved production, use, and dissemination of statistical data was meant to inform
medium-term programming and planning, focusing on the National Statistics Office (Office National des
Statistiques -- ONS), the General Directorate of Reform Studies and Monitoring and Evaluation (Direction
Générale des Etudes, des Réformes et du Suivi-Evaluation – DGERSE) and the General Budget Directorate
(Direction Générale du Budget – DGB) of the Ministry of Finance.




                                                                                                 Page 8 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                MR Public Sector Governance Project (P146804)



                            There were three IRIs.

                                  Performance agreements are elaborated, signed between the State and SOEs, and monitored.
                                   Baseline: 0 (30 November, 2015). Target: 2 (30 December, 2022). Achieved: 2 (2 December, 2022).
                                   The project implemented and monitored two pilot performance contracts for the Société des
                                   Transports Publics and the Société Nationale des Forages et des Puits, complementing the PDO
                                   focus on publishing economic and budget information (see below).
                                  Qualified statisticians employed by the National Statistics System. Baseline: 15 (20 April, 2018).
                                   Target: 35 (30 December, 2022). Achieved: 36 (30 December, 2022). The project complemented
                                   support provided by the European Union and the International Monetary Fund to (i) enhance the
                                   capacity of the National Statistical System to produce timely and quality statistics, (ii) improve macro-
                                   economic forecasting capacity and strengthen the linkages between medium-term programming and
                                   annual budgeting processes, and (iii) increase access to statistical and fiscal information.
                                  User satisfaction with the availability of publicly accessible budget information. Baseline: 25% (30
                                   April, 2018. Target: 50% (30 June, 2022). Achieved: 56.14% (2 December 2022). Measuring user
                                   satisfaction with access to budget information enabled the GoM to understand better how project
                                   interventions were viewed by the users surveyed so that demand-driven policy solutions could be
                                   developed.

                            There were three PDO indicators (one was dropped at AF).

                                  Public disclosure of annual consolidated reports on public corporations' financial performance and
                                   fiscal risks (enterprises et établissements publics) issued by the Direction de la Tutelle Finaciere
                                   (DTF). Baseline: 0 (30 November, 2015). Target: 6 (30 December, 2022). Achieved: 7 (2 December,
                                   2022). This resulted in publishing economic and budget information and aggregate SOE portfolio
                                   reports.
                                  Improved public access to fiscal information (measured as elements of fiscal details). Baseline: 3 (31
                                   December, 2014). Target: 6 (30 December, 2022). Achieved: 7 (2 December, 2022). The project
                                   supported improved public access to seven key elements related to GoM budget forecasting and
                                   execution, along with projected annual revenues and debt.
                                  Coverage of internal audits in the Ministries of Health and Primary Education. Baseline: 10% (30
                                   November, 2015). Target: 20% (30 June, 2020). Not Achieved: Dropped at AF/First Restructuring.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            PDO 1: Improve Allocation and Management of Public Resources. The project met the target for the PDO
                            indicator on the transmission of the budget execution bill but fell short of the PDO indicator on the alignment
                            between MTEF and annual budget estimates in two selected sectors. The GoM introduced MTEFs in 2000,


                                                                                                                               Page 9 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MR Public Sector Governance Project (P146804)



but these programming tools were not systematically developed and had little influence over annual budget
allocations. There was limited capacity of sectoral ministries to undertake medium-term programming, ensure
regular updating of MTEFs, and monitor and align medium-term programming and annual budget processes.
Given the GoM’s limited experience and capacity in aligning MTEF and budget estimates, the project focused
on two sectors. By providing support to enhance the functionality of GFMIS core modules that focus on the
timely and automated production of reliable information on budget execution, the project helped the GoM to
submit the budget execution bill every year since 2018 on time. MTEF estimates for 2021-2023 of two
selected ministries (MET and MASEF) were prepared and transmitted on 31 March 2021. While achieving
this significant improvement, the final alignment rate of these MTEF estimates with the disclosed budgets was
89.7 percent, below the target of 95 percent. The project met targets for two IRIs, falling short of the target for
the IRI on upgrading, integrating, and interfacing core budget and treasury accounting management
information systems with other principal financial management information systems. The achievement of PDO
1 is rated as Modest.

PDO 2: Improve Mobilization of Public Resources. The project exceeded the targets for the PDO
indicators, focusing on urban land parcels with use or ownership rights recorded in a land information system
and mine companies subjected to tax audits. As of 2019, the Geological and Mining Information System
(Système Informatique Géographique Minéral) and the mining title management system "Flexicadastre” were
online and accessible to investors and stakeholders in the sector. As of 2021, the country’s three principal
mining companies were subject to risk-based audits, with 16 of the 19 main subcontractors subject to the
same principles. The number of tax audits of mining companies and subcontractors (19 out of 22 companies)
carried out by DGI thus exceeded the associated target. The targets for all IRIs were also exceeded. The
achievements in regularizing land tenure and modernizing systems for land administration were notable since
they laid the foundation for improved property tax revenue generation. While the PDO indicators were
achieved, the PDO is rated as Substantial.

PDO 3: Improve the Management of Public Resources. The project exceeded the targets for PDO
indicators, focusing on improved public access to fiscal information and public disclosure of annual
consolidated reports on public corporations' financial performance and budgetary risks. The project
significantly improved public access to fiscal data, including (i) documents relating to the draft annual budget
of the executive power, (ii) pre-budget statements, (iii) macroeconomic forecasts, (iv) adopted budgets, (v) in-
year reports on budget execution, (vi) audited financial statements, and (vii) external audit reports. The
original PDO indicator on the coverage of internal audits in the Ministries of Health and Primary Education
was dropped at AF because the revised PDO indicator on the public disclosure of annual consolidated reports
and the new PDO indicator on improved public access to fiscal information were assessed to be more
adequate measures. The project exceeded all IRIs. The improvements in public access to financial
information and opportunities for the public to monitor the financial performance of SOEs and autonomous
government agencies were notable achievements that enhanced the overall transparency of public finances.
The accomplishment of PDO 3 is rated as Substantial.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MR Public Sector Governance Project (P146804)



 5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency: No economic or financial rate of return was calculated at appraisal. The PAD (p. 21) uses
an Economy-Wide Return of 12 percent as a benchmark for expected financial and economic benefits, based on
“an ongoing Bank study” on the economic growth impact of Mauritania's 2014-16 Public Investment Program. A
footnote in the PAD also mentions an ongoing Bank study on the economic growth impact of the 2014-16 Public
Investment Program in Mauritania that notes a Financial Internal Rate of Return estimated at 6 percent and the
Economic Internal Rate of Return estimated at 14 percent “based on conservative regional averages and the
concessional nature of available financing.” Still, these amounts are not calculated or used for any estimates.

Other specific assumed economic and financial benefits mentioned in the PAD and the AF Project Paper include
(i) tax revenues and fees from an improved property tax system estimated to increase by 20 percent (assuming
5 percent inflation and 5 percent annual increase in taxes and fees collected), (ii) transfer pricing documentation
and disclosure requirements leading to revenue collection benefits of about 0.6 percent of GDP; and (iii) 1
percent of GDP in budgetary savings from a decline in extra-budgetary spending and carryforwards in the
parastatals sector. The economic and financial analyses in the PAD were not presented, and data sources were,
in part, based on an ongoing World Bank study without adequate documentation. The AF Project Paper did not
provide any additional or updated estimates on the overall expected economic benefits of the project.

The ICR noted these limitations and conducted economic and financial analyses that identified some ‘tangible
results” related to increased monitoring of SOEs and autonomous government agencies and some payroll
savings (Annex 4). The economic and financial analyses in the ICR were limited to the data available to the
team. The working assumptions for these analyses were also clearly stated and reasonable.

Operational Efficiency: Partly reflecting its expanded scope, the project required about 2.5 times the original
financing of US$10.3 million, and its implementation took 6.5 years instead of the originally planned 3.5 years.
There were procurement challenges and implementation delays, mainly related to the upgrade of the GFMIS
and exacerbated by restrictions imposed by COVID‐19. GFMIS procurement challenges included the
cancellation of (i) a US$4.3 million Treasury accounting system contract (with Oracle South Africa) in June/July
2021 and (ii) a Treasury banking software contract for US$1.4 million in May 2022. Project management costs
aligned with initial expectations, representing US$3.55 million, or 13.4 percent of the total cost at project closing.
Better due diligence and contingency planning for these complex IT procurements would have improved
operational efficiency.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                         Not Applicable



                                                                                                        Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MR Public Sector Governance Project (P146804)



                                                                                    100.00
ICR Estimate                                              25.38
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project received a Substantial rating for Efficacy and a Modest rating for Efficiency. Most of the PDO
indicators met or exceeded targets. The PDO remained aligned with and relevant to the country context, GoM,
and World Bank strategies. The revised PDO adequately captured the scale-up and expansion of scope under
the AF and First Restructuring in 2018 and minor changes under the Second Restructuring in 2021. This ICRR
rates overall Outcome as Moderately Satisfactory since PDO Relevance is rated as High, Efficacy as
Substantial and Efficiency as Modest.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Despite progress in achieving the PDO, there are risks that threaten the sustainability of achieved outcomes
moving forward. These risks relate to sustainability or PFM reforms and the mobilization of public resources.
Despite substantial investments in financial management ICT systems (RACHAD and JIBAYA), they
continue to be fragmented, with missing interfaces and the need for a centralized database and shared
platform (see ICR Annex 8.2. and 8.3 for a helpful table and diagram that clearly illustrates this
fragmentation). While the alignment between MTEF and annual budget estimates was strengthened for two
ministries from 2021-23, it is not clear if the GoM is committed to scaling and sustaining this to additional
ministries. This is needed to ensure that the annual allocation of public resources is more evidence-based
and results-focused. The project financed the operationalization of the CSEPS to monitor government
priorities, but for this to be effective, the GoM will need to commit the resources needed to institutionalize
and sustain its operations in the future.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Quality at Entry is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.

  When the project became effective in June 2016, planned activities were directly aligned with GoM and
  Bank strategies for Mauritania, including the 2016‐2030 Strategy for Accelerated Growth and Shared
  Prosperity and the FY14‐FY16 County Partnership Strategy. There was no ToC in the PAD, with an
  implicit ToC and Results Chain added under the AF/First Restructuring. The PAD's results framework
  (RF) did not adequately track achievement toward the PDO. The RF did not have an indicator tracking

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MR Public Sector Governance Project (P146804)



  revenue generation, which is fundamental to understanding the impact of project activities on public
  research mobilization, a key part of the PDO. The indicator measuring the alignment with MTEF and
  Annual Budget estimates focused on two ministries. Project documents did not provide the rationale for
  the choice of ministries for this indicator, making it difficult to understand the broader impact of the project
  beyond the ministries that were tracked.

  During preparation, the Task Team drew on the experience of the previous World Bank projects, such as
  the Projet de Renforcement des Capacités du Secteur Public (PRECASP) and Projet de Renforcement
  Institutionnel du Secteur Minier (PRISM) 1 and 2 operations based on lessons learned from these
  operations. The project’s simple design was informed by PRECASP’s experience, which was too
  complex for a low-capacity environment such as Mauritania (five components and five ministries).
  PRECASP’s experiences also highlighted the importance of establishing a strong focus on M&E at the
  beginning (hiring a full-time M&E officer with a clear, yet realistic, data collection protocol), ensuring
  robust supervision arrangements that allow for frequent in-country support missions, along with focusing
  on donor coordination and GoM ownership of project activities. PRISM 1 and 2 provided opportunities for
  the project to build on and coordinate with PRISM’s ongoing activities in the mining sector.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Task Team was comprised of staff with expertise in governance (lead), extractives, land
 administration, social and environmental safeguards, procurement, and financial management (FM). Over
 its 6.5-year duration, the project had four different Task Team Leaders (TTLs) that provided supervision
 and technical support throughout implementation. The ICR noted that supervision quality suffered
 somewhat due to the frequent change of TTLs. Supervision missions were organized bi‐annually, and Aide
 Memoires and implementation status reports (ISRs) were prepared promptly. A total of 13 ISRs were
 generated between June 2016 to December 2022, and in November 2017, a midterm review (MTR)
 mission was conducted.

 As accurately noted in the ICR, reporting was generally of sufficient quality and candor, and systematically
 covered challenges and provided recommendations on addressing them. This was especially true for the
 MTR mission, which candidly identified project design and implementation difficulties. It directly informed
 the AF and First Restructuring in 2018, which revised the PDO, and introduced a Results Chain organizing
 existing and new PDO indicators across three expected outcomes. The AF also introduced changes to
 implementation arrangements (including monitoring and evaluation - M&E) but still needed to revise the RF
 to reflect activities fully. Following the MTR until project closing, ISRs consistently rated Implementation
 Progress, Procurement, and M&E as Moderately Satisfactory (down from Satisfactory). The final three
 ISRs also lowered the rating of overall progress towards the PDO to Moderately Satisfactory (from
 Satisfactory).

 The World Bank team helped the GoM improve its capacity for compliance with environmental and social
 safeguards, FM, and procurement. However, later in project implementation, several more significant
 procurements had to be canceled – most notably the Treasury accounting system and Treasury banking


                                                                                                       Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MR Public Sector Governance Project (P146804)



 system procurements. A stronger focus on GoM procurement capacity issues might have identified
 remedial actions earlier and prevented the canceled procurements.

 Overall Bank Performance is rated as Moderately Satisfactory. This reflects Moderately Satisfactory ratings
 for Quality at Entry and Quality of Supervision. Despite some shortcomings, the original project design was
 adequate. Since an explicit ToC was not formulated at appraisal, an implicit ToC had to be derived. Under
 the AF/First Restructuring, the original PDO was revised, and a Results Chain was introduced, organizing
 existing and new PDO Indicators around three expected outcomes. Based on the findings of the MTR, the
 AF also introduced changes to implementation arrangements, but it could have used this opportunity to
 revise the RF more fully. No specific adjustments were made to address the impacts of COVID-19, even
 though the pandemic was cited as an essential reason for canceling several activities (and the rationale for
 the Second Restructuring). Under the AF/First Restructuring, several significant ICT procurements were
 withdrawn and replaced with replacement activities. While this resulted in the non-achievement of one IRI
 target, none of the replacement activities were captured in the RF – despite generating some critical
 results. Despite the extension of the closing date (under the AF) to 6.5 years, the time was still insufficient
 for PFM reforms focusing on improving the mobilization, allocation and management of public resources.
 Supervision quality also suffered somewhat due to the relatively frequent changes of TTLs, and some of
 the supervision ratings might have lacked some candor.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design evolved during implementation due to PDO changes requiring an updated RF. Previous
 operations, PRECASP and PRISM 1 and 2 informed M&E and project design more generally, at appraisal.

 The scale-up and expansion of the scope under the AF/First Restructuring in 2018 led to revisions of the
 RF. Out of four original PDO indicators, (i) one was retained (and had already been achieved), (ii) two were
 reformulated to capture project achievements better, (iii) one was dropped because one revised existing
 indicator, together with one of the new indicators, were seen as more adequate measures of the associated
 outcome, and (iv) three new indicators were introduced. Similar changes were introduced to IRIs. After that,
 the RF remained intact, with one IRI added under the Second Restructuring in 2021.

 While the PAD did not have an explicit ToC to inform the RF (World Bank guidelines did not require a ToC
 at this time), there was a detailed narrative explaining the PDO. The primary Results Chain introduced at
 AF did not, however, adequately organize existing and new PDO indicators around three expected
 development outcomes (see ICR Annex 6.2). There were gaps in the RF. The third PDO was not well
 named and did not fully capture the focus on building the GoM capacity to effectively manage public



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MR Public Sector Governance Project (P146804)



 resources. The absence of revenue mobilization indicators in PDO 2 was also a shortcoming that made it
 difficult to fully assess the impact of project activities on revenue mobilization.

 The project’s M&E system was adequate. A project implementation unity (PIU) was established to ensure
 fiduciary responsibility and technical coordination of activities. The PIU reported directly to the Minister and
 supported a Project Steering Committee (Comité de Pilotage) comprised of project implementing agencies’
 technical leadership, ensuring oversight and monitoring. PIU core staff included an M&E Specialist
 responsible for monitoring and reporting results defined in the RF – per an established method, data
 source, and frequency for each indicator. Baseline values were calculated based on statistical records,
 reports, and data collected from the central administration. The M&E system also relied on focal points in
 each implementing agency, reinforcing monitoring capacity within each targeted entity. The M&E
 Specialist produced semi-annual reports with the latest data for each indicator made available to
 beneficiaries and stakeholders.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E was initially rated as Satisfactory in ISRs, falling to Moderately Satisfactory after the MTR mission.
  The MTR identified several M&E shortcomings, including (i) slow progress in several reform areas
  (auditing and accounting norms, GFMIS, and fiscal audit capacity in the mining sector), (ii) limited impact
  in some activities that the RF needed to capture consistently, (iii) the formulation of some results
  indicators that created challenges for monitoring progress, and (iv) insufficient technical coordination
  since the Project Steering Committee only met once a year.

  The AF/First Restructuring addressed some of these challenges by establishing a Technical Advisory
  Committee attached to the Steering Committee to facilitate regular monitoring and enable just-in-time
  adjustments to implementation modalities. Also, to strengthen institutional capacity, several technical
  advisers were recruited to assist the PIU and beneficiary institutions in developing Terms of Reference
  and monitoring contractor performance, mainly supporting the GFMIS procurements and the overall
  reform process. Given the failed ICT GFMIS procurements after the AF/First Restructuring, these
  measures were needed to address this issue effectively. Several new activities were added in the Second
  Restructuring, but the RF was not revised to capture them, so the impact of these investments was not
  adequately recorded.

  A Government ICR (rapport d’achèvement) captured the project’s main achievements at the closure.
  However, the completion date for the report was 30 September 2022, three months before project
  closure, which did not allow for including final data for several PDO indicators and IRIs. The PIU
  obtained updated M&E-related data from the implementing agencies/beneficiary institutions to finalize
  project results for project closing.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E was effectively used to inform the MTR and the subsequent AF/First Restructuring and led to
  significant changes to the overall project design relatively early during implementation. After AF/First
  Restructuring, M&E was less effective in identifying challenges related to more extensive procurement
  processes – most notably the Treasury Accounting system. No corresponding adjustments were made
  to the RF and/or M&E framework to monitor and capture data for the activities that replaced canceled

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MR Public Sector Governance Project (P146804)



  activities, including (i) the upgrade of the Tax Management Information System, (ii) the introduction of
  the Jira Work Management collaboration tool at the Ministry of Finance, (iii) the acquisition of tablets for
  the realization of the General Census of Population and Housing by the National Agency of Statistics
  and Demographic Analysis, and (iv) the audit of dormant funds and certified checks, the digitization of
  archives, the training program for public procurement stakeholders, and the implementation of a
  significant public-private partnership project plans. The Second Restructuring did not adequately
  address these issues in the RF. Adding one or more IRIs to the RF could have handled this
  shortcoming.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Most project components did not entail any social risks. Given the sensitive and often contested nature of
   land rights, the only area with potential social risks involved the land registration pilots. Pilots were selected
   to avoid contested areas to mitigate any negative impacts, such as access restrictions because of the land
   registration activities. Social assessments were conducted for each pilot area, including a condition in the
   contract of the international firm responsible for supporting the pilots to ensure the prior completion of the
   assessments and any mitigation measures. This approach embedded a solid risk management dimension
   into the operation to facilitate adopting participatory and inclusive processes for land registration.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Assessments conducted by the World Bank team generally rated FM performance as Satisfactory. The
   only two exceptions were Implementation Status Report (ISR) #2 (January 2017) and ISR #11 (March
   2022), which rated FM as Moderately Satisfactory. The ISRs did not provide clear rationales for these
   downgraded scores. The final disbursement rate was approximately 97.3 percent.

   Procurement compliance was rated Satisfactory in the first three ISRs, with the remaining ten rated as
   Moderately Satisfactory. This reflects the IT procurement challenges described above that negatively
   impacted project implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The unintended impacts identified in the ICR focused on the reallocation of funds from unsuccessful
   procurements to new replacement activities.




                                                                                                       Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MR Public Sector Governance Project (P146804)



d. Other
   No other issues were raised in the ICR.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Modest


12. Lessons

Small but targeted investments in strategic planning capacity in the executive branch can
support the broader goals of governance operations. A comparatively small investment of US$
500,000 was a catalyst for the operationalization of the newly created CSEPS. Based on the
encouraging achievements described in Section 2.d, additional support for CSEPS could further
PFM reform in Mauritania, focusing on improved public sector project monitoring and coordination.
This support could include (i) building capacity through peer-to-peer exchanges in the region and
beyond, (ii) encouraging CSEPS to prioritize further the projects it monitors (highlighting 3-5 projects
with high visibility and impact, creating synergies with the other components, and (iii) helping to
strengthen communication and citizen engagement around these critical projects given
strengthening the social contract.

Complex ICT procurements should be carefully planned at appraisal, with sufficient due
diligence before initiating the procurement process. Due to protracted issues encountered
during the procurement process, acquiring a new Treasury accounting system (from Oracle South
Africa) was eventually abandoned in 2021 at the signature stage. The GoM subsequently decided
that these funds (US$ 4.3 million) be reallocated to several replacement activities. Some of these
activities required additional ICT procurements, which were also not successful. Procurement
planning and due diligence would have addressed some of these challenges. These types of
procurements should dedicate sufficient resources to ensure completion, testing, interfacing, and
built-in provisions to ensure maintenance and sustainability.

To effectively monitor implementation and assess the impact of governance projects, the RF
should be fully aligned with the PDO from effectiveness to closure, capturing outputs and
outcomes throughout implementation. The RF was extensively revised during the AF/First
Restructuring and, to a lesser extent, the Second Restructuring, making it difficult to track progress
and impact. The addition of a new component with the AF/First Restructuring (strengthening national
statistical capacity, medium-term programming, and annual budget processes) and adding a new
subcomponent (supporting the operationalization of the CSEPS) during the Second Restructuring

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MR Public Sector Governance Project (P146804)



were not clearly linked with the PDO (which was also revised during the AF/Second Restructuring),
making it difficult to monitor progress and assess impact over time. In addition, the project did not
have an indicator that tracked revenue collection, a fundamental data source for the mobilization of
public resources.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR presents a detailed and coherent description of project activities, documenting implementation
challenges and achievements. There are eight annexes to the ICR, including (i) the results framework and key
outputs, (ii) World Bank lending and implementation support/supervision, (iii) project cost by component, (iv) a
detailed efficiency analysis, (v) ToC and RF diagrams, and (vii), helpful tables summarizing changes related to
the AF and two project restructurings. These annexes provide adequate activity-level data and analysis to
understand project implementation. The ICR correctly noted that more due diligence and analysis regarding the
procurement and implementation of ICT solutions would have strengthened and deepened project outcomes.
Overall, the analyses provided in the ICR provided a detailed understanding of project outputs and outcomes
based on the available data, but a more robust assessment of project weaknesses in the RF and coherence of
the two restructurings would have provided the basis for more targeted lessons learned for future governance
operations in Mauritania and elsewhere. The ICR would have also benefitted from a more extensive editorial
review to improve the flow and readability of the document.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                   Page 18 of 18
