     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Providing an Edu of Quality in HT (PEQH) (P155191)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023696

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P155191                                    Providing an Edu of Quality in HT (PEQH)

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Haiti                                      Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D1230,IDA-D4700,TF-B0083               30-Oct-2022                                         86,563,845.56

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 10-Nov-2016                                30-Jan-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            30,000,000.00                                   17,800,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             86,600,000.00                                   17,600,000.00

 Actual                                         86,563,845.56                                   17,600,000.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Salim J. Habayeb            Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objectives of the project were to: (a) strengthen public management of the education sector; (b) improve
   learning conditions in selected public and non-public primary schools; and (c) support enrollment of students
   in selected public and non-public primary schools (Financing Agreement dated December 20, 2016, p. 4).

   During implementation, the project received additional financing and increased its scope and level of ambition,
   including by increasing the number of beneficiaries and project-supported schools. The project revised
   outcome targets and intermediate results targets upward, but decreased one outcome target for enrollment to

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Providing an Edu of Quality in HT (PEQH) (P155191)



   accommodate an additional parallel modality for promoting enrollment through a different package of support
   to schools. Therefore, this ICR Review assesses the project based on the revised targets and expanded
   scope.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  16-May-2019

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had four components summarized below. During implementation, components remained the
   same but underwent changes in their content. Related revisions are noted below under each component
   and sub-component for the purpose of clarity:

   I. Improving Institutional Capacity and Governance (Appraisal: US$3.0 million; Actual: US$3.6
   million). This component aimed at strengthening the technical capacity of the Ministry of National
   Education and Vocational Training (MENFP) to improve service delivery and overall governance mainly by:
   (a) refining and piloting the Quality Assurance System (QAS); (b) developing an education management
   information system (EMIS) that would incorporate data generated under QAS; (c) designing and
   administering learning assessments of public and non-public primary schools as part of QAS; and (d)
   strengthening overall institutional planning and budgeting practices.

   Revisions included additional funding to provide more technical assistance to development of the EMIS
   and to the information unit. Revisions upgraded the gender aspects of QAS, including in teaching practices,
   behavioral studies, training, and promoting communications on gender equality. Activities supporting the
   COVID-19 pandemic response were added for the operationalization of the distance learning platform,
   pedagogical content, and communications on COVID-19 prevention.

   II. Supporting Access to Quality, Public Primary Education in Poor Communities (Appraisal:
   US$13.5 million; Actual: US$52.8 million).

   This component aimed to support access to quality primary education in selected schools in disadvantaged
   communities through two programs.

   Sub-component 2.1: Support to the cohorts of the community education grant program under the
   EFA II Project (Education for All Project II) aimed at improving access to primary education services in
   selected rural communities by sustaining the support previously provided under the EFA II project to

                                                                                                  Page 2 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Providing an Edu of Quality in HT (PEQH) (P155191)



community-managed primary schools. School Management Committees would continue to be supported
through community education plans based on community engagement and community education grants
that would finance the implementation of community plans, such as for expenses related to school
rehabilitation, teacher salaries, supplies and equipment, staff training in school management, and students’
tuition and transportation expenses.

Revisions: Changes were introduced in response to sociopolitical challenges and COVID-19 school
closures. Community-based schools would receive a new QAS-based “light package” instead of the “full
package” (note: an explanation of the full and light packages of QAS is included in Section 4 under
Objective 3). Financing of transportation services was dropped and shifted to tuition expenses.

Sub-component 2.2: Public School Improvement Model aimed at promoting access to quality education
in 149 beneficiary public primary schools through a Public-School Improvement Model. The model would
focus on administration and leadership, teaching practices, learning assessment, community involvement,
and accountability. The QAS would help in assessing learning conditions and in identifying strengths and
weaknesses at each school. School directors, in a participatory process with parents and other
stakeholders, would then develop and implement annual improvement plans based on the identified priority
areas. Activities to be financed included: (i) technical assistance and training of school directors in
management and leadership, and to teachers on pedagogical skills and content knowledge; (ii)
development and implementation of information and communication activities for school directors, school
officials, and other stakeholders; (iii) school improvement grants to fund planned activities, such as small
infrastructure works, school materials, uniforms, and furniture; and (iv) school feeding, deworming, and
nutrition supplements to students.

Revisions: An additional number of public primary schools was included in the Public-School Improvement
Model, and changes in QAS support packages were introduced, reflected by a new sub-component:

Sub-component 2.3: Critical Support for Public School Operation. A total of 136 schools -- with 79
public schools originally receiving the full package of QAS-based interventions -- and 57 new schools were
expected to benefit from the light QAS package.

III. Supporting Access to Quality, Non-Public Primary Education in Poor Communities (Appraisal:
US$11.5 million; Actual: US$22 million). Component III aimed at supporting access of poor children to
non-public schools while improving learning conditions in those schools.

Sub-component 3.1: Support to the final tuition waiver program cohort under the EFA II
Project aimed to bring to completion the non-public school Tuition Waiver Program financed by the World
Bank and other development partners since 2007, and would support the final cohort of students benefiting
from tuition waivers. Student tuition waiver grants would be provided to participating schools in exchange
for school commitment to allow students to attend tuition-free and to comply with basic MENFP school
operating criteria, such as maximum class sizes and textbook provision. It also aimed to finance
communication activities to raise awareness about the new results-based financing program (RBF) under
sub-component 3.2, below, and which would replace the Tuition Waiver Program.

Sub-component 3.2: Support to the development and implementation of a replicable model for
results-based financing for non-public schools would support the design and implementation of RBF in
selected non-public primary schools. It would incentivize schools to improve teaching and learning
conditions, and would provide a per-student grant that would be conditional on the school attainment of


                                                                                                Page 3 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Providing an Edu of Quality in HT (PEQH) (P155191)



  such conditions. Schools found to be out of compliance would be exited from the program and ineligible to
  return.

  Revisions: An additional allocation of US$6.5 million was provided to scale up the RBF model to additional
  schools, doubling the number of student beneficiaries. In view of the shifting focus and costs involved, the
  project financing of feeding and deworming activities was dropped in non-public schools and maintained
  only in public schools. The original QAS-based interventions for non-public schools were expanded to
  include training on climate change, response to natural disasters, and gender equity.

  IV. Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation (Appraisal: US$2 million; Actual: US$8.3
  million). This component would provide support to MENFP for carrying out M&E activities by strengthening
  existing monitoring and evaluation functions, carrying out studies and impact evaluations, financing
  operating costs, carrying out project audits, and independent external technical verifications under
  Component 3.

  Revisions: Additional funding was provided to support additional staff for the scaled-up project. The
  planned impact evaluation was cancelled in 2021 due to inability to implement it in the increasingly
  challenging country context (ICR, p. 15). This cancellation included evaluation of the school improvement
  model and evaluation of RBF in non-public schools.

  Project scope: Apart from EMIS development that was meant to serve the whole sector, the project was
  focused on the southern departments of the country. By project closing, the project included 70 schools
  under the full QAS package, 132 schools under the light QAS package, and 126 non-public schools under
  the RBF mechanism. In addition, the project supported 60 communities to implement community education
  plans, and it supported a tuition waiver program for eligible students in non-public schools. The RBF
  modality was different from the classical RBF modality, as it provided grants to schools if they satisfied a set
  of basic qualifying conditions and operational conditions. Schools were selected based on a list of basic
  qualifying conditions and operational criteria, including adherence to MENFP standards, school size,
  maximum numbers of students in each class, and existence of latrines (TTL clarifications, November 28,
  2023).

  The above-noted project coverage was relatively small compared to the total number of schools in the four
  southern departments, but the operation was meant to set the stage for wider future implementation, as was
  actually observed through replication in using EMIS and QAS throughout the country. EMIS was planned for
  nationwide use, and, by project closing, the application of QAS in primary education expanded to eight of
  the country’s 10 departments, supported by other development partners (see Section 4). Per TTL
  clarifications of November 28, 2023, the numbers of existing schools in 2016 were as follows: Grande Anse:
  286 public schools, 594 non-public schools; Nippes:192 public schools, 582 non-public schools; Sud: 326
  public schools, 1,368 non-public schools; and Sud-Est: 324 public schools, 1,010 non-public schools.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost and financing: At appraisal, the original cost was estimated at US$30 million equivalent,
  financed by an IDA Grant through an Investment Project Financing instrument. No direct counterpart
  funding was planned. Additional financing aiming at scaling up the project was provided on May 16, 2019,

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Providing an Edu of Quality in HT (PEQH) (P155191)



   and consisted of an additional IDA Grant of US$39 million and another Trust Fund Grant of US17.6 million
   from Global Affairs Canada, bringing the aggregate revised commitment to US$86.6 million. All proceeds
   were disbursed, and the actual cost was US$86.6 million.

   Dates: The project was approved on November 10, 2016, and became effective on March 7, 2017. The
   project closed on January 30, 2023, after an extension of three months.

   Restructurings: The project underwent seven restructurings listed below (revisions were explained in the
   components section, and substantive changes were introduced only in the first two restructurings):

       1. First restructuring, May 16, 2019: In view of the vast sector needs and as the project was advancing
            in a satisfactory manner with 53 percent of the original financing having been disbursed, additional
            financing (noted above) was provided to scale up the project and enhance its impact.
       2.   Second restructuring, February 3, 2021: This second restructuring allowed the project to adapt and
            respond to new priorities arising from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. It introduced and
            reoriented interventions to support MENFP’s COVID-19 response plan while helping to help protect
            education access and primary school retention. It revised the results framework and reallocated
            funds between disbursement categories.
       3.   Third restructuring, November 19, 2021: Reallocation between disbursement categories.
       4.   Fourth restructuring, April 7, 2022: Reallocation between disbursement categories.
       5.   Fifth restructuring, September 6, 2022: Reallocation between disbursement categories.
       6.   Sixth restructuring, October 26, 2022: Change of grant closing date with an extension of three
            months.
       7.   Seventh restructuring, January 23, 2023: Reallocation between disbursement categories.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At appraisal, Haiti was reported to be the poorest country in the Western Hemisphere and one of the
poorest countries in the world, with a 2014 gross domestic product per capita at US$824 (PAD, p. 1). The
country was struck on October 3, 2016, by Hurricane Mathew, a large-scale disaster that exacerbated
access challenges to education. Its impact was highest in the country’s southern departments, leaving
1.4 million people in need of lifesaving assistance, and damaging more than 3,500 schools (ICR, p. 5).
Beyond the hurricane emergency, needs were substantial across the education sector. At the primary
level, public provision of education was insufficient to meet demand, and non-public providers
had stepped in to fill the gap, operating over 80 percent of primary schools. Most providers operated with
little oversight or accountability for providing quality education and ensuring learning. At the same time,
the majority of families struggled to finance education costs, which absorbed 10 percent of consumption
costs on average for most households with children in primary school (PAD, p. 3, Investing in People to
Fight Poverty in Haiti, World Bank 2015).

Student achievement remained low, and, according to the ICR (p. 6), once in school, only about half of
the children entering the first grade would reach grade 6. The ICR noted that a 2015 pilot fourth-grade
learning assessment in mathematics conducted in public and non-public schools by MENFP revealed

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Providing an Edu of Quality in HT (PEQH) (P155191)



scores only slightly better than random guessing. A key factor associated with the weak results was the
low quality of the teaching and learning environment. Classrooms suffered from a dearth of teaching and
learning materials. Only 56 percent of primary schools had a source of drinking water, according to the
2013-14 school census. Public sector teachers were commonly not paid on time. About 80 percent of
teachers in the first two cycles of basic education were found to be underqualified in 2015-2016.

MENFP took initial steps in 2014 to increase its oversight of the education system, and this project
intended to invest in developing the systems to do so. In August 2014, MENFP announced Twelve Policy
Measures and a National Pact for Education Quality to work on sector oversight through enforcing
minimum requirements for schools. MENFP also announced a set of minimum physical criteria related to
safe infrastructure, water, sanitation, and evidence of student testing that schools must meet in order to
operate.

Also, at the time of appraisal, existing tuition waiver programs were coming to a close. This would
effectively shift the financial burden of primary education back to households. World Bank estimates put
the number of students at risk of not being able to access school due to the phasing out of tuition waiver
programs at 700,000 primary level students, representing over 30 percent of all primary level students
(PAD, p. 5). There were no systematic investment plans to substantially expand public supply to
compensate for the reductions in access due to the phasing out of these programs. The project planned
transition arrangements for existing tuition waiver programs to safeguarding enrollment incentives to the
poor. In this context, the PAD noted that increasing the quality of education service delivery across both
public and non-public schools to demonstrate the value of education was a critical priority for ensuring
sustained access.

In line with MENFP priorities, the vision of the project was to build upon prior World Bank-supported
operations, particularly EFA II, which overlapped with this project for 15 months prior to its closing in June
2018, to invest in developing systems that would, in the long term, enhance primary education access
and quality.

At the time of both entry and project completion, the project's objectives were consistent with the latest
available Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Haiti initially covering the period FY16-FY19. The
CPF was revised in May 2018 based on a Performance and Learning Review (PLR). The objectives were
directly aligned with the PLR’s Focus Area 2 (Enhancing Human Capital), and Objective 3 (Improve
access to quality primary education), tracked by indicators on (i) primary student enrollment and (ii) the
development of QAS standards, assessments, and application at schools. The PLR also called for further
investments in education in view of their long-term benefits for human capital outcomes.

The objectives were also aligned with the PLR's adjustments to the World Bank's engagement strategy,
notably the introduction of a territorial approach to investments to foster economic opportunities outside
of Port-au-Prince, and to focus on local capacity to prepare for and respond to disasters. The project had
adopted such an approach with its focus on southern departments (ICR, p. 6) and its contribution to
recovery efforts, while concurrently building quality assurance systems that could be replicated and
expanded across the country. The introduction and application of important innovations pertaining to the
Quality Assurance System constituted a central pillar for the project and extended beyond the public
system. While improving overall learning conditions, the project also enhanced its support to gender
equity aspects, and was aligned with the CPF’s approach of mainstreaming gender considerations and
activities in World Bank-supported programs.



                                                                                                      Page 6 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Providing an Edu of Quality in HT (PEQH) (P155191)



               In addition, while remaining in line with the country’s education sector priorities, the project was in general
               alignment with the World Bank Strategy for Fragility, Conflict, and Violence 2020-2025 and to Haiti’s
               fragility context, as the project contributed to supporting the strategy's third strategic pillar on "Helping
               Countries Transition Out of Fragility." This included project support for responding to the COVID-19
               pandemic and for contributing to education recovery efforts in some of the poorest departments. The
               PDO were also consistent with the three strategic pillars of the National Ten-Year Education Sector Plan
               for 2020-2030, namely to: (i) strengthen governance; (ii) improve access and equity; and (iii) improve
               quality and relevance.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Strengthen public management of the education sector



                             Rationale
                             The theory of change envisaged that developing and implementing EMIS and QAS at the primary education
                             level would result in a functional information system and enablement of quality enhancements. The
                             application of processes pertaining to these systems and the utilization of information for decision-making
                             would plausibly contribute to strengthened public management of the education sector.



                             Outputs and intermediate results

                             Under the project, an EMIS was established and incorporated a wide array of data, including national data on
                             schools, students, administrative and teaching staff, and importantly, data generated by QAS.

                             QAS and related assessment methodologies were developed and applied in project-supported schools. The
                             project also integrated gender dimensions into QAS tools. The project developed a system for learning
                             assessment at the primary level. Student learning standards were developed and tested for Creole reading,
                             French reading, and mathematics through related learning assessments that were initiated in 166 project-
                             supported schools and in a sample of non-public schools.




                                                                                                                            Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Providing an Edu of Quality in HT (PEQH) (P155191)



The project developed and provided management training programs for school directors in project-supported
schools. Training was delivered to 95 percent of school directors, exceeding the target of 65 percent. The
effectiveness of the training was not assessed (TTL clarifications, November 28, 2023).

The project used scorecards for decision-making under RBF in non-public primary schools. Eight schools
were removed from RBF because they did not meet minimum expectations.

The project developed a stakeholder hotline with stipulated standards for response time. The proportion of
calls responded to/resolved within applicable response times increased from a baseline of zero in 2016 to 97
percent in January 2023, exceeding the target of 95 percent.



Outcomes

MENFP utilized EMIS data for decision-making, including for planning and resource allocations (ICR, p. 23).
The ICR (p. 43) noted that EMIS was being used for school registration nation-wide. EMIS data were made
accessible across all MENFP directorates.

The use of EMIS enabled incremental national implementation of QAS. The ICR (p. 18) reported that QAS
was established, tested, and implemented, and generated the required data. QAS benefits were not limited to
project-supported schools, as the use of QAS expanded to other schools in the northern and central
departments of the country, supported by the Inter-American Development Bank and Caribbean Development
Bank. Collectively, QAS was implemented in eight of the country’s ten departments, approaching a near-
national geographic scope. At the time of the ICR, data from the Inter-American Development Bank-
supported operation were in the process of being integrated. The use of QAS by other education operations
would be expected to generate a wider impact. Hence, EMIS enabled quasi-national implementation of QAS
with partners' coordination, further reflecting the contribution of the project to strengthening coordination and
informed management decisions in the primary education sector.

This ICR Review notes that strengthening public management and capacity building are considered both a
process and an outcome. The objective to strengthen public management was assessed as almost fully
achieved based on the application of a continuous process of improvements through QAS that provided both
the means and the information needed for relevant decision-making in managing the primary education
sector. This objective and its outcomes were interlinked with those of Objective 2 (to improve learning
conditions) below, as both objectives were pursued under the same QAS pathway. For example, based on
QAS findings, performance bonuses were also provided to 48 project-supported non-public schools that
improved their learning conditions score through informed decision-making to address specific areas of
weaknesses identified by QAS.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Providing an Edu of Quality in HT (PEQH) (P155191)



Improve learning conditions in selected public and non-public primary schools

Rationale
The theory of change held that the development and application of a Public-School Improvement Model
(aimed to improve the dynamics and behaviors among school-level actors in relation to school administration
and leadership, teaching practices, learning assessment, community involvement, and accountability) and the
provision of Community Education Grants would result in designing and implementing school improvement
plans based on QAS data. The implementation of school improvement plans would plausibly contribute to
improved learning conditions.



Outputs and intermediate results

School improvement plans were developed and tailored by each school according to its specific needs,
informed by improvement areas indicated by QAS scores.

The proportion of public schools that developed and implemented school improvement plans approved by
MENFP was 100 percent in January 2023, as targeted.

The project rehabilitated 195 classrooms to improve school physical conditions as part of annual school
improvement plans.

The project rehabilitated an additional 171 classrooms in 19 schools that were damaged by the August 2021
earthquake, bringing the total number of rehabilitated/built classrooms to 366 classrooms.

The proportion of public schools under the Public-School Improvement Model receiving maintenance
products for latrines reached 100 percent by January 2023, as targeted.

Ten water and sanitation facilities were upgraded based on guidelines from a gender-informed protocol (ICR,
p. 20).

The project developed a teacher training program, and 66 percent of teachers participated in the training,
achieving the target of 65 percent. There was no assessment of teachers' competency after training (TTL
clarifications, November 28, 2023).

The percentage of teachers and school directors who received in-service training on gender issues reached
78 percent in January 2023, short of the target of 100 percent.

The project provided school textbooks, workbooks, kits, teacher textbooks, and school feeding to public and
community-based schools.

The attendance rate for girls in primary public schools supported by the project was 84 percent, short of the
target of 95 percent.



Outcomes


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Providing an Edu of Quality in HT (PEQH) (P155191)



The net proportion of project-supported schools that improved their QAS learning conditions score increased
from a baseline of zero in 2016 to 52.6 percent in January 2023, exceeding the target of 30 percent. The
achievement was measured in 376 public and non-public schools. The achievement included 51 percent in
public schools and 55 percent in non-public schools. Although results were exceeded, the effects of the
project on changes in learning conditions were not fully assessed due to the dropping of the impact
evaluation.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Support enrollment of students in selected public and non-public primary schools

Rationale
Theory of change: In addition to activities promoting enrollment in public schools as described under
Objective 2, the theory of change held that designing and implementing results-based financing in non-public
schools would result in schools being incentivized to meet basic operating requirements and improved
performance, and that tuition waivers to poor students would sustain and facilitate the enrollment of students
in non-public schools.

Explanation on the packages provided under QAS: The ICR (pp. 57-59) explained the pillars, dimensions,
and indicators of QAS. The three pillars covered school quality, teacher competencies, and student learning.
The system had nine dimensions centered on areas of leadership, pedagogy, school environment, community
participation, personnel, infrastructure and efficiency ratios, teacher competencies, student socioemotional
aspects, and student learning levels.

The “light” QAS package was simpler in its data collection, and also included information on funds to cover
school operating costs, delivery of school feeding services or food rations, provision of textbooks, training on
reading instruction methods, and technical assistance to school management committees. The full package
included all interventions of the light package, plus other elements, including QAS learning assessments,
implementation of school improvement plans, rehabilitation of latrines, and gender clubs (ICR, p. 13).



Outputs and intermediate results

The project used five modalities to enhance access and support enrollment of students in primary schools: full
QAS package and light QAS package (explained above), community education grants, tuition waivers, and
results-based financing.




                                                                                                  Page 10 of 19
                     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                     Providing an Edu of Quality in HT (PEQH) (P155191)



                  60 communities proposed and implemented community education plans, exceeding the target of 57
                  communities.

                  Direct project beneficiaries, including students, teachers, and school directors, increased from a baseline of
                  110,487 beneficiaries in 2016 to 424,616 beneficiaries (of which 48 percent were females) in January 2023,
                  exceeding the target of 350,000 beneficiaries.

                  There were shortcomings in tracking gender-disaggregated data (see Section 9).



                  Outcomes

                  According to the ICR, the objective’s achievement was reflected by enrollment support through the use of
                  different modalities that facilitate student access:

                      1. The number of children enrolled in the “full package” of QAS in public primary schools increased from
                           a baseline of 23,000 children to 117,935 students in January 2023 (45.2 percent females), slightly
                           short of the target of 120,000 children.
                      2.   The number of children enrolled in the “light package” of QAS in primary schools increased from a
                           baseline of 29,000 to 107,196 children in January 2023 (45.3 percent females), exceeding the target
                           of 98,000.
                      3.   The number of children enrolled in primary school through the provision of community education
                           grants increased from a baseline of zero to 38,855 in January 2023 (42.4 percent females),
                           exceeding the target of 16,000 children.
                      4.   The number of children enrolled in primary schools through the provision of tuition waivers to non-
                           public schools reached 22,141 children in January 2023 (50.1 percent females), exceeding the target
                           of 16,500 children.
                      5.   The number of children enrolled in primary schools through the RBF mechanism in non-public
                           schools increased from a baseline of zero to 119,718 in January 2023 (47.3 percent females),
                           exceeding the target of 91,000 children.

                  However, the calculation methodology for reported enrollments was deficient. The Project Implementation
                  Unit (PIU) used cumulative annual enrollment for the objective’s sub-indicators, with each year’s total added
                  to the previous year. The methodology did not provide the number of uniquely identified students or correct
                  for repeated grades and other variations (ICR, p. 26). Therefore, the objective is assessed as partly achieved.
                  In this context, it is worthwhile to note that the ICR concluded that the quality of M&E was modest in view of
                  important shortcomings (see Section 9) that included quality of evidence issues, output level issues, and the
                  dropping of the planned impact evaluation.



                  Rating
                  Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                                                                                                                   Page 11 of 19
              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
              Providing an Edu of Quality in HT (PEQH) (P155191)



 OBJ_TBL




           OVERALL EFFICACY
           Rationale
           Two objectives (to strengthen public management of the education sector, and improve learning conditions in
           selected public and non-public primary schools) were almost fully achieved and rated Substantial. The third
           objective (to support enrollment of students in selected public and non-public primary schools) was partly
           achieved and rated Modest. The aggregation of achievements is indicative of a Substantial rating for overall
           efficacy, but with caveats, as there was modest achievement of one of the three objectives.



           Overall Efficacy Rating
           Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The PAD’s economic analysis (pp.16-17 and pp. 62-63) provided arguments about the strong rationale for public
financing of primary education. It estimated the benefits accruing from the additional income expected from
additional years of education that beneficiary children would obtain as a result of project activities. It considered
benefits related to components 2 and 3 that accounted for 83 percent of project costs. The PAD’s cost-benefit
analysis compared expected costs and benefits, and, using a discount rate of 8 percent, it estimated a Net
Present Value of US$13.3 million and an Internal Rate of Return of 6 percent. Under a sensitivity analysis, it
considered another scenario that assumed that the project affected only two-thirds of beneficiary children,
resulting in a Net Present Value of US$8.9 million and an Internal Rate of Return of 4 percent.

The ICR (pp. 50-52) replicated the cost benefit analysis at project completion, but also included the benefits
arising from beneficiaries’ educational attainment resulting from tuition waivers. The analysis used the standard
methodology for computing aggregated private returns to work in adulthood of the students benefiting from
project interventions. The effects of school closures due to COVID-19, the 2021 earthquake, and insecurity
issues were also considered.

Using the same discount rate of 8 percent, the ICR’s cost-benefit analysis estimated that the Net Present Value
of the project was about US$25 million, corresponding to an estimated Internal Rate of Return of 9 percent. The
results suggested that project was a good investment from an economic point of view, mainly reflecting a future
increase of wage incomes associated with the expected gains in student learning. The analysis conducted a
sensitivity analysis assuming a more conservative discount rate of 10 percent, a lower rate of employment of 45
percent, and a lower increase of income per additional year of schooling. The results suggested that the Internal
Rate of Return remained positive but decreased to 8 percent.

There were moderate shortcomings in the efficiency of implementation consisting of variable delays, but which
were described by the ICR (p. 25) as relatively minor in terms of implementation. Delays were related to
exogenous events that affected the pace of implementation, such as the deterioration of the safety and security
context in the country, the advent of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the August 2021 earthquake that damaged
some project-supported schools. The President of Haiti was assassinated in July 2021, leading to a period of
violence.



                                                                                                          Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Providing an Edu of Quality in HT (PEQH) (P155191)



Nevertheless, the ICR (p. 24) reported that the project maintained a sufficient pace of implementation to pursue
the achievement of its development objectives. Implementation was facilitated by continued strengthening of the
PIU with the addition of an internal audit team and a new school infrastructure team (ICR, p. 25). The project
required only a three-month extension to allow the completion of infrastructure repairs at schools. Grant
proceeds were fully disbursed.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     83.00
 Appraisal                                                 6.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     82.00
 ICR Estimate                                              9.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated High in view of full alignment with the country's context, its development plans,
and the World Bank's Country Partnership Framework. Efficacy is rated Substantial, as development objectives
were almost fully achieved, except for one objective that was partly achieved. Efficiency is rated Substantial,
based on positive expected returns, but with negative aspects of implementation caused by exogenous factors
that moderately reduced overall efficiency. The aggregation of these findings is consistent with a Moderately
Satisfactory outcome rating, as there was modest achievement of one objective used in the assessment of
overall efficacy. This is indicative of essentially moderate shortcomings in the project’s overall preparation,
implementation, and achievement.




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Several factors suggest that development outcomes are likely to be sustained. The follow-on project
(Promoting a More Equitable, Sustainable and Safer Education Project, or PROMESSE, P174707), provides
medium-term continuity of financing, including implementation of EMIS and QAS in support of school

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Providing an Edu of Quality in HT (PEQH) (P155191)



enrollment and quality improvements. The follow-on project became effective on May 19, 2022. It is co-
financed by the World Bank and the Global Partnership for Education, and implemented by MENFP and the
same experienced PIU.

MENFP’s priorities remain consistent, with continued development partner financing for key priorities of the
Education Sector Plan of 2020-2030. In addition to financial sustainability provided by the PROMESSE
operation, the project built important foundations in terms of institutional processes and structures that are
expected to help in sustaining its outcomes. MENFP’s EMIS Coordinating National Technical Team,
established by a ministerial decree, maintains continued operationalization and coordination of EMIS and
education sector data collection and management. Efforts were underway at the time of project completion to
operationalize school standards nation-wide. Community-managed schools, whose teachers were
predominantly financed by the World Bank, have been converted to national public schools with access to
government resources.

At the same time, the fragility of the socioeconomic and political environment and the possibility of future
exogenous shocks, such as climate or seismic events, remain constant risks to development outcomes.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The World Bank team worked closely with MENFP on project preparation and design. During the initial
  stage of preparation, and through Non-Lending Technical Assistance (NLTA) to MENFP, the Bank team
  brought technical expertise, fostered dialogue, and delivered analyses and technical products that served
  as the foundation for the development of QAS and learning standards (ICR, p. 27). The “Haiti Education
  NLTA: Addressing Key Constraints to Sustainable, High-Quality Education in Haiti” (P153557)
  was approved in January 2015 and completed in October 2015. In addition to substantive elements that
  became the cornerstone of QAS, the NLTA delivered a series of workshops and discussions leading to a
  shared understanding with MENFP and other development partners regarding learning standards for
  curriculum development and learning assessments.

  The project design considered lessons learned from EFA operations and education projects in other
  regions, notably for prioritizing institutional strengthening, providing comprehensive support to meet
  school needs for improving learning conditions, and simultaneously addressing access and quality of
  education.

  Project readiness benefited from the institutional and implementation arrangements that were already in
  place for EFA II and the PIU. The PAD (p. 13) noted that the integration of project activities with MENFP’s
  structure and operations was intentional. Such integration built experience within MENFP and laid the
  groundwork for eventual scale-up of the models developed under the project. MENFP had overall
  responsibility for the project, supported by a PIU that was responsible for day-to-day implementation. The
  PIU was led by a Project Coordinator located within the Director General’s office, allowing regular
  communication with the Director General to facilitate alignment and integration of project activities with
  mainstream activities of the ministry. Within each technical directorate involved in the project, external
  consultants were hired to work closely with the directorate’s technical specialists in executing activities at
  the central level, and other consultants were hired to work with local MENFP staff for coordinating

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Providing an Edu of Quality in HT (PEQH) (P155191)



  implementation at the local level. Roles of MENFP staff in implementing project activities were clearly
  defined at the outset in the Project Operations Manual, taking into account existing responsibilities of
  staff. Financial management and procurement responsibilities were executed by consultants dedicated to
  the project and located within the Director General’s office and the Project Coordinator. M&E
  arrangements were adequate (see Section 9) and the PIU included an M&E specialist for coordinating
  data collection and tracking indicators of the results framework. Risk identification and mitigation were
  adequate (PAD, p. 16), including for capacity strengthening at MENFP, design flexibility, and
  reinforcement of PIU fiduciary capacity.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank Team worked closely with the PIU and MENFP in supervising the project, and provided regular
 implementation support, technical assistance, and adequate reporting. It maintained close liaison through
 formal meetings, communications, and informal exchanges. The regularity of Bank team meetings with the
 PIU and MENFP contributed to the timely identification and resolution of arising issues (ICR p. 25). For
 most of the project period, except during the COVID-19 disruptions, there was constant presence of a Bank
 Task Team Leader on the ground. There was close collaboration to facilitate implementation and enhance
 PIU functions. Transitions between task teams were aided by periods of team overlaps for facilitating the
 transfer of materials and knowledge. The team facilitated the simplification of several activities, such as
 conditions for non-public school grants and support packages for public schools, adjustments to the results
 framework, and reallocation of resources. The team was proactive in facilitating seven restructurings in a
 timely manner, in response to shifting needs and circumstances.

 The team was able to provide intensive and adaptive support to implementation in the face of repeated
 shocks and disruptive events (see Section 5). The team’s performance contributed to the project’s ability to
 maintain a sufficient pace of implementation and progress toward achieving its objectives. The Bank team
 also leveraged trust fund resources to implement complementary activities to the project, such as the Haiti
 Statistical Capacity Building in Education Grant, approved in June 2017 (ICR, p. 27).




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization


                                                                                                  Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Providing an Edu of Quality in HT (PEQH) (P155191)



a. M&E Design
 The project's objectives were realistic and adequately stated overall, but with potential ambiguity in the
 interpretation of two objectives using the terms "support" or "strengthen" that were associated with system
 development. The links between activities and intended outcomes were logical. The results framework was
 adequate. Where relevant, baselines were available, but since many interventions were new or not yet
 started, many baselines were considered to be zero. A telephone hotline for grievance redress was
 planned to be maintained and tracked in the results framework. The PIU was responsible for M&E
 implementation, while also relying on data and external verification information provided by the United
 Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS). Two impact evaluations were planned (PAD, p. 15): one for
 the public-school improvement model and another for the RBF mechanism.



b. M&E Implementation
  Notable shortcomings were reported during implementation. Upon project effectiveness, the PIU, based
  on UNOPS data, started using cumulative annual enrollment for the sub-indicators of objective 3, and, as
  noted in Section 4, this methodology did not provide the number of uniquely identified students or correct
  for repeated grades and other variations (ICR, p. 26).

  The ICR also noted that there was no tracking of the integration of gender-disaggregated data in the
  EMIS, and targets were not set at restructuring for female beneficiaries with respect to enrollment
  indicators. During the first and second revisions, and for most new or revised intermediate results
  indicators, annual targets were set for only some project years without explanation, creating gaps in
  guiding progress monitoring (ICR, p. 25). An indicator on the number of water and sanitation facilities
  upgraded in schools based on gender-informed protocols was added to the results framework in 2019,
  was reported subsequent Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs), remained unchanged in the
  second revision of 2021, but was subsequently dropped from the results framework without explanation,
  and was not reported in subsequent ISRs (ICR, p. 26).

  During implementation, the results framework underwent revisions largely associated with the project’s
  increased scope, supported by additional financing. The enrollment outcome target associated with the
  full package of QAS support was reduced (or essentially split) to accommodate enrollment under a light
  QAS package. As noted in Section 2d, the planned impact evaluation was cancelled in 2021 due to
  inability to implement the planned assessments in the increasingly challenging country context.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were used for regular project monitoring and to inform activities and adjustments during
  implementation. In view of the reported shortcomings during implementation, namely in the inadequate
  calculation methodology for enrollment sub-indicators, the dropping of the planned impact evaluation,
  and in tracking important outputs, overall M&E quality is rated Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest


                                                                                                  Page 16 of 19
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Providing an Edu of Quality in HT (PEQH) (P155191)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified under Environmental Assessment Category B. It triggered OP/BP 4.01 in view of
   potential risks arising from schools’ civil works, but whose scale was expected to be small. The PAD (p. 20)
   reported that the government prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that
   outlined how sites for construction and rehabilitation activities would be selected, and how potential adverse
   environmental and social impacts at these sites would be identified, minimized, mitigated, and
   managed. The project also triggered the safeguard policy on Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 to allow
   municipalities to identify resettlement needs that could be required and to ensure that the affected people
   would be provided with the required assistance and livelihood support. At the 2019 additional financing,
   safeguard policy OP 4.09 Pest Management was also triggered, as small works may entail the use of
   pesticides or herbicides (ICR, p. 15).

   The ICR (p. 26) reported that the project did not entail physical displacement/relocation or economic
   displacement. It highlighted adequate performance and utilization of the hotline for the grievance redress
   mechanism, which responded to/resolved 95 percent of calls within stipulated service standards for
   response times. However, the ICR did not provide further information related to ESMF during the
   implementation period and on overall compliance with environmental or other safeguards aspects, although
   the Overall Safeguards Rating was recorded as satisfactory in the Operations Portal.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   At approval, the fiduciary risk was rated High, but was reduced to Substantial in 2021 and further revised to
   Moderate in 2022, given significant improvements made during implementation and the mitigation of
   residual risks in both financial management and procurement. Financial management and procurement
   ratings were Moderately Satisfactory for most of the implementation period and were upgraded to
   Satisfactory in 2022 as a result of (i) the resolution of internal control weaknesses and strengthening of
   financial management capacity with additional staff; and (ii) the improved pace of procurement execution
   and elimination of procurement delays (ICR, p. 27).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   --



                                                                                                   Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Providing an Edu of Quality in HT (PEQH) (P155191)




11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                       IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                   There was modest achievement
Outcome                           Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory    of one objective used in the
                                                                                   assessment of overall efficacy.
Bank Performance                  Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 28-29) offered lessons and recommendations, including the following lessons re-stated
by IEG's review:

In a fragile context, putting in place foundational elements prior to launching an operation
greatly facilitates implementation. During the initial phase of preparation, a Non-Lending
Technical Assistance brought technical expertise, fostered dialogue, and delivered analyses and
technical products that served as the foundation for the development of the Quality Assurance
System. The technical assistance also facilitated the introduction of new financing models
to promote student enrollment.

Continued reinforcement of a Project Implementation Unit, beyond the arrangements made at
entry, allows a project to expand its scope in an effective manner. During implementation, the
project enhanced the capacities of the Project Implementation Unit in fiduciary and technical
aspects, and in supervision at the local level, thus allowing the project to maintain critical functions in
varying circumstances and to take on new activities with sufficient capacity. Examples included the
establishment of an internal control unit and infrastructure unit, and the timely engagement of
supplementary administrative and technical expertise.

Coordination among development partners promotes synergy and system-wide
impact. Coordination with development partners facilitated the alignment of interventions around
government priorities while promoting the ownership of relevant government units. The development
of the Education Management Information System, which was associated with the application of the
Quality Assurance System in primary education, considered not only the information needs of
development partners, but the needs of the system as a whole.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No


                                                                                                       Page 18 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Providing an Edu of Quality in HT (PEQH) (P155191)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a detailed overview of the project experience. The narrative was generally aligned with the
stated objectives. It was largely output-oriented in view of activities that largely focused on developing
processes and system building. The quality of evidence varied among objectives, and ranged from adequate to
low. The quality of the ICR’s analysis was high. The lessons were specific and derived from project experience.
The ICR was generally consistent with guidelines and was reasonably concise. The ICR had insufficient
information on monitoring and compliance with environmental aspects during implementation, and had
occasional moderate lapses in clarity, completeness, and internal consistency.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 19 of 19
