     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Uzb: Transparent and Inclusive DPO (P171751)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023614

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P171751                                    Uzb: Transparent and Inclusive DPO

 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Uzbekistan                                 Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-91840,IDA-68070,IDA-68080             30-Jun-2022                                         500,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Dec-2020                                30-Jun-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                              500,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                               500,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                           500,000,000.00                                            0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Richard J. Carroll          Jennifer L. Keller            Gabriela Chamartin Escobar     IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The program development objectives (PDO) were: (i) Improving the efficiency, sustainability, and
transparency of resource allocation in the economy; and (ii) Enhancing economic inclusion and social
resilience. These objectives were reported in the PD, but not the Loan Agreement. From the prior actions, it
is clear that resource allocation refers mainly to public resources, but involves public sector interaction


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Uzb: Transparent and Inclusive DPO (P171751)



with the private sector as well (banking, PPPs, farming, land distribution and labor mobility). For the purposes
of this ICR Review, IEG adopts the PDOs as presented in the PD:

    1. PDO 1: Improving the efficiency, sustainability, and transparency of resource allocation in the
       economy; and
    2. PDO 2: Enhancing economic inclusion and social resilience.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The operation had two pillars, which were identical to the objectives.

PILLAR 1: Improving the efficiency, sustainability, and transparency of resource allocation in the
economy by: curtailing subsidized and state-directed bank lending; ending state-mandated cotton production;
reducing inefficient fossil fuel subsidies; improving the investment environment for public-private partnerships
in renewable energy and other infrastructure sectors; establishing a systematic approach to the management
and privatization of state-owned enterprises (SOEs), and improving fiscal transparency.

PILLAR 2: Enhancing economic inclusion and social resilience by: ending almost all internal migration
controls; establishing legal frameworks to address gender-based violence and ensure equal opportunities for
women and expanding social assistance to vulnerable households while strengthening the effectiveness of
the safety net system.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The loan was for US$500 million which had several components: IDA-68080 for US$165,000,000, IBRD-91840
for US$250,000,000 and IDA-68070 US$85,000,000. The financing was approved on December 16, 2020, and
the operation was effective on December 17, 2020.The operation closed on June 30, 2022, which was the
original closing date.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 The PDO of the operation was relevant to the country context of a deteriorating fiscal situation and the need
 for greater inclusion of the broader Uzbek population in the economy. The operation supported key elements
 of the 2016–2020 Country Partnership Framework (May 19, 2016) and of the 2018 Performance and Learning
 Review (June 26, 2018), as well as with the 2022-2026 CPF. These elements included supporting a
 Sustainable Transformation toward a Market Economy and Reforming State Institutions and Citizen
 Engagement. The objective of more efficient and transparent resource allocation sought to curtail contingent
 liabilities in an effort to support the national priority of addressing Uzbekistan’s rising budget deficits.

 The second PDO, enhancing economic inclusion and social resilience addressed the third CPF focus area of
 investing in people. This support was through measures to improve economic opportunities for rural citizens,
 increase women's economic participation and well-being, and improve social safety net coverage. The design
 of the DPO was also aligned with the World Bank’s COVID-19 Crisis Response Approach Paper the objectives

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Uzb: Transparent and Inclusive DPO (P171751)



to save livelihoods, preserve jobs, and ensure more sustainable business growth and job creation, and to
strengthen policies, institutions, and investments for resilient, inclusive, and sustainable growth.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Table 1: Prior Actions (PAs)

 Objective 1: Efficiency, sustainability, and transparency of resource allocation
 PA1: To increase the efficiency of financial resource allocation and strengthen transparency in the
 banking sector in implementation of the Government’s approved banking law and financial sector
 reform strategy, the Borrower has:

      i. prohibited all new on-lending to State Owned Enterprises (“SOEs”) by state commercial banks
         using subsidized funds from the Uzbekistan Fund for Reconstruction and Development
         (“UFRD”);
     ii. required all new commercial bank lending in local currency, from 1 January 2020, to be at
         interest rates at or above the central bank reference rate, except for government loans for
         mortgage lending and the production of raw cotton and grains; and
    iii. appointed at least one independent director, consistent with requirements in the Banking Law, to
         each of the boards of at least ten state-owned commercial banks.

 PA2: In accordance with the Borrower’s agricultural modernization strategy to increase climate
 resilience, diversify agriculture, increase the transparency and efficiency of land distribution, and
 eliminate state agricultural production, the Borrower has abrogated the state cotton order system by
 removing mandatory cotton production targets and mandatory state procurement of cotton.
 PA3: To reduce inefficient fossil fuel subsidies, the Borrower has abrogated the State’s regulation of the
 retail price of AI-80 petroleum, diesel, and ECO diesel.
 PA4: To enhance the enabling environment and transparency of public-private partnerships (“PPPs”) in
 the renewable energy and other infrastructure sectors, the Borrower has submitted legislative draft
 amendments to the PPP and Currency Regulation Laws, for Parliamentary approval, to:

      i. allow the Government to enter foreign currency financial commitments in PPP concession
         agreements and allow financial compensation to be paid to investors against losses which may
         arise from changes to legislation in force on the date of the partnership agreement; and
     ii. strengthen public information disclosure requirements for PPP tenders and PPPs under
         implementation.

 PA5: To improve the financial transparency and performance of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and
 reduce state ownership of assets, the Borrower has:

      i. required 32 of the largest SOEs by financial valuation to (a) adopt international financial
        reporting standards, (b) prepare enterprise financial recovery strategies, and (c) obtain
        international credit ratings starting from 2021; and

                                                                                                       Page 3 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Uzb: Transparent and Inclusive DPO (P171751)



    ii. approved a list of SOEs that will be divested of government ownership via a competitive
       process.

PA6: To increase fiscal transparency and strengthen public ownership of the State Budget, the
Borrower has enacted amendments to the Budget Code of the Republic of Uzbekistan to:

     i. vest the Parliament, Jokargy Kenes, and regional kengashlar with the responsibility of approving
       their respective budgets; and
    ii. incorporate the income and expenses of the Uzbekistan Fund for Reconstruction and
       Development in the State Budget Law draft.

Objective 2: Enhancing economic inclusion and social resilience
PA7: To increase domestic labor mobility, improve access to public services such as health and
education, and expand economic opportunities for citizens, the Borrower has: (i) reduced restrictions on
the issuance of new residency registrations by expanding eligibility criteria for registration in Tashkent
and (ii) simplified and digitized residency registration procedures.
PA8: To reduce barriers limiting the full economic participation and safety of women, the Borrower has
issued regulations to further implement legislation: (i) guaranteeing non-discrimination on the basis of
sex for employment, electoral candidacy, and for access to state resources; and (ii) for the issuance,
enforcement, and monitoring of protection orders for survivors of gender-based violence.
PA9: To increase support for vulnerable households during the COVID-19 crisis and to further
strengthen the efficiency and transparency of the social safety net system and its responsiveness in
targeting people affected by future sources of vulnerability, including climate vulnerable groups, the
Borrower has:

     i. increased by 10 percent the number of beneficiaries receiving low-income family allowances
        and waived re-registration requirements for existing low-income family allowance recipients in
        response to the COVID-19 crisis; and
    ii. approved the transition of all regions in the country to using the Single Registry of Social
        Protection to process applicant registration, beneficiary selection, program enrollment, and
        payment orders.




The PAs supporting PDO1(PA1-PA6.) dealt with the national priority of improving Uzbekistan’s fiscal stance by
improving the efficiency of resource use and curtailing contingent liabilities. PAs 1., 5. and 6. aimed at reducing
the fiscal burden of SOEs and by increasing financial transparency. PA2 sought improved resource allocation
by increasing the flexibility of output decisions in the agricultural sector and liberalizing access to land, while
PA3 would reduce public expenditures on fuel subsidies. PA4 would reduce the government burden of
investment needs by expanding PPPs.

Objective 1: Efficiency, sustainability and transparency of resource allocation

PA1. PA1 has three distinct sub-actions. The relevance of the first sub-action (i) of the PA is satisfactory in
reducing subsidized SOE lending which has been wasteful in the past. A large share of directed
lending happened via a complex process of on-lending—from the UFRD via state banks to SOEs. Since its

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Uzb: Transparent and Inclusive DPO (P171751)



establishment in 2006, the UFRD has financed industrial development through concessional loans to SOEs, but
at a high cost to financial sector efficiency. Thus, the relevance of sub-action (ii) is satisfactory in improving
resource allocation because it aims to eliminate a price distortion in artificially low interest rates. Sub-action (iii)
addresses the issue that public officials with no operational independence and limited banking sector expertise
dominated the boards of state-owned banks Sub-action (iii) pursues greater transparency by promoting
independent directors on the boards of state-owned commercial banks by ensuring that at least one director is
independent. Sub-action (iii) is moderately satisfactory as it is unlikely that a single independent director is
sufficient to ensure independence. Relevance of PA1: Satisfactory.

PA2. Uzbekistan’s agriculture sector is characterized by significant production and market distortions that lead
to low productivity. Since the early 1990s, farmers have operated under a centrally planned state production
system that allocates farmland for production of cotton and wheat. Under this system, farmers were subject to
production targets and mandatory procurement rules—in the case of cotton 100 percent of production was
surrendered to the state under mandatory procurement. Farmers were forced to use inputs developed centrally,
untailored to local environmental, soil, and water conditions. Compounding this issue is that Uzbekistan’s
agriculture sector is highly vulnerable to climate change. This PA is relevant in reducing inefficiencies in land
distribution and farming choices, which are key to improved resource allocation. Eliminating mandatory
production targets and state purchase of cotton opens cotton production to market forces and related efficiency
and transparency gains. Greater freedom in the technology that farmers can use to produce cotton and other
crops should improve productivity and help diversify crops. Greater freedom of choice has the potential to
increase private investment in climate-smart and water-saving technologies better adapted to local climate,
water, and soil conditions. Relevance of PA2: Satisfactory.

PA3. Uzbekistan is one the most energy-intensive countries in the world, with energy intensity 35 percent
higher than in neighboring Kazakhstan and fossil fuel subsidies costing an estimated 7.4 percent of GDP. The
PA aimed at reducing fossil fuel subsidies the State will no longer regulate the retail price of these three types
of fuel. The subsidies cause further stress on the budget and send distorted price signals. The ICR notes that
this was a partial step, with 75-80 percent of cars running on gasoline and natural gas, which are produced by
Uzbeknetegaz and remains subsidized. " Relevance of PA3: Moderately Satisfactory.

PA4. There were significant weaknesses in the PPP framework that created obstacles to realizing renewable
energy potential. With the removal of some investment climate uncertainties, the PA aimed to facilitate other
climate-friendly investments such as the modernization of district heating; the renewal of water supply
infrastructure; the modernization of gas thermal energy production and aging transmission infrastructure, and
the creation of environmentally sustainable solid waste management facilities. Making the environment for
foreign participation through foreign currency commitments and compensation against losses were key to
eliminating uncertainties that were impeding private investors. The additional expected foreign private sector
investment Intended to sustain resource allocation to government priorities of renewable energy which will
substituted for fossil fuel. Relevance of PA4: Moderately Satisfactory.

PA5. PA5 consists of two complementary sub-actions. Sub-action (i) deals with the problem that information
was lacking in measuring SOE financial performance. Thus, sub-action (i) was a necessary first step in lowering
the fiscal drain SOEs impose on the government, which contributed to the PDO of improved resource
allocation. It also allows SOEs the opportunity to devise how their financial performance can improve. Sub-
action (ii) takes the next step by targeting the top 32 SOEs so that the potential for fiscal savings down the road
is maximized. Relevance of PA5: Satisfactory.




                                                                                                         Page 5 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Uzb: Transparent and Inclusive DPO (P171751)



 PA6. Prior to 2018, estimates of off-budget balances ranged between 6-9 percent of GDP. PA6 increases
 transparency by incorporating the UFRD (which accounts for 4 percent of GDP, and all of which is off-budget
 spending) into the overall budget. By consolidating the UFRD’s operations into the budget, the PA ensures that
 these operations would be considered in coordination with other budgetary decisions. Also, empowering the
 Parliament to control its own budget places greater responsibility on the Parliament and therefore transparency,
 as opposed to having separate government processes. Relevance of PA6: Satisfactory.

 Objective 2: Enhancing economic inclusion and social resilience

 PA7: Active measures to reduce rural-urban migration have led to Uzbekistan having one of the lowest rates of
 internal migration in the world. There is a large mismatch between where workers live, and where economic
 growth is highest which is a misallocation of labor resources. The primary instrument to control internal
 migration was the propiska, a system of population control from Soviet times that serves as a residency permit.
 For example, registration rules prohibit migration to urban centers (particularly to Tashkent). Propiska policies
 are one of the main constraints to the free mobility of labor as identified by respondents to the Listening to the
 Citizens of Uzbekistan (L2CU) survey, which is a barrier to economic inclusion. PA#7 addresses this
 development constraint by removing all quotas and lengthy assessment processes, which is expected to lead to
 increased registrations in Tashkent (though housing prices remain a constraint). The PA was relevant for
 achieving both pillars of the PDO: improving economic efficiency (Pillar 1) and enhancing economic inclusion
 and social resilience (Pillar 2). Relevance of PA7: Satisfactory.

 PA8: PA8 is comprised of two sub-actions. Sub-action (i) addresses the lack of gender equality in business
 and institutional laws which is strongly associated with lower levels of economic participation by women. On
 average, only 20 percent of Uzbekistani women participate in the labor market, compared with 46 percent of
 men. Women and female-headed households also report lower monthly incomes. Weak or restrictive laws
 related to family, gender-based violence, and economic opportunities are likely to limit women’s empowerment.
 Though data is not available for Uzbekistan, gender-based violence has direct consequences for women’s labor
 force participation in terms of job loss and lost productivity. PA8 supported legislation to guarantee equal
 opportunities for women and men and non-discrimination based on gender for employment, access to public
 services, access to land and concessional finance, and electoral candidacy. Sub-action (ii) established special
 requirements for registering, processing, and enforcing gender-based violence (GBV) offenses and protecting
 victims. Both sub-actions are somewhat weak in effecting the intended improvement in economic
 inclusion. Relevance of PA8: Moderately Satisfactory.

 PA9. According to the PD, about 63 percent of the poor are not reached by low-income allowances. Only half of
 the poor who receive support are lifted above the poverty line. PA#9 enhances both economic inclusion and
 social resilience by helping low-income families increase household resources. The social registry increases
 efficiency of benefits delivery especially targeting. By expanding the provision of social assistance, the PA was
 highly relevant for achieving the Pillar 2 PDO of enhancing economic inclusion and social resilience. Relevance
 of PA9: Satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Uzb: Transparent and Inclusive DPO (P171751)




Rationale

Objective 1: Improve the efficiency, sustainability, and transparency of resource allocation in the
economy

RI1 was clear and measurable. It indirectly captures the reduction in SOE lending. Increasing the share
of commercial lending in total bank lending diminishes the share of preferential lending. Another measure
could be the total new lending to SOEs, which would be closer to the PA. Relevance of RI: Moderately
Satisfactory.

RI2 indirectly captures the transparency objective by recording the appointment independent directors to
the majority of their boards, which is the first critical step towards improving the operational effectiveness
of the banking system. Relevance of RI: Moderately Satisfactory.

RI3 was an appropriate measure. By avoiding mandatory crop production targets, growers have flexibility
to use climate smart practices. Also, they probably will not without being freed from mandatory production
targets. Still, there needs to be incentives to use climate smart technologies, not just freedom from the
mandatory production targets and that is covered by the broader national policy, as the ICR indicates, of
the Agricultural Development adopted in 2019. Relevance of RI3: Satisfactory.

RI4 is strongly linked to the PA. A measure of actual subsidies expended would have strengthened results
measurement. Sustainability may be an issue if temporary price ceilings are introduced. Relevance of
RI4: Satisfactory.

RI5 partially captures the intent of the PA which is to expand MW of renewable energy and to do so
harnessing private sector participation. There may also be broader benefits in other infrastructure sectors
which the indicator does not capture. Relevance of RI5: Moderately Satisfactory.

RI6 is somewhat disconnected (establishment of an institution) from the specific achievements mentioned
in the PA. Other indicators, such as the number of privatized or liquidated SOEs, could more accurately
have reflected the outcome of the reform in connection with the Pillar 1 PDOs. The SCTSSP’s functions
have been broadened and assigned the following main tasks. The ICR also states that the SCTSSP was
established “many years ago.” Relevance of RI6: Unsatisfactory.

Objective 2: Enhancing economic inclusion and social resilience

RI7 measures the PA and is consistent with a clearer overall picture of the budget with the UFRD
included. However, a more outcome-oriented RI could have been chosen, such as “the remaining total
off-budget spending of quasi-fiscal entities” as the ICR suggests. Relevance of RI7: Moderately
Satisfactory.

RI8 does not measure reduction in discrimination against women in the workplace (Sub-action (i) of the
PA). RI8 provides an indication of reducing violations through an intermediate measure (referral
pathways), but no indication of the use of those pathways. Relevance of RI8: Moderately
Unsatisfactory.




                                                                                                       Page 7 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Uzb: Transparent and Inclusive DPO (P171751)



RI9 reflects the part of the PA related to gender-based violence (GBV) but not the part that promoted
equal opportunity legislation. The RI was an output indicator and did not reflect the outcome of the
reform concerning the issuance and enforcement of protection orders for survivors of (GBV). Relevance
of RI9: Moderately Satisfactory.

RI10 is relevant by focusing on the rejection rate of applicants who lack registration with the Employment
Service Center was not an adequate measure of the accuracy of targeting of social protection programs
because registration as an employment seeker remains a condition of eligibility for social protection for
persons able to work. The RI was thus weakly linked to the prior action of increasing the number of
beneficiaries of low-income family allowances and rolling out the SR. Relevance of RI10: Moderately
Unsatisfactory.

While there were several strong RIs (1 at S level), there were also several weak ones (1 U-RI6, and 2
MU-RI8 and RI10) with the remaining at MS level (6). Alternative outcome indicators could have been
designed in some cases, such as, the number of SOEs liquidated, transformed, privatized, or
performance-related indicators in the case of RI6 or the availability of shelters for GBV victims under
protection orders in the case of RI#9. In a few cases, the RIs were less relevant, being weakly linked to
the prior actions (RI6; RI10). The overall RI rating is Moderately Satisfactory.

Table 2: Results Indicators

                                                                               Actual
                                   Baseline          Target       Actual       change in RI RI
              Associated RI
RIs                                (including        (including   value as of relative to achievement
              PA(s)      Relevance
                                   date)             date)        target date targeted      rating
                                                                               change
Objective 1: Improving the efficiency, sustainability, and transparency of resource allocation in the
economy
RI1: The
stock of
outstanding
loans
classified as                                                     61 percent
commercial                                                        (2021)
by the Central                       36 percent More than 60
               PA1        MS                                                   104%         High
Bank of                              (2019)        percent (2021) 65 percent
Uzbekistan as                                                     (November
a share of the                                                    2022)
stock of all
outstanding
banking
sector loans.
RI2: The       PA1        MS         0 (Jan 2020) At least 5 (end 8 (end-      160%         High
number of                                          2021)          2021)
state-owned
commercial                                                        7 (end-2022)
banks’
boards,

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Uzb: Transparent and Inclusive DPO (P171751)



where the
majority
comprises
independent
directors,
consistent
with
requirements
in the
Banking Law.
RI3: An
increase in                                                          1,819,000
cotton                                                               hectares
                                      160,000       300,000
growing area                                                         (end-2021)
              PA2         S           hectares      hectares (end-                   1185%       High
with adopted
                                      (end-2019)    2021)
climate-smart                                                        2,293,000
farm                                                                 (end-2022)
technologies.
RI4: Retail
prices of all
                                                                     Retail price
unleaded
                                                                     determined
petroleum                                            Retail price
                                                                     by
(AI80 and                                            determined by
                                      Retail price                   commodity
above) and                                           commodity
                                      set by govt.                   exchange
diesel                                               exchange
                                      decree with                    trading free
(including                                           trading and not
              PA3         S           provisions for                 of any direct               High
ECO Diesel)                                          directly
                                      direct                         price
are                                                  subsidized by
                                      subsidies. (M                  controls or
determined                                           any regulatory
                                      arch 2020)                     subsidies by
by the market                                        legal acts.
                                                                     the
and free of                                          (end-2021)
                                                                     Government
direct
                                                                     (2022)
government
subsidies.
RI5:          PA4         MS          100 MW     500 MW (end- 2,597 MW               624%        High
Megawatts of                          (September 2021)        (excl. 100
renewable                             2020)                   MW
energy                                                        baseline).
generation                                                    (end-2021
capacity that                                                 and end-
have been                                                     2022)
transparently
and
competitively
tendered as
PPPs,
consistent
with the PPP

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Uzb: Transparent and Inclusive DPO (P171751)



Law, and
whose tender
process has
been
concluded.
                                                  SCTSSP is
                                                  established
RI6: An                                           and has
                                   SCTSSP
improvement                                       commenced
                                   does not
in                                                the valuation
                                   exist, and
government                                        and
                                   privatizations
institutional                                     determination SCTSSP is
                                   are approved
arrangements PA5         U                        of sale         now fully                 [High]
                                   on a case-
to support a                                      methods for operational
                                   by-case
more                                              SOEs listed for
                                   basis.
systematic                                        divestiture
                                   (October
approach to                                       under the
                                   2020)
privatization.                                    approved
                                                  Resolution.
                                                  (end-2021)
                                                  UFRD income
                                                  and expenses
                                   UFRD
                                                  are included in
                                   income and                     UFRD
                                                  the
                                   expenses                       income and
RI7: Increase                                     consolidated
                                   are not                        expenses
d                                                 2020 and 2021
                                   included in                    included in
transparency                                      State Budgets,
                                   the                            the
and                                               as are all
               PA6       MS        consolidated                   consolidated              High
accountability                                    supplementary
                                   government                     2020, 2021,
of the general                                    budgets in
                                   budget                         and 2022
government                                        those years
                                   approved by                    State
budget.                                           that are
                                   Presidential                   Budgets (20
                                                  approved by
                                   Decree                         22)
                                                  the
                                   (2019)
                                                  Parliament. (e
                                                  nd-2021)
Objective 2: Enhancing economic inclusion and social resilience
RI8: A         PA7       MU        317,088 (201 Fewer than          3,907(2021 1630%        [High]
decrease in                        9)             125,000 (end- ) 11,674(20
the annual                                        2021)           22
number of
people fined
by the
Government
for violations
of place of



                                                                                             Page 10 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Uzb: Transparent and Inclusive DPO (P171751)



 registration
 rules.




                                                                    Referral
                                                     Referral       mechanisms
                                       No legal      pathway for    have been
                                       basis for     gender-based established,
 RI9: The
                                       complaints or violence       and
 establishment
                                       referral      survivors,     protection
 of referral
                                       pathways for compliant with orders for
 pathways for PA8          MS                                                                  Modest
                                       survivors of WHO             Gender-
 survivors of
                                       gender-       standards, has based
 gender-based
                                       based         been adopted violence
 violence.
                                       violence      and            victims are
                                       (June 2019) disseminated. being
                                                     (end-2021)     issued.
                                                                    (2022)
 RI10: A
 decreasing
 share of low-
 income
 allowance
 applications
 with income                           48 percent                   37.3 percent
                                                                                 59.4%
 below the                             covering only Less than 30 (December
 eligibility                           the Syrdarya percent         2021)
                PA9        MU                                                    111.6%       [High]
 threshold that                        pilot         nationwide (en 27.9 percent
                                                                                 (delayed
 are rejected                          region (Augu d-2021)         (December
                                                                                 achievement)
 because of a                          st 2020)                     2022)
 lack of
 registration
 with the
 Employment
 Service
 Center.

 Note: RI achievement ratings note achievement of the targeted change for the RI. RI achievement ratings
 in brackets reflect ratings that may have been adjusted based on weak relevance of the results indicator
 (discussed in efficacy section).



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory


                                                                                                Page 11 of 19
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Uzb: Transparent and Inclusive DPO (P171751)



   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Improving the efficiency, sustainability, and transparency of resource allocation in the economy.

               Rationale
               Five RIs were substantially achieved, and one was modestly achieved. The actions therefore contributed to a
               Satisfactory achievement of objective 1.

               By taking measures to halt new on-lending to SOEs and ensuring interest rates at the Central Bank reference
               rate and including an independent director to each of the 10 SOE commercial banks, the government
               improved efficiency and transparency of resources allocation. Eliminating the mandatory cotton production
               targets was successful, expanding the areas for climate smart farming which improves sustainability and
               efficiency of farming. Reduction of fuel subsidies, though not directly measured, was achieved and is highly
               likely to save government resources and improve resource allocation. Allowing the government to enter
               foreign currency commitments in PPPs overcomes a key constraint to increased foreign participation
               specifically in renewable energy supports a more sustainable energy supply for the economy. Efficiency and
               transparency are also promoted through the measures to reduce state ownership of assets. Finally,
               amendments to the budget code to vest Parliament (Jokargy Kenes) and regional governments
               with responsibility for their own budgets and incorporating the expenses of the Uzbekistan FUND FOR
               Reconstruction and Development increase public ownership of the budget and budget transparency.

               For three of the RIs, the targets were exceeded: (i) State-owned banks with a majority of independent
               directors on their boards (RI2); (ii) cotton growing area with climate-smart technologies (RI3); and (iii)
               renewable energy generation capacity tendered through competitive PPPs (RI5). RIs 4, 6 and 7 were
               intermediate output indicators. At the same time, certain RIs mechanically reflected the implementation of
               the prior actions rather than the desired outcomes of the operation. The efficacy of the operation with respect
               to Objective 1 is rated Satisfactory.



               Rating

               Satisfactory

               OBJECTIVE 2
               Objective
               Enhancing economic inclusion and social resilience.

               Rationale
               Two of the RIs achievements were substantial and one was modest.

               Inclusion was promoted by the reduction of restrictions to new residency registrations which had inhibited
               labor mobility. Digitization also improved the efficiency of inclusion as evidenced in the decrease in the
               number of fines. Inclusion of women in the workplace was enhanced through additional implementing
               regulations to guarantee non-discrimination and support to protection orders for victims of gender-based

                                                                                                                   Page 12 of 19
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Uzb: Transparent and Inclusive DPO (P171751)



                      violence. Social resilience was enhanced through increases in the number of people receiving family
                      allowances with special waivers for eligible families during COVID-19. In addition, the program supported the
                      Single Registry of Social Protection to improve efficiency and resilience of social safety net programs.

                      One RI target was exceeded: a decrease in the number of fines for violations of residence registration rules
                      (RI8), which demonstrates some concrete benefits of the PA. Gender inclusion was partially measured
                      through the establishment of referrals for GBV. The ICR presented additional evidence regarding gender
                      employment and wage gap, but the evidence did not show improvement through 2021. The RI10 showed
                      progress with some delay in reaching the target of low-income applications rejected.



                      Rating

                      Moderately Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Achievement of the first objective is Satisfactory while the second in Moderately Satisfactory. The first objective
forms the larger part of the program and thus is weighted more heavily. Therefore, the overall efficacy rating is
Satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Satisfactory


      6. Outcome

      Rationale

      Both relevance and efficacy are rated satisfactory.


      a. Rating

      Satisfactory

      7. Risk to Development Outcome

      The ICR focuses on macroeconomic, implementation and governance risks. It notes that the economy
      rebounded ahead of expectations, which lowered macroeconomic risk. What remains is the fallout of
      Russia’s (Uzbekistan’s largest trading partner) invasion of Ukraine and instability in Afghanistan which

                                                                                                                      Page 13 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Uzb: Transparent and Inclusive DPO (P171751)



creates medium term risk to the outcomes. A fall in worker’s remittances from Russia along with higher
inflation pose challenges for 2023 and 2024. The ICR cites risks that will require careful monitoring so that
the achievement of the PDOs associated with financial sector reform (PA1) and SOE reform and privatization
(PA5) is sustained. High macroeconomic uncertainties over the medium term require careful management of
economic and social risks and the maintenance of macroeconomic discipline, which might also affect PA3
(reduction of fossil fuel subsidies).

The ICR assesses implementation risk to be substantial due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the
fast pace of reforms, and the formative stage of many critical government institutions. It also states that many
of the new institutions created, also under the PAs, will require time to identify and recruit expert talent in
sectors that have long been managed through vertically integrated SOEs. This risk also affects the
sustainability of PAs 1 and 5 in particular. It will also take time for these new institutions to develop clear
sector strategies and policies and enforce strong governance. The risk is mitigated by the Government’s high
awareness of these challenges. The authorities also work closely with the World Bank and other
development partners to receive expert assistance and policy advice.

Good governance is essential to the overall success of the reform strategy, and the ICR cites several
positive developments including greater powers given to legislative bodies, growing public demands for
accountability, and Government’s sensitivity to public opinion. However, despite the national development
strategies, 2017-2021 and 2022-2026, emphasizing state and public institutions, securing the rule of law, and
reforming the judicial system as key objectives, there has been limited progress in fleshing out a reform
vision in these areas, while, at the same time, governance has attracted little diagnostic and knowledge work
from the Bank. Governance risk may also affect PAs 6 (fiscal transparency) as well as PA4 (transparency of
PPPs). Experience from transition economies points to the critical importance of strengthening the rule of law
and judicial neutrality in stimulating private sector development.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


Analytical work to support the operation’s prior actions was recent and included:

      World Bank TA reports on financial sector development (2019), strengthening banking regulations
         (2018), and the development of a financial sector strategy (2020);
        World Bank analytical support on the development of an agricultural modernization strategy (2019),
         agri-food diagnostic study (2020), cotton-textile clusters’ assessments (2019 and 2020), and cotton
         pricing reforms (2020);
        World Bank Growth Diagnostic Study (2018);
        World Bank Public Expenditure Review (2019), Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
         Report (2019);
        World Bank TA on social safety net reform (2017-2020).



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Uzb: Transparent and Inclusive DPO (P171751)



While the ICR does not explicitly explain a theory of change, the PD does make clear connections between
the analytical work and the PAs and the PAs and expected outcomes. The ICR does point out that the
analytical work, as well as TA, was conducted in close collaboration with the authorities and the role of a
trusted partner played by the Bank team. The ICR also points out that the analytical work formed the basis
for the disbursement of about US$140 million of budget support by the Government of Japan, thus
leveraging additional funding. The application of lessons learned and how they informed the design of the
operation is not discussed in either the PAD or the ICR.

The PD documentation provided a candid analysis of major risks and social and environmental impacts.
The substantial nature of risks on the institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability was noted,
especially during the COVID-19 pandemic. The political and governance risk was appropriately stated as
substantial. The discussion of mitigating measures contained in the operation was thoughtful. The
documentation also included a thorough assessment of social risks and impacts on poverty, focusing on
ending state-mandated cotton production and the possible impacts of SOE privatization.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The ICR cites ongoing TA through the implementation phase, with specific examples thereof. The ICR critiques
the monitoring of outcomes noting that additional monitoring was needed given that four of the ten
results indictors being output-oriented. The ICR also cites a lack of proactive monitoring and data sources for 6
of the 10 RIs.

“Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) concentrated on the implementation of actions and insufficiently on
monitoring outcomes with a view to learning. Four out of the 10 RIs (RI4; RI6; RI7; RI9) were output indicators,
reflecting the implementation of the PAs, which would require complementary monitoring of outcome indicators
to capture progress towards the PDO within the operational timeframe. Moreover, the proactive use of the M&E
system to anticipate possible implementation impediments and seek solutions has generally not taken place.”

This is an important critique that will need to be addressed in subsequent operations. As the ICR points out
“Developing good practice M&E systems would merit attention in future operations.”

The ICR also cites “the impressive array of TA deployed by the World Bank Team at the preparatory stage, and
the continuation of TA efforts in several of the policy areas during implementation.” More detail on the specifics
of the TA would have been useful to clarify.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Uzb: Transparent and Inclusive DPO (P171751)




c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

This was a single operation DPO and as such the design rating of Satisfactory takes precedence over the
implementation rating of Moderately Satisfactory yielding an and therefore the overall rating of Satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

Though the ICR posited some potential positive impacts, no new information was presented on social and
poverty impacts.



b. Environmental

Though the ICR posited some potential positive impacts, no new information was presented on environmental
impacts.



c. Gender

Though the ICR posited some potential positive impacts, no information was presented on gender impacts.



d. Other

---

10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR covered most issues well. The lessons might have been stronger in delving into the success of the
project in a challenging implementation context. ICR does not mention applied lessons learned and is cursory


                                                                                                    Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Uzb: Transparent and Inclusive DPO (P171751)



in identifying coordination with partners with only a passing reference, in the Bank Performance section. The
ICR also does not explicitly mention a theory of change. The ICR could have made a stronger link between the
analytic work and the results chain, though more details are found in the PD. The discussion of risks was
candid and detailed in both the program document and the ICR. The document was too long 31 pages (20
pages in the guidelines), particularly for a single operation. For a rather lengthy ICR it seems that other
sections might have been streamlined to allow space to go into greater detail on Bank Performance. Overall,
the ICR adequately assessed the operation. The last paragraph of section IIB repeats much of the first
paragraph of section IIB.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreement/Comments
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR derives a number of lessons relevant to the Uzbek country context. There is a somewhat complex
message that standalone DPOs are appropriate for the Uzbek context, but there is potential for a programmatic
approach.

“Standalone DPOs provided the operational agility needed to support a dynamically evolving reform agenda.
With major reforms occurring across Uzbekistan’s economy and society, the pace and sequence of change
have tended to vary across different areas. Both have depended on administrative capacity, the availability of
expertise, and political support. This DPO, as the preceding and subsequent ones, has helped sustain
sequenced reforms in sectors such as agriculture, banking, energy, SOEs, fiscal transparency, and social
protection critical to an inclusive transition.”

The ICR also states, “Given the growing complexity of reforms, it would also need to be matched by an
increased willingness on the part of the Government to pre-commit. Critical areas of such complexity include
state-owned enterprises and bank reform and governance, which require a multi-year implementation
framework.”




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Uzb: Transparent and Inclusive DPO (P171751)



While the rationale for a standalone is clear in the ICR, it is not clear why a programmatic approach would be
better if the former has already been successful.

Successful collaboration and coordination with other development partners were essential in delivering this
DPO. The operation significantly benefitted from the joint design and co-funding with JICA. In addition, the
investment and advisory services provided by the IFC and other development partners, especially in energy,
SOEs, the banking sector, and PPPs, enhanced the government's technical capacity to achieve the PDOs.
Close cooperation with UN agencies was more prominent in social protection and gender issues. The WBG
should continue building on improved coordination within itself and other development partners by leveraging
lending and technical expertise to attain high-yielding impacts.

The lesson “This DPO helped the government counter a deeper fall in the GDP growth rate and meet budgetary
obligations”, is more of a finding as opposed to a lesson and is better placed in the outcomes section of the ICR.

Lessons on improved indicators are appropriate, but it would be useful to gain insights on how to improve
indicators. The ICR does site that there needed to be “More clarity on data sources and emphasis on outcome
indicators would enhance the M&E framework of DPOs. In several cases, using output RIs reduced the
usefulness of the M&E framework as a tool to proactively assess progress toward the PDOs and anticipate
impediments in reform implementation. The absence of a clear definition of data sources and methodology for
the RIs compounded this shortcoming.” The ICR also states that RIs should be carefully balanced to avoid
excessively weak targets (e.g., RI3, RI5, and RI8.

“It will be important to address these weaknesses by designing outcome-based RIs, measurable and
monitorable within the timeframe of DPOs.” This lesson assumes that it is feasible in the first place and begs
the question whether such indicators even exist in certain circumstances. The ICR might have offered a few
examples of better indicators.

“Another critical aspect relates to formulating the proper language to ensure the targeted objective is
appropriately defined (e.g., RI6). This will make it possible to proactively use the M&E framework and seek
solutions in the reform process to avoid emergency measures. It would be paramount if the DPO program were

to move towards the design of programmatic series in the future, as the design of sound RIs and triggers will be
key for smooth program implementation.”

Additional lessons from IEG:

One way to improve the quality of RIs would be to make RIs a specific product of the analytical work underlying
the PAs. Analytic work underlying the operation was sound and was well positioned to offer a menu of
indicators for potential reforms.

A key to the expansion of transparent PPP contracts, an often-challenging reform, is the removal of investment
climate uncertainties. PA4 helped achieve in increase of renewable power (five times the targeted increase –
500 vs. 100 MW), as well as modernization of district heating and upgrade of the water supply infrastructure, as
well as the development of environmentally sustainable solid waste management facilities.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?


                                                                                                   Page 18 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Uzb: Transparent and Inclusive DPO (P171751)



No




                                                                                 Page 19 of 19
