     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Children and Youth Protection Project (P158791)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023714

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P158791                                     Children and Youth Protection Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Argentina                                   Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-86330,IBRD-89030,IBRD-90730            31-Dec-2020                                      1,349,552,383.47

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Jun-2016                                 31-Jan-2023

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            600,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                           1,350,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                       1,349,552,383.47                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz         Judyth L. Twigg               Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                           Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (page 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 6), the project
   objectives were as follows:

           To expand coverage of the Family Allowances programs;



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Children and Youth Protection Project (P158791)



          To improve transparency of social protection programs implemented by ANSES (Administración
          Nacional de la Seguridad Social - Social Security National Administration)

   Key outcome targets were decreased at the time of a November 2018 project restructuring/ (first) Additional
   Financing (AF). A split rating methodology is therefore applied.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  01-Nov-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Universal Child Allowance program financing (Appraisal: US$522.0 million; Appraisal + AF1: US$970.9
   million; Appraisal + AF1 and AF2: US$1,270.1 million; Actual: US$1,319.3 million): This component was to
   finance the provision of grants for the AUH (Asignacion Universal por Hijo - Universal Child
   Allowance) program, a cash transfer program with co-responsibilities in education and health (vaccination
   schemes, health checks, and school attendance) that covered children in the most vulnerable households
   (inactive, unemployed, and low-income informal workers). Disbursement of the financing was to be
   triggered by the achievement of Disbursement-Linked Indicator (DLI) targets.

   2. Closing the coverage gaps of the Universal Child Allowance program (Appraisal: US$53.6 million;
   Appraisal + AF2: US$57.6 million; Actual: US$20.2 million) This component aimed to expand coverage of
   AUH to include children who could be eligible, but who had missing information in the ANSES database, or
   for whom there was no record at all. Activities included: an active search to complete missing information of
   children (collection of data from birth certificates, preparation of action plans/field work to collect further
   missing information, coordination and communication with provincial and other agencies to update data);
   actions to correct information on compliance with co-responsibilities (home visits, communication
   campaigns, installation of kiosks and mobile units for families to update data); and actions to reach out to
   indigenous communities (field visits, training workshops, and information dissemination).

   3. Institutional strengthening of ANSES in information procedures and transparency and project
   management (Appraisal: US$10.5 million; Appraisal + AF2: US$6.5 million; Actual: US$2.5 million): This
   component aimed to prevent further coverage gaps in the AUH program and improve transparency through
   access to information. Activities included development of information systems to systematically exchange
   information among agencies and design of mechanisms for direct verification of compliance.




                                                                                                     Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Children and Youth Protection Project (P158791)



  4. Institutional strengthening of the Ministry of Social Development (MDS) and project
  management (Appraisal: US$12.4 million; Actual: US$4.6 million): This component aimed to strengthen
  MDS's capacity to manage social protection programs.

  The first Additional Financing (November 2018) aimed for further registry expansion for remaining eligible
  children, through the following activities: implementing advances in technology to reduce cumbersome
  paperwork to prove compliance with co-responsibilities; and reducing information barriers through a series
  of early alerts directed to beneficiaries and service providers.

  Another project restructuring (October 2019) added the following activities: developing a single window
  (Ventanilla Unica) to combine services offered by ANSES and other government agencies; mobile offices to
  enable more access by beneficiaries; and protocols to reinsert children whose benefits had been
  suspended due to lack of compliance verification.

  The second Additional Financing (December 2020) added implementation of CUNA (Cobertura Universal
  de Niñez y Adolescencia or Universal Coverage of Children and Youth) as a new protocol and payment
  system that establishes eligibility for all Family Allowances programs simultaneously.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost

        The project cost at appraisal was US$600.0 million. With two Additional Financings, the appraised
         cost increased to US$1,350.0 million.
        The project cost at completion was US$ 1,346.6 million.

  Financing

        The project was financed entirely by an International Bank for Reconstruction and Development loan
         of US$600.0 million, plus Additional Financing loans in the amounts of US$450.0 million and
         US$300.0 million.
        At completion, US$1,346.6 million had been disbursed.

  Borrower contribution

        There was no planned Borrower contribution.

  Dates

          June 30, 2016: Project approval.
          September 30, 2016: Project effectiveness.
          October 26, 2018: Mid-Term Review.
          November 1, 2018: Additional Financing in the amount of US$450.0 million was approved. Due to a
           deteriorating macroeconomic environment, the government tightened fiscal and monetary policies
           but aimed to mitigate the effects on the poor and vulnerable with an expansion of social
           benefits. Additional project activities were added (see above), along with new (increased) DLI

                                                                                                 Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Children and Youth Protection Project (P158791)



            targets and new indicators to reflect both these new activities and to improve monitoring of the
            strategies for expanded coverage.
           October 29, 2019: The project was restructured to add new activities (see above), reallocate
            financing, and revise the results framework due to these new activities. The project closing date was
            extended from December 2020 to June 2022 to allow for implementation of the new activities.
           March 2, 2020: A second Additional Financing was approved in response to an expected increase in
            demand as the fiscal and social crisis deepened.
           December 15, 2020: The project was restructured to adjust DLI targets due to the impact of the
            COVID-19 pandemic.
           June 24, 2022: The project was restructured to adjust DLI targets due to the impact of the COVID-19
            pandemic. The project closing date was extended from June 2022 to December 2022.
           November 16, 2022: The project was restructured to adjust DLI targets due to the impact of the
            COVID-19 pandemic.
           December 22, 2022: The project closing date was extended from December 2022 to January
            2023 to allow for completion of activities.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At the time of project appraisal, in the context of a deteriorating business environment and worsening
external conditions for economic growth, the government of Argentina had introduced a series of
macroeconomic and structural reforms. Even as the macroeconomic environment was stabilizing, social
and labor market indicators continued to be weak: net employment creation slowed down, income of the
bottom 40 percent of the income distribution fell by 10 percent (2014), and poverty and extreme poverty
incidence grew from 10.9 to 12.7 percent and 4.5 to 5.4 percent, respectively, between 2013 and 2014.
Therefore, safety net programs continued to play a critical role as a bridge to maintaining living conditions
and human capital investments. The social protection system underwent significant reforms following the
economic crisis of 2002, led by ANSES and MDS. Non-contributory schemes had recently complemented
the traditionally contributory ones, aiming to provide universal coverage to children aged 18 years or less.
Children are covered by the Family Allowances (FA) system and more recently, the AUH. For the latter, key
design features are as follows: all qualifying children in ANSES administrative records are automatically
enrolled, and eligibility is determined on a monthly basis (with 80 percent of the benefit paid monthly
and the balance paid once a year upon verification of compliance with co-responsibilities on health and
education services). These programs helped ensure that families that lost formal jobs maintained access to
child allowances and that children remained enrolled in school and obtained adequate health
care. However, there remained a substantial coverage gap that required an active effort by authorities to
find and include potentially eligible children who were not participating in the program due to missing
information.

After project implementation had begun, further deteriorating macroeconomic conditions in 2018 (economic
contraction, increasing inflation, currency depreciation) increased vulnerability of poor households due to a
decline in real wages and formal employment opportunities. Hence, the project objectives remained



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Children and Youth Protection Project (P158791)



               relevant to the country's approach to mitigate the impact of macroeconomic conditions on vulnerable
               groups.

               The Bank's Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY2015-18 acknowledged the conditions above, noting
               that ensuring that poor and vulnerable households have the assets to cope with risks required
               strengthening public service delivery and investing in human development. In addition, obstacles created by
               cumbersome public administrative processes reduced the quality and coverage of service
               delivery. However, there was not a specific objective or results indicator in the CPS for social protection
               programs. The onset of the 2018 economic crisis shifted Bank activities back to social protection objectives
               due to the urgent need. The more recent Country Partnership Framework for FY2019-22 identified
               achieving fiscal consolidation while protecting the poor as a key objective, including a results indicator
               for number of children covered by the FA program.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To expand coverage of the Family Allowances programs (original targets)

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change for this objective was clear. Expanded coverage of the social protection programs was
                             to be achieved by reducing existing coverage gaps. The primary activities to conduct active searches for
                             parental data and co-responsibilities compliance (including household surveys and outreach to indigenous
                             groups), improved information systems to enhance the exchange of information among ANSES and the
                             various agencies, and strengthened capacity of the implementing agencies were likely to lead to the intended
                             outcome to expand coverage of the Family Allowances program.

                             Approximately eight million of the thirteen million children in Argentina are covered by the overall social
                             protection program (FA), with about 3.7 million receiving a benefit from the non-contributory AUH program
                             and 3.1 million from the contributory program (Sistema Único de Asignaciones Familiares, SUAF). The total
                             amount financed by the project was approximately 5.9 percent of program spending during the project
                             period.

                             Outputs

                                        Reimbursements to finance AUH grants to vulnerable families with children. Disbursements were
                                          linked to results: number of children under 18 years old with complete records in the
                                          ANSES database; publication of a quarterly AUH monitoring report.


                                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 16
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Children and Youth Protection Project (P158791)




     Active searches by MDS to complete missing information of nearly 1.5 million children, which was
        preventing those children from being considered as potential beneficiaries of AUH. The active
        efforts included: collection of data from birth certificates of children whose parents may be eligible
        to receive AUH grants, action plans for the list of children with missing family information in the
        ANSES database, and update of the database through the transferring of data from birth certificates
        by each participating registry. Project restructurings included changes in strategies to identify missing
        potential beneficiaries, such as visits to early childhood centers and vulnerable neighborhoods, to
        further capture unregistered newborns who did not complete the process to obtain a national
        identification document.
       Active searches by MDS to correct information on compliance with the co-responsibilities in the
        ANSES database that, as of February 2016, excluded 537,000 children from receiving benefits. The
        active efforts included: coordination of activities with the provincial ministries of education and
        municipalities to reach families with no evidence of compliance, field work to collect information
        through home visits using the address information on record, household surveys, communication
        campaigns, installation of kiosks in key spots such as in hospitals and public locations,
        and ANSES mobile units.
       Outreach to indigenous populations, through the design of special field arrangements in indigenous
        communities, training workshops for indigenous leaders on social security topics, training to allow
        indigenous communities to access ANSES information and procedures remotely, and dissemination of
        project information in indigenous languages. 66,277 transactions in the ANSES registry were carried
        out in isolated and indigenous populations (target: 50,000).
       Information technology (IT) -based mechanisms to improve the verification of compliance of AUH co-
        responsibilities (i.e., smartphone apps) and to provide early alerts to avoid the suspension of benefits.
       Implementation of the Single Window (Ventanilla Única) by ANSES, which reduced transaction costs
        for citizens by combining services offered by ANSES with other government services. 2,350,410
        transactions in the ANSES database were carried out through the Single Window (original target:
        7,065,985; revised target: 5,000,000).

Outcomes

     The number of children with missing parental information in the ANSES individual registry database
      (Administrador de Personas, ADP) decreased from 1,526,182 in March 2016 (11.6 percent of those
      registered in the ADP) to 155,608 in January 2023 (1.2 percent of those registered in the ADP)
      (DLI3). This meant that 1,370,574 more children were now included in the automatic process that
      determines their eligibility for FA programs. Given that, on average, 35.5 percent of children in the
      database are deemed eligible for benefits, this meant that approximately 486,554 additional children
      were covered by the FA program during the project period.
     The percentage of beneficiaries for whom payment had been suspended due to lack of evidence of
      compliance with health/education co-responsibilities decreased from 11.4 percent in 2016 to 7.0
      percent in 2020. This decrease exceeded the original target of 9.5 percent.
     The number of children under 18 years old registered with complete records in the ANSES database
      increased from 11,583,647 to 12,819,869 by project closing (DLI1). This fell slightly short of the
      original target of 12,992,000 children.
     The number of children under 18 years old receiving benefits from the AUH program increased from
      3,798,000 to 4,270,371 by project closing. This nearly achieved the original target of 4,298,000. Of
      these, 2,264,145 children were female, surpassing the original target of 2,149,000.


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Children and Youth Protection Project (P158791)




      The number of children under 18 years old receiving benefits from the broader FA program increased
       from 7,897,000 to 8,418,283 by project closing. This achieved the original target of 8,397,000
       children. Of these, 4,289,614 children were female, achieving the original target of 4,199,000.

Achievement is rated Substantial due to evidence of expanded coverage - attributable in large part to
addressing the gaps in coverage due to missing information and outreach to vulnerable groups - with almost
all targets fully achieved.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To expand coverage of the Family Allowances programs (revised targets)

Revised Rationale
Note: See outputs reported above.

Outcomes

In addition to the outcomes reported above whose targets were not revised:

      The percentage of beneficiaries for whom payment had been suspended due to lack of evidence of
       compliance with health/education co-responsibilities decreased from 11.4 percent in 2016 to 7.0
       percent in 2020. This achieved the revised target of 8.5 percent. The ICR (page 18) noted that for a
       temporary period starting in 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, AUH beneficiaries could submit a
       sworn statement instead of actual copies of school attendance, vaccination records, or health checks.
      The number of children under 18 years old registered with complete records in the ANSES
       database increased from 11,583,647 to 12,819,869 by project closing. This fell significantly short of
       the first revised target of 13,181,650 and the second revised target of 13,255,000 children.
      The number of children under 18 years old receiving benefits from the AUH program increased from
       3,798,000 to 4,270,371 by project closing. This surpassed the first revised target of 4,023,000 and the
       second revised target of 4,041,000. (Note: It is not clear from the Project Paper (August 2018) nor
       from the ICR why the target for this indicator was significantly reduced). Of these, 2,264,145 children
       were female, surpassing the revised target of 2,020,001.
      The number of children under 18 years old receiving benefits from the overall FA program increased
       from 7,897,000 to 8,418,283 by project closing. This fell significantly short of the revised target of
       9,391,001 children. Of these, 4,289,614 children were female, falling short of the revised target of
       4,695,001. The ICR (page 18) reported that increases in the absolute number of children with
       complete information was offset by a decline in the absolute number of children registered in the
       ANSES database from September 2019 onwards. This decline was the result of (i) a drastic drop in
       the number of births in 2019 and 2020, mirrored by the decline in the number of children ages 0-2 that




                                                                                                 Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Children and Youth Protection Project (P158791)



       received AUH benefits each year; and (ii) an increase in the under-registration of newborns as a result
       of lockdowns during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Achievement is rated Substantial due to evidence of expanded coverage - attributable in large part to
addressing the gaps in coverage due to missing information and outreach to vulnerable, unregistered groups
- with most targets fully achieved. A notable shortfall in achieving targets was the number of children receiving
benefits from the overall FA program, although other outcomes more closely linked to the project activities
(namely the AUH program) were mostly fully achieved.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve transparency of social protection programs implemented by ANSES

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective was sound. Activities to upgrade information systems, produce regular
monitoring reports, and implement a grievance redress mechanism were likely to lead to the intended
outcome of increased transparency of the social protection programs.

Outputs

      Provision of information technology equipment and training to upgrade ANSES information systems,
       which led to improved data exchange protocols with other agencies. The project also supported the
       creation of a specialized data analysis unit within ANSES and the purchase of a new data warehouse
       to host all the main ANSES databases.
      Implementation of a grievance redress mechanism. The percentage of ANSES grievances responded
       to in 20 days or less increased from 50 percent to 89 percent by project closing (original target: 90
       percent; revised target: 97 percent). The average response time to AUH grievances decreased from
       21 days to 3 days by project closing (original target: 5 days; revised target: 3 days).
      Capacity building and communication activities among key stakeholders (ANSES regional and field
       offices, provincial civil registries, municipal governments, indigenous peoples leaders) to ensure a
       common understanding of the benefits, eligibility, and application procedures.
      Capacity building support to the Social Security Observatory, which was created with Bank support in
       2010 to generate and disseminate information on ANSES programs and to conduct evidence-based
       research to inform public policies. The Observatory has responsibility for the preparation and
       dissemination of the Social Security Reports, the AUH Bulletin, quarterly updates of ANSES open
       data, and the Social Security Studies series. The newly redesigned Observatory website provided a
       user-friendly interface to promote access among different audiences and increase visibility and access
       to its numerous publications (108 new publications between December 2019 and March 2023).

Outcomes



                                                                                                   Page 8 of 16
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Children and Youth Protection Project (P158791)




                                    The Social Security Bulletin was published on a quarterly basis on ANSES website (total of 19
                                     reports), which included data on the main social programs implemented by ANSES (original target: 10;
                                     revised target: 13). In addition, quarterly AUH monitoring reports, showing detailed data on
                                     beneficiaries, recipients, and benefits (68 reports), were published on the website (original target: 20;
                                     revised target: 60) (DLI2).
                                    The Social Security Observatory's new website experienced a significant increase in the number of
                                     visits and downloads since the first month after being launched (138 percent and 12 percent,
                                     respectively)

                              Achievement of this objective is rated Substantial due to increased availability of public information on
                              ANSES programs, including achievement of targets.



                              Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Achievement of the first objective under the original outcome targets is rated Substantial due to evidence of
                            expanded coverage - attributable in large part to addressing the gaps in coverage due to missing information
                            and outreach to vulnerable groups - and almost all targets fully achieved. Achievement of the
                            second objective is rated Substantial due to increased availability of public information on the ANSES
                            programs, including meeting of targets. Therefore, overall Efficacy under the original outcome targets is rated
                            Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Achievement of the first objective under the revised outcome targets is rated Substantial due to evidence of
                            expanded coverage - attributable in large part to addressing the gaps in coverage due to missing information
                            and outreach to vulnerable, unregistered groups - and most targets fully achieved. A notable shortcoming
                            was the number of children receiving benefits from the overall FA program, although other outcomes more
                            closely linked to the project activities (namely the AUH program) were mostly fully achieved. Achievement of
                            the second objective is rated Substantial due to increased availability of public information on the ANSES
                            programs, including meeting of targets. Therefore, overall Efficacy under the revised outcome targets is rated
                            Substantial.


                                                                                                                                 Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Children and Youth Protection Project (P158791)




  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The economic analysis in the PAD (Annex 6) discussed the short-term and long-term economic impacts of the
project. In the short term, the project interventions would contribute to reduced poverty and extreme poverty
among vulnerable households by increasing income. The analysis estimated the incidence of poverty and
extreme poverty, considering total household income with and without AUH transfers. The estimates showed
that AUH reduces poverty and extreme poverty by approximately 3 and 2 percentage points, respectively. In
2015, the incidence of poverty and extreme poverty was 13.6 and 3.5 percent, respectively, and
therefore without the project, the rates would have been 16.1 and 5.3 percent. In the long term, the project
contributed to increased human capital due to improvements in education attainment. With 1.5 million children
included in the program due to the project, the estimated internal rate of return (IRR) of the project was 8.2
percent.

At appraisal (ICR, Annex 4), the estimate of short-term impact was updated with actual figures (actual number of
beneficiaries, actual project costs). The extreme poverty rate decreased by 4.6 percentage points during the
second half of 2020, notably amidst the worst of the COVID-19 pandemic. The impact of the AUH program was
even more notable when focusing on extreme poverty among its main target population of children under 18
years of age whose parents are inactive, working informally and not receiving any other non-contributive
benefits. Without the project, 23.7 percent of AUH beneficiaries would have been living in extreme poverty,
compared to the actual 15.9 percent, a 7.7 percentage point difference. In the long term, updating the analysis
resulted in an IRR of 9 percent. The ICR suggested that this is a conservative estimate, as the economic
analyses only took into consideration the impact of the AUH’s education co-responsibilities, while it would
be reasonable to expect that enhanced access to health care services as a result of AUH health co-
responsibilities will result in better health outcomes, with corresponding economic benefits.

Regarding implementation efficiency, the project, by design, put into place more efficient operational
arrangements including file updates, data exchanges, mobile access, and one-stop access points. These
activities were largely implemented as planned, although utilization rates were somewhat lower than
expected. There were other implementation challenges that arose during the project period, including outreach
to vulnerable population groups proving to be more expensive and labor intensive than anticipated, mobility
restrictions imposed during the COVID-19 pandemic, changes in key management positions within MDS, and
some challenges with financial management and procurement that were addressed by project closing (see
Section 10b). However, given the overall achievements despite extremely adverse external conditions,
Efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Children and Youth Protection Project (P158791)



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    100.00
Appraisal                                                 8.20
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    100.00
ICR Estimate                                              9.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Outcome under original outcome targets - Satisfactory

Relevance is rated Substantial due to strong alignment to country conditions and recent Bank strategy during
project implementation (in response to macroeconomic conditions), though less so for the Bank strategy during
the earlier project appraisal and implementation period. Efficacy is rated Substantial due to substantial
achievement of the first objective (evidence of expanded coverage - attributable in large part to addressing the
gaps in coverage due to missing information and outreach to vulnerable groups - with almost all targets fully
achieved) and substantial achievement of the second objective due to increased availability of public information
on ANSES programs, including meeting of targets. Efficiency is rated Substantial due to favorable internal rate
of return and overall level of achievement despite adverse external conditions.

Outcome under revised outcome targets - Satisfactory

Relevance remains Substantial. Efficacy is rated Substantial due to substantial achievement of the first objective
(evidence of expanded coverage - attributable in large part to addressing the gaps in coverage due to missing
information and outreach to vulnerable groups - with most targets fully achieved). A notable shortcoming
was the number of children receiving benefits from the overall FA program, although other outcomes more
closely linked to the project's activities (namely the AUH program) were mostly fully achieved).
The second objective remained substantially achieved. Efficiency remained Substantial.

Overall combined outcome - Satisfactory

According to OPCS and IEG harmonized guidelines for restructured projects, the overall combined outcome
rating is determined by weighting the outcome by disbursement levels before and after the restructuring that
revised the outcome targets. As the outcome rating is Satisfactory before and after the restructuring, the
combined rating is therefore also the same rating of Satisfactory, indicating that there were only minor
shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory




                                                                                                   Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Children and Youth Protection Project (P158791)



7. Risk to Development Outcome

The AUH, and FA program as a whole, have been firmly established as central components of the social
protection program in Argentina. Institutional arrangements are in place to continue implementing and
regularly monitoring the various programs. The most substantial risk is macroeconomic volatility, which will
continue to affect fiscal policies and vulnerability of poor households.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project drew upon strong government commitment to expansion of the social protection program and
  leveraged the multiple decades of institutional experience of the Bank and the implementing agency in
  this sector. The project drew upon lessons from similar social protection operations in other countries in
  the region. These lessons included the importance of inter-institutional coordination and active outreach
  to improve social inclusion and program coverage. ANSES, as a primary implementing agency, had
  previous experience in implementing Bank operations but would also need to coordinate activities with
  MDS as well as increase transparency in operations. The M&E arrangements were adequate but lengthy,
  and the use of results-based financing (linking disbursements to achieving intermediate targets) was an
  effective incentive to keep up the pace of implementation.

  The overall risk was rated Moderate, with key risks stemming from institutional capacity for coordinated
  implementation and the technical design. Mitigation measures, which were adequate, included a gradual
  phased expansion, continuous engagement by the Bank with implementing agencies, and reliance on
  regular audits.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project team demonstrated a high level of responsiveness and adaptability to the changing context.
 It worked proactively with MDS teams to make significant adjustments to project indicators and DLI targets
 due to operational definitions that, while reasonable under normal circumstances, did not hold up under the
 exceptional conditions produced by COVID-19 (such as the number of children being born, the number of
 births registered, the eligibility thresholds for the FA programs, and adjustments in strategy to increase
 effectiveness). Multiple project restructurings and additional financings addressed these changing
 circumstances and strategies, including revision of targets and indicators.

 Fiduciary and safeguards implementation were effectively monitored and supervised by the Bank team.




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Children and Youth Protection Project (P158791)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design was overall sound, though it would have benefited from being more concise and narrowly
 focused on overall and intermediate outcomes that were more directly linked to project activities. Monitoring
 arrangements drew upon strong capacity of ANSES to monitor and produce data. DLIs were an effective
 mechanism to incentivize the implementing agencies to achieve targets and maintain focus
 on outcomes. As noted in the ICR (page 32), a stronger focus on intermediate results would have helped to
 better understand the specific efficacy and efficiency of the multiple strategies supported under the
 operation.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E framework was revised on multiple occasions due to changing circumstances that impacted the
  underlying assumptions for the targets and DLI triggers. New indicators were introduced to further refine
  the tracking of results and adjust to changes in implementation strategies. ANSES demonstrated strong
  capacity to implement monitoring systems.



c. M&E Utilization
  ANSES produced and reported on the M&E data as planned. Regular data updates were used to
  gauge achievement of DLI targets and to produce regular quarterly/monthly bulletins, both of which
  helped to track implementation progress and informed critical adjustments to the project's design and
  strategies. The impact evaluation conducted by MDS provided information on the efficacy
  of mechanisms to demonstrate compliance with AUH co-responsibilities.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Environmental Assessment Category "C", and therefore an environmental
   assessment was not required.


                                                                                                  Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Children and Youth Protection Project (P158791)



   The safeguard policy on Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) was triggered due to the presence of indigenous
   peoples, representing 2.4 percent of the total population. The project specifically aimed to reduce access
   barriers that have historically limited the participation of vulnerable communities in national social programs.
   It developed a National Indigenous Peoples Plan (NIPP), with activities specified in the NIPP to be
   implemented through Component 2. ANSES had prior experience implementing Bank social safeguard
   policies. The ICR reported that the numerous actions taken to carry out the NIPP and engage indigenous
   populations were recognized as best practices.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management: ANSES was responsible for financial management and disbursement, including
   with regards to DLIs. Performance was rated satisfactory until January 2021, when it was downgraded to
   Moderately Satisfactory through project closing due to persistent shortcomings that affected ANSES's and
   MDS's ability to provide timely financial reporting to monitor project implementation and ensure the efficient
   use of loan proceeds. These shortcomings included: (i) a lack of financial projections for Components 2, 3,
   and 4, which were particularly relevant in view of the low execution of these components; (ii) delays in the
   presentation of estimated dates for compliance with DLI 1 under Component 1; and (iii) no detailed
   proposal for the reallocation of resources that had been made available by the suspension of output-based
   activities under the June 2022 restructuring. Audit reports were received by the Bank, unqualified and of
   acceptable quality, albeit with some delays.

   Procurement: ANSES was responsible for the procurement activities under Components 2 and 3, and
   MDS was responsible for the procurement activities under Component 4; the implementation of
   Component 2 required the coordination of both agencies. According to the ICR (page 34), procurement
   performance was varied throughout the project period, being downgraded from Moderately Satisfactory to
   Moderately Unsatisfactory in November 2020 due to delays in the technical definition of procurement
   processes which, in turn, posed a risk to PDO achievement. The procurement rating was upgraded to
   Moderately Satisfactory during the final year of implementation, once ANSES submitted a
   detailed procurement plan and implemented its activities, albeit with some delays.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Children and Youth Protection Project (P158791)



Outcome                           Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                  Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (page 36), adapted by IEG:

        Focusing on the operational aspects of a well-designed policy program can
         significantly increase its effectiveness and efficiency. In the case of this project,
         interventions focused on removing technical barriers to access for vulnerable households,
         increasing the accuracy of databases that identify beneficiaries, improving information
         exchange among agencies, and implementing community outreach and household
         verification, all worked together to improve coverage of the existing safety net programs.
        Results indicators that are too broad or incorrectly framed can be unduly affected by
         external factors and fall short in measuring true impact. In the case of this project,
         several key indicators and disbursement-linked indicators were framed according to
         denominators that were outside of the project's control. Therefore, numerous revisions had
         to be undertaken to more carefully measure project progress and results.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The quality of the ICR's evidence and analysis were satisfactory, particularly in discussing the impact of the
broader context on project achievements and shortcomings. The ICR was internally consistent, adhered to
guidelines, and was strongly results-oriented. Lessons were clearly drawn from implementation experience,
particularly on the operational aspects of a large social program, where policy is already well-established but
operational efficacy and efficiency need to be improved. The ICR could have been more concise, although its
length reflected in part the extensive results framework and multiple project restructurings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Children and Youth Protection Project (P158791)




                                                                               Page 16 of 16
