     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pac Isl-GEF-Sustainable Energy Finance (P098423)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023703

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P098423                                   Pac Isl-GEF-Sustainable Energy Finance

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Pacific Islands                           Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-58282,TF-58284,TF-90429,TF-            31-Dec-2017                                          2,058,488.50
 90430,TF-90431

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 12-Jun-2007                               15-May-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            8,904,486.68                                   8,904,486.68

 Revised Commitment                             3,654,465.99                                   2,058,488.50

 Actual                                         2,058,488.50                                   2,058,488.50




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Ranga Rajan                Kishore Laxmikant            Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani                Nadkarni




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 3) is:

   " To significantly increase the adoption and use of renewable energy technologies in participating
   Pacific Islands Countries (PICs) through a package of incentives to encourage local financial
   institutions to participate in sustainable energy finance in support of equipment purchase ". The


                                                                                                Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pac Isl-GEF-Sustainable Energy Finance (P098423)



   participating PICs were Fiji, Papua New Guinea (PNG), Republic of Marshall Islands (RMIs), Solomon Islands
   (SIs) and Vanuatu.

   Revised PDO as per the project restructuring of 2014:

   PDO 1. To significantly increase the adoption and use of renewable energy technologies and the more
   efficient use of energy through a package of incentives to encourage local financial institutions to
   participate in sustainable energy finance in Fiji; and

   PDO 2. To support knowledge sharing and capacity building on renewable energy and energy
   efficiency technologies in the PICs.

   Revised PDO 1 as per the project restructuring of 2018:

   PDO 1. To significantly increase the adoption and use of renewable energy technologies and the more
   efficient use of energy through a package of incentives to encourage local financial institutions to
   participate in sustainable energy finance in the PICs.

   PDO 2. To support knowledge sharing and capacity building on renewable energy and energy
   efficiency technologies in the participating PICs.

   The original Global Environment Objective (GEO) of the Project is:

   " To contribute to mitigating climate change through the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions in line with
   the United Nations Framework on Convention on Climate Change ".

   Revised GEO objectives of the Project:

    To (i) significantly increase the adaptation and use of renewable energy technologies and the more efficient
   use of energy through a package of incentives to encourage local financial institutions to participate in
   sustainable energy finance in Fiji; and (ii) support knowledge sharing and capacity building on renewable
   energy and energy efficiency technologies in the participating countries.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  24-Apr-2010

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Pac Isl-GEF-Sustainable Energy Finance (P098423)



The original design envisioned implementing the Project in five PICs - Fiji, PNG, RMIs, SIs and Vanuatu.

1. Financing of investments in Renewable Energy (RE) and Energy Efficiency (EE), through a Risk-
Sharing Fund (RSF): (estimated cost at appraisal US$51.50 million; actual cost at project closing
(estimated from data in the ICR para. 16) US$69.79 million).The RSF aimed to provide financing for
facilitating the flow of finance for purchasing Renewable Energy (RE) and Energy Efficiency (EE) equipment
from the participating financial institutions (PFIs) to three targeted end-user groups: (i) households in rural
areas using kerosene for lighting needs: (ii) Medium-Sized Enterprises (MSEs) and village based formal
institutions using kerosene, diesel or other fossil fuels; and (iii) the RE Service Companies. The
technologies supported under the RSF included: (i) solar photovoltaic (PV); (ii) pico-hydro; (iii) switching to
coconut oil; and (iv) improving EE.

The RSF would cover up to 50% of the net outstanding principal amount of a portfolio of new loans
originated by the local PFIs (commercial and development banks) that would not otherwise have happened
without RSF guarantees. The IDA funds would be used as guarantees to cover the Government's risk
sharing amount.

2. Technical Assistance (TA), Market Incentives and Communications: (estimated cost at appraisal
US$5.08 million; actual cost at project closing (estimated from data in the ICR para. 17) US$1.69 million).
The actual cost includes that financed by the GEF; information for costs financed from other sources was
not provided in the ICR.

a. TA to the local PFIs for strengthening their capacities to serve clients borrowing for RE equipment and
training the local PFIs to maintain a sustainable energy portfolio.

b. TA for MSEs. Activities: (i) capacity building activities for strengthening their sales and incentive
structures through market surveys; (ii) capacity building activities to the MSEs to make them bankable from
the perspective of private sector lenders: (iii) provide assistance in sustainable energy repair and
maintenance in vocational schools; and (iv) facilitate other local training institutions to develop sustainable
energy equipment.

c. Developing and updating a Product Catalogue. Activities: (i) developing a RE product catalogue that
qualified for financing in each participating country and updating the catalogue to allow for price fluctuations
and improved technologies; and (ii) assisting wholesalers, retailers and MSEs to attend international trade
fairs and training programs.

d. Participant training and communications. This subcomponent aimed to strengthen customer
understanding of the operational aspects of sustainable energy equipment.

e. TA to utilities and studies. This subcomponent planned to finance RE and EE related studies.

3. Participant Monitoring and Communications: (estimated cost at appraisal US$0.40 million; actual cost
at project closing US$0.0 million). This component aimed to monitor customer understanding of the
operational aspects of the sustainable energy equipment. This component was dropped and funds for this
component were reallocated to Component 4.

4. Management and Evaluation: (estimated cost at appraisal US$1.57 million; actual cost at
project closing US$0.76 million financed by GEF; costs financed from other sources were not
monitored). Under this component, the executing agencies (EAs) in the participating countries could hire a

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Pac Isl-GEF-Sustainable Energy Finance (P098423)



  management consultant (MC) in the first three years of the project. After three years, these functions were
  to be delegated to the Executing Agency (EA) of Fiji acting as the Regional EA.

  5. Regional information and capacity building: (estimated cost at appraisal and actual cost at project
  closing were not reported in the ICR). This was an additional activity that was added under the project
  restructuring (discussed below). This activity aimed to leverage the Fiji case as a demonstration model to
  other interested PICs through knowledge sharing and capacity building.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$58.46 million (PAD Annex 5). Based on the data in
  the ICR, the actual cost at project closing was at least US$72.74 million. However, the final total cost cannot
  be ascertained, given that many costs were not monitored.

  Project financing. At appraisal, the Project was to be funded by a GEF Trust Fund grant of
  US$9.48 million (PAD Annex 5). The amount of the grant actually approved was US$8.90 million.
  Regarding the amount disbursed at project closing, there are significant discrepancies in the ICR. The ICR
  Data Sheet reports a total disbursement of US$2.06 million while Annex 3 reports the amount as US$7.75
  million. There are differences in the amount of GEF financing as inferred from the data in the ICR in regard
  to actual costs and financing of the different components. The difference between the amount of the grant
  at appraisal and amount disbursed was due to the reduced project scope and cancellation of the bulk of
  funds allocated for SI and PNG.

  Borrower contribution. Borrower contribution of US$500,000 was planned at appraisal. During
  implementation, there was no contribution from the Borrower.

  Other financing sources: At appraisal, ' Borrowing Countries " Financial Intermediaries were expected to
  contribute US$10.20 million and sub-borrowers US$500,000, for a total of US$10.70 million. During
  implementation, data in the ICR (paras. 16 to 18) indicates that the total financing provided was about
  US$64.59 million from a variety of sources (local banks, NGOs/European Union Trust Funds, MSEs).

  Dates. The Project was approved on June 12, 2007, became effective on July 9,2007 and was scheduled
  to close on December 31, 2017. However, the Project closed four and half years behind schedule on May
  15, 2022.

  Changes. The Project was restructured six times (two level 1 restructurings and four Level 2
  restructurings).

  The significant changes made through the first Level 1 project restructuring on April 24, 2014, four
  years after the first Mid Term Review (MTR) in 2010 were.

        The original design aimed at implementing the Project in RMI and Vanuatu by the International
         Finance Corporation (IFC) and by the World Bank in SI, PNG and Fiji. The IFC did not commence
         operations in RMI and Vanuatu based on its assessment of insufficient opportunities and potential
         partner banks willing to commit to the program. The World Bank terminated the activities in PNG and
         SI due to lack of progress that was attributed to: (i) lack of individual borrowers in rural areas that
         were deemed to be "bankable" either due to their seasonal incomes or lack of credit history; (ii)

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Pac Isl-GEF-Sustainable Energy Finance (P098423)



         limited maturity of the MSEs market in the countries; and (iii) easily available donor-funded, free
         solar home systems in SI. With these changes, the geographical coverage of the RSF - the main
         project activity - was only confined to Fiji.
        The grants to PNG and SI were cancelled.
        Within Fiji, the project scope was modified: As discussed in section 2, the targeted end-users of RSF
         envisioned at design were: (i) individual borrowers; (ii) MSEs; and (ii) RE equipment retailers. Local
         PFIs in Fiji found most individual borrowers in rural areas to be "non-bankable". Hence, the PDO
         was revised from " significantly increase the adoption and use of RE technologies in participating
         PICs through a package of incentives to encourage local PFIs to participate in sustainable energy
         finance in support of equipment purchase (by the targeted end-users)" to " significantly increase the
         adoption and use of RE technologies and the more efficient use of energy through a package of
         incentives to encourage local PFIs to participate in sustainable energy finance in Fiji".
        A component was added to include to knowledge-sharing and capacity building for the non-
         performing countries (SI and PNG), and for countries where the Project was yet to be launched
         (RMIs and Vanuatu). A PDO was added to reflect these activities.
        The safeguards on Involuntary Resettlement was triggered in Fiji during implementation.

The closing date was extended by six months from December 31, 2017, to June 30, 2018, for completing
the ongoing activities through a second (Level 2) restructuring on December 19, 2017.

The closing date was extended by three months from June 30, 2018, to September 30, 2018, through the
third (Level 2) restructuring on June 11. 2018.

The main changes made through the fourth (Level 1) restructuring on August 22, 2018, were:

      The PDOs were revised again to reflect a key recommendation of the second MTR in 2016 to
       relaunch the Project as a regional project with Fiji and Vanuatu (at the Government's request in
       support of its rural electrification program). With this change, the geographical coverage of the
       Project expanded from a "Fiji" project to a regional project as per the World Bank classification of a
       regional project (more than one country).
      RSF (component one) activities and TA (component two) activities were added to Vanuatu.
      Some outcome indicators were dropped (discussed in section 9).
      The closing date was extended from September 30,2018 to December 31, 2022, for completing the
       ongoing activities in Fiji and Vanuatu.

Several legal clauses on fiduciary aspects in the Grant Agreement were amended through the fifth (Level
2) restructuring on March 9, 2022.

The main changes made through the sixth (Level 2) restructuring on May 11,2022 were:

      Contrary to the expectation at the time of the second restructuring, the conditions for commencing
         the Project in Vanuatu were not met, due to delays in finalizing inter-jurisdictional implementation
         arrangements between Fiji and Vanuatu and limited interest from the local PFIs to lend for RE in
         Vanuatu in the wake of the COVID - 19 pandemic. Hence the Project activities in Vanuatu were
         dropped. With this change, the Project reverted back to a Fiji Project. No funds had been allocated
         at this time to Vanuatu under the Project Agreement



                                                                                                  Page 5 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pac Isl-GEF-Sustainable Energy Finance (P098423)



         The closing date was brought forward from December 31, 2022 to May 15, 2022.

   Split rating. Substantial changes were made to the PDO and outcome targets through the project
   restructurings in 2014 and 2018. This review considers project performance before and after
   restructurings. When the Project was restructured in 2014, the Project's main component was removed
   from four of the five participating PICs, and the Project became a Fiji focused project. In 2018, the PDO was
   changed to expand the scope to Vanuatu. However, the Project activities in Vanuatu were dropped and the
   Project again became a Fiji focused project. A split assessment is undertaken for the two phases when the
   Project was regional (2008 - 2014 and 2014 - 2022) and when it was Fiji focused 2014-2018. Since PDO 2
   was included in 2014 as a subsidiary objective through the first project restructuring, PDO 2 is assessed
   when the Project was country-focused (2014-2018).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Regional and Country Context. The participating PICs - Fiji, PNG, RMI, SIs and Vanuatu - faced common
development challenges. stemming from their small size, sparsely distributed
populations, remoteness, narrow economic base and constrained institutional capacities. Together with
political instability, these factors contributed to weak economic growth in these countries.

Sector Context. When this Project was prepared, access to electricity was very low in the PICs - ranging
from 7% in PNG to over 65% in Fiji. There was a large discrepancy in access to electricity between the rural
and urban areas in the countries. Power generation in the countries depended on diesel imports, rendering
them vulnerable to oil supply and price shocks. The high cost of electricity, besides undermining their
economic competitiveness, also created a financial burden for consumers, with rural households
spending as much as 25% of their income on fuel.

The PICs however were endowed with renewable energy (RE) sources (such as solar, wind and hydro).
Hence, utilizing least-cost options for widespread adoption of RE and EE for reducing energy costs was
important for the participating PICs. The key barriers to wider application of RE and EE technologies in the
PICs were: (i) lack of an enabling regulatory framework; (ii) absence of technology standards; (iii) lack of a
dealer network to supply RE equipment; and (iv) reluctance of local PFIs to lend for financing RE and EE
equipment at affordable rates and longer tenors.

Bank Regional Strategy. The PDO continues to be relevant to the World Bank's regional strategy for PICs.
At appraisal, the PDO was broadly aligned with the Bank's Pacific Regional Strategy's (PRS) pillars for
2006 - 2009 of "reducing poverty and increasing the quality of life for persons living in rural households" and
"generating sustainable economic growth and employment opportunities ". The PDO was relevant to the
Bank's Regional Partnership Framework (RPF) objective for 2017 -2021 of "Increasing access to basic
services and improved connective infrastructure " through RE technologies.

Bank's current Country Strategy for Fiji and Vanuatu. The PDO is aligned with the current Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) (2021-2024) objective of - "enhancing delivery of productivity-enabling
resilient infrastructure" and assisting Fiji in its transition to clean energy. The PDO was also relevant to the


                                                                                                       Page 6 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Pac Isl-GEF-Sustainable Energy Finance (P098423)



               Government of Vanuatu's objectives of increasing access to affordable electricity to its citizens under the
               National Energy Road Map 2016 - 2030.

               Previous Bank experience. The Bank had financed one directly connected energy project in the region -
               the Papua New Guinea Teacher Solar Lighting project in 2005. This project aimed to catalyze commercial
               finance from the Teachers Savings and Loan Associations to its members for purchasing solar PV systems.
               The project, although designed for delivery of 3,000 units over five years, received over 7,000 requests in
               the first six months alone, when acceptable solar systems PV systems and financing packages were made
               available.

               While the Project was under preparation, the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) was
               implementing two ongoing GEF supported projects - PIs RE Project and its follow-up project - PIs
               Greenhouse Gas Abatement Project through RE. These projects addressed the first two barriers to the
               application of RE and EE technologies identified above.

               This Project aimed to complement the above-mentioned projects by addressing the remaining two major
               barriers for promoting RE equipment: (i) helping the local RE dealers with market intelligence; and (ii)
               enabling the local PFIs to lend for RE and EE equipment. The two barriers mutually reinforced each other:
               (i) since local stores did not carry RE equipment, customers were unaware of their benefits; and (ii) lack of
               market intelligence prevented local RE dealers from entering this market.

               That said, the Project was overly ambitious, given the level of financial coordination that was required in the
               participating countries. One participating country, Fiji was clearly an outlier as its commercial banking sector
               was more developed. The project activities associated with establishing the RSF - the main project activity -
               were dropped in four participating countries. As a result, the Project, originally conceived as a regional
               project a country-focused project. The relevance of the PDO is rated as substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             PDO 1 (2008-2014). To significantly increase the adoption and use of RE technologies and the more efficient
                             use of energy through a package of incentives to encourage local financial institutions to participate in
                             sustainable energy finance in the participating PICs.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC). The PAD did not articulate a theory of change (TOC). However, the ICR includes
                             a diagrammatic representation of the TOC that it inferred from the project design and implementation
                             experience. The Project aimed at addressing the barriers to widespread adoption of RE technologies in Fiji,

                                                                                                                            Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Pac Isl-GEF-Sustainable Energy Finance (P098423)



PNG and SI. The outputs such as establishing a RSF to incentivize the local PFIs to lend to targeted end-
users for RE and EE equipment, together with capacity building of key stakeholders (MSEs, equipment
suppliers and energy service providers), were expected to increase the market for RE and EE equipment and
boost the RE installed capacity in the countries. These outcomes were expected to aid in contributing to the
long-term development outcomes of accelerating deployment of RE technologies. The causal links between
project activities, their outputs and the intended outcomes were logical, and the intended outcomes were
monitorable.

The intended outcomes were predicated on the following assumptions: (i) the targeted end-users are properly
identified; (ii) the loans to end-users are affordable and the administrative requirements for getting them were
simple: (iii) a significant number of local PFIs are willing to lend for RE equipment; and (iv) there are no
adverse macroeconomic shocks in the participating PICs during project execution.

Outputs.

      RSF was established in Fiji, PNG and SI countries to enable the participating PFIs in those countries
       to lend for RE and EE equipment to end-users as targeted.
      Issued loans in the amount of US$7.9 million were allocated by the PFIs to individuals and MSEs for
       purchasing RE equipment, well short of the target of US$18.9 million.

Outcomes.

The PDO outcome indicators measured the extent to which RE equipment was adopted in the participating
countries.

      15,057 SPV systems were sold to end-users (target 23,000).
      No pico-hydro systems were sold (target 540).
      11 diesel to coconut oil switching equipment was installed (target 720).

Efficacy of this PDO is rated as modest due to the low achievement.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
PDO 1 (2018-2022). To significantly increase the adoption and use of renewable energy technologies and the
more efficient use of energy through a package of incentives to encourage local financial institutions to
participate in sustainable energy finance in the participating PICs (Fiji and Vanuatu).

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change. The theory of change was similar to the one outlined above with two exceptions; (i) the
RSF and TA activities were restricted to activities in Fiji and Vanuatu and (ii) unlike the original design which
aimed at providing loans to targeted end users, the revised design aimed to promote adoption of RE and EE


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Pac Isl-GEF-Sustainable Energy Finance (P098423)



technologies through incentivizing the local PFIs to lend for such equipment. The causal links between the
activities, outputs and outcomes were logical and the intended outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs.

The conditions for enabling the implementation of the Project in Vanuatu were not met, due to the delays in
finalizing inter-jurisdictional implementation arrangements between Fiji and Vanuatu.

      No RSF guarantees were called (target two).
      70 loans were approved for MSEs, community organizations and individuals, short of the target of
       135.

Outcomes.

      The local PFIs lend US$21.53 million for RE and EE equipment, short of the revised target of
       US$41.00 million.
      4.49 kilowatts (kw) of RE and EE technology were financed through the approved local PFIs, short of
       the revised target of 8.8 kw.

Efficacy of this objective is rated as modest because of low achievement.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
PDO (2014-2018). To significantly increase the adoption and use of renewable energy technologies and the
more efficient use of energy through a package of incentives to encourage local financial institutions to
participate in sustainable energy finance in Fiji.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change. The causal links between the project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical.
Activities such as establishing RSF for incentivizing the local PFIs to lend for RE and EE equipment, together
with capacity building of local PFIs, MSEs, community organizations were aimed at encouraging the local
PFIs to lend for RE activities. These activities were likely to aid in widespread adoption of RE technologies in
Fiji.

However, it should be noted that the original PDO and intermediate results indicator targets were not formally
revised. The Results Framework does not indicate that original indicators were revised after the April 2014
restructuring. In this sense, the original targets continued to apply and the Project's achievements even during
the country-focused period should have been measured against the original targets.

Outputs.



                                                                                                   Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Pac Isl-GEF-Sustainable Energy Finance (P098423)




       70 loans were approved in Fiji for MSEs, community organizations and individuals, exceeding the
        2017 target of 30.
       One RSF guarantee was called, short of the target of zero.
       6.65 tons of carbon dioxide emissions were avoided, short of the target of 6.3 tons (GEF objective).

Outcomes.

The outputs described above were expected to increase lending by the local PFIs to MSEs, community
organizations and individuals.

       The total lending catalyzed by local RSFs reached US$21.53 million, exceeding the target of
        US$10.00 million. Nearly 40,000 individuals and small businesses benefitted from the loans which
        supported RE and EE investments amounting to over US$40.00 million. The Non-Performing Loan
        Ratio (NPL) was one percent, implying that almost all of the US$5.2 million allocated to the RSF by
        the Bank had been returned.

In the absence of formally revised PDO and intermediate results indicators, efficacy of the PDO should have
been measured against achievement of the original targets. Efficacy of the PDO when the Project was
confined to Fiji is rated as Modest against the original targets and Substantial against the targets indicated in
Table 6 of the ICR. Subject to the foregoing, the ICRR rates the efficacy as Substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
There was no Objective 2 in the original design.

Rationale
N/A



Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
PDO 2. To support knowledge sharing and capacity building on renewable energy and energy efficiency
technologies in PICs.

Revised Rationale


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Pac Isl-GEF-Sustainable Energy Finance (P098423)



Theory of Change. The causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were clear, though
there is little detail on how the various activities would flow through to other regional partners and inform the
next steps in broader regional engagement. Activities such as community presentations and showcasing Fiji's
success were likely to help the other participating PICs to understand the benefits associated with widespread
adoption of RE and EE technologies, but part of the reason the project retracted to Fiji was precisely because
they had a different set of contextual issues to deal with.

Outputs.

      Five MSEs and community organizations participated in training activities, short of the target of eight.
      21 articles and broadcasts were organized on the benefits of RE and EE, short of the target of 28.
      65 showcases and community presentations were organized on the benefits of RE short of the target
       of 80.
      Eleven PICs participated in the knowledge sharing and capacity building programs, exceeding the
       target of 11.

Outcomes.

The outcomes of these activities could not be evaluated. The focus was largely on awareness raising and it is
unclear what expectations there were with regards to how other regional partners might advance progress in
these sectors. Thus, the rating for this objective is Modest.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
PDO 2. To support knowledge sharing and capacity building on renewable energy and energy efficiency
technologies in PICs (unchanged).

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change. The causal links between the project activities, outputs and outcomes were clear, though
there is little detail on how the various activities would flow through to other regional partners and inform the
next steps in broader regional engagement. Activities such as community presentations and showcasing Fiji's
success were likely to help the other participating PICs to understand the benefits associated with widespread
adoption of RE and EE technologies, but part of the reason the project retracted to Fiji was precisely because
they had a different set of contextual issues to deal with.

Outputs.

      Five MSEs and community organizations participated in training activities, short of the target of eight.
      21 articles and broadcasts were organized on the benefits of RE and EE, short of the target of 28.
      65 showcases and community presentations were organized on the benefits of RE short of the target
       of 80.

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 20
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Pac Isl-GEF-Sustainable Energy Finance (P098423)




                                    Eleven PICs participated in the knowledge sharing and capacity building programs, exceeding the
                                     target of 11.

                              Outcomes.

                              The outcomes of these activities could not be evaluated. The focus was largely on awareness raising and it is
                              unclear what expectations there were with regards to how other regional partners might advance progress in
                              these sectors. Thus, the rating for this objective is Modest.



                              Revised Rating
                              Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy is rated Modest prior to the first restructuring in April 2014 when the Project had a
                            regional focus. The Modest rating follows from the significant under-achievement of the planned outcomes
                            and relevant indicators.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            The overall efficacy is rated Modest following the restructuring in August 2018 which restored the Project to a
                            regional focus. The Modest rating follows from the significant under-achievement of the planned outcomes
                            and the relevant indicators.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                        Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement
                  OBJR2_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 2
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rationale
                            Subject to the considerations mentioned earlier (lack of formally revised PDO and intermediate results
                            indicators), the overall efficacy for the period April 2014 to August 2018 is rated Substantial when the Project
                            had a country-focus on Fiji. The overall efficacy rating of Substantial reflects the considerable progress made
                            against the revised indicators for Fiji as set out in Table 6 of the ICR (although these revised indicators are



                                                                                                                               Page 12 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Pac Isl-GEF-Sustainable Energy Finance (P098423)



  not reflected in the Results Framework). The rating is acknowledged as having moderate shortcomings given
  the Modest rating for Objective 2.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis. The cost-benefit analysis focused on the benefits of installing solar home systems (SHS).
This activity accounted for 67% of the project cost. The analysis was based on the Avoided Cost Methodology
(ACM) as recommended in the World Bank's " Power Sector Investment Projects: Guidelines for Economic
Analysis". The costs were the costs of replacing kerosene lighting with solar home systems (SHSs) (such as the
capital cost of SHS, cost of battery and controller replacements and operation and management costs). The
SHS benefits were assumed to come from avoiding the costs of fossil fuels. The ex-ante analysis demonstrated
the Project was economically viable, although the Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was only 8.7%. The
ex-post EIRR was much higher at 26%. The higher ex-post EIRR was attributable to the lower capital
expenditure. The ICR (para 62) noted that between the second and seventh year of project implementation the
cost of SHSs declined by 10% per year. These cost savings outweighed the lost benefits associated with fewer
SHSs being distributed.

Administrative and Operational shortcomings during implementation. Although the Project became
effective in 2008, implementation progress was stalled, with only one participating country, Fiji, able to establish
the incentives and financial intermediaries for providing loans for RE and EE equipment and attract individuals
and companies willing to seek credit for such investments by 2010.

Although the Project was economically viable in Fiji, the Project did not demonstrate good value for money for
the GEF funding for a regional project. The original design had five participating PICs. The IFC did not
commence operations in RMI and Vanuatu, based on its assessment of insufficient opportunities and potential
partner banks willing to commit to the program. The World Bank terminated the activities in PNG and SI soon
after due to lack of credit-worthy individual borrowers, limited maturity of the MSEs market, and easy availability
donor-funded, free solar home systems in SI. Although the Project scope was expanded to a regional project
with Vanuatu, the Project reverted back to a Fiji focused project, due to the delays in finalizing inter-jurisdictional
implementation arrangement arrangements between Fiji and Vanuatu.

Due to the delays during implementation the Project closed four and half years behind schedule. In sum,
efficiency is rated as Modest due to the administrative and operational shortcomings during implementation.


Efficiency Rating
Modest




                                                                                                         Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pac Isl-GEF-Sustainable Energy Finance (P098423)



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                              Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     67.00
Appraisal                                                8.70
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     67.00
ICR Estimate                                             26.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the Bank's regional strategy is Substantial. Efficacy of the PDO is Modest when
the Project was regional (before April 2014 and post- August 2018) and Substantial when the Project focused
on Fiji (April 2014 to August 2018). Efficiency is rated as Modest due to administrative and operational
shortcomings during implementation. Taking these ratings into account, although the relevance of objectives is
Substantial, the overall outcome is rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory, based on significant shortcomings in the
Project's achievement of its objectives and in its efficiency.

Table: Split Rating Evaluation.

                             Before April      April 2014 to      August 2018 to
Indicator
                             2014              August 2018        Closing
Relevance                    Substantial       Substantial        Substantial
Efficacy                     Modest            Substantial        Modest
Objective 1                  Modest            Substantial        Modest
Objective 2                  N/A               Substantial        Modest
Efficiency                   Modest            Modest             Modest
                             Moderately        Moderately         Moderately
Outcome
                             Unsatisfactory    Satisfactory       Unsatisfactory
Values                       3                 4                  3
 Implementation Period
                             76.5              53                 39
(months)
Percentage distribution      46%             31%                  23%
Weighted values              1.38            1.24                 0.69
                             1.38+1.24+0.69
Total of weighted values     = 3.31 (rounded
                             to 3.00)
                             Moderately
Overall outcome
                             Unsatisfactory




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pac Isl-GEF-Sustainable Energy Finance (P098423)



a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial Risk. There is high risk to the sustainability of development outcomes. This Project demonstrated
that the local PFIs banks in Fiji were aware of the commercial and technical risks challenges of lending for
RE equipment and were prepared to lend for such equipment. It is however not clear whether the successes
achieved to date could continue without the RSF. As (para 103) of the ICR notes, given the economic
conditions in the region post COVID - 19, it may take some time before local PFIs banks could consider
lending for RE equipment, as they are likely to have other priorities for lending.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The PAD (para 23) noted that although there were many attempts to promote adoption of RE and EE
  equipment in various countries, there were few examples of successful outcomes when this Project was
  under preparation. One exception was the Papua New Guinea Teacher Solar Lighting project (discussed
  in section three). Lessons from this project incorporated at project design included: (i) the notion that local
  PFIs would be interested in expanding their loan portfolio and willing to finance RE equipment to targeted
  end-users: (ii) teachers and other salaried employees with regular incomes would be an attractive group
  for local PFIs as their payments could be deducted "at source". and (iii) there would be considerable
  demand by the end-users for RE equipment, if finance packages at affordable rates and long tenors were
  made available. Appropriate arrangements were made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary
  compliance (discussed in section 10).

  However, there were significant shortcomings in Quality-at-Entry. One, the regional project was over-
  ambitious, given the level of financial coordination required in the participating countries. As a result, the
  Project which was designed as a regional project, became in effect a country-focused project. Two, the
  Project was clearly not ready for effectiveness. As early as in 2010, the IFC decided that the Project was
  not commercially viable in RMI and Vanuatu, based on its assessment of insufficient opportunities and
  potential PFIs willing to commit in these countries. The Bank terminated the activities in PNG and SI due
  to the lack of "bankable" borrowers, limited maturity of the MSEs market and availability of donor-funded,
  free solar home systems in SI. Three, the design was not suitable for its intended purpose due to the
  improper identification of the end-users. Most rural households neither had access to bank accounts nor
  regular income to qualify for a loan and so the market for RE equipment was limited. As a result, the
  Project had to be refocused to providing loans to credit- worthy borrowers. Four, the original design
  envisioned that local PFIs (mainly commercial banks) could be encouraged (through the provision of RSF
  guarantees) to provide micro loans for individuals and MSEs. However, most PFIs did not meet the World
  Bank's criteria that were more appropriate to larger banks. Commercial banks do not provide loans to
  non-creditworthy borrowers. The commercial banks in Fiji did not lend to this cadre of borrowers.
  Although some micro-finance institutions were interested in becoming PFIs, they were unable to meet the
  Bank's stringent criteria for eligibility. Five, the implementation arrangements were not appropriate. The

                                                                                                      Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pac Isl-GEF-Sustainable Energy Finance (P098423)



  original design envisioned that the Executing agency (EA) and the fund manager in each participating
  country would be responsible for the technical implementation of the Project. The commitment of the EAs
  in the participating countries varied and there was limited engagement by them on work plans,
  procurement, budgeting and understanding on Bank procedures. This resulted in the dropping of the
  project activities in PNG and SI.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Twenty-five Implementation Status Results Reports (ISRs) were filed over a project lifetime of
 approximately fourteen years, implying twice a year supervision missions. The Project was supervised by a
 task team leader (TTL) and the project team was based in Sydney. Two MTRs were held and a
 Sustainability Paper was prepared in March 2016 for aiding the restructuring during implementation. The
 supervision team conducted regional training workshops to share the lessons from Fiji's experience with
 other PICs. The supervision team initiated project restructurings to adjust the scope of the Project in
 response to changing circumstances and address the constraints during implementation. The support
 provided by the supervision team aided in safeguards and fiduciary compliance (discussed in section 10).

 However, there were significant shortcomings in supervision. First, although the first Mid-term Review
 (MTR) was held in 2010 to review progress, it is not clear why the recommendations of the MTR were
 followed through a formal project restructuring four years later in 2014. Likewise, although the second MTR
 was held in 2018 which identified the issues with amendments to the legal agreements practiced by the
 PFIs and borrowers, they were only addressed through three years later through the project restructuring in
 2021. The ICR (para 100) acknowledges that the supervision team was not sufficiently proactive, given the
 extended period of poor project performance ratings. Between May 2009 and June 2014, both the
 implementation progress (IP) and progress towards achievement of the development objective, were rated
 as Moderately Unsatisfactory and Unsatisfactory due to the limited progress of the Project in PNG and SI.
 The IP rating was upgraded to Satisfactory when the project restructuring of 2014 discontinued activities in
 PNG and SI. Finally, there were shortcomings in M&E implementation (discussed in section 9).

 In sum, overall Bank performance is rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory, because of the significant
 shortcomings both at Quality-at-Entry and during supervision.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pac Isl-GEF-Sustainable Energy Finance (P098423)




a. M&E Design
 Although the Project's theory of change was clear, there were M&E system weaknesses. The indicators in
 the Results Framework approved at appraisal were not monitored regularly, and the ICR (para 84) notes
 that the Implementation Status Reports (ISRs) reported on three new PDO indicators (number of solar
 systems sold, number of pico-hydro systems sold and number of diesel-fueled systems to coconut oil
 change sets installed) that were not listed in the PDO. Over the course of the Project, a number of PDO
 indicators were deleted and replaced by new indicators. However, the restructuring papers did not report
 on how the indicators were designed or how the baseline data would be collected.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (para 85) notes that although M&E data was reported in a timely fashion, there were significant
  shortcomings in the quality of data collected and indicators monitored by the task team. The indicators in
  the Results Framework were not monitored regularly. While the 2014 restructuring developed eight
  indicators, only four were monitored. There were weaknesses in the collection of information and
  reporting of project costs in regard to some items.

  The M&E design envisioned that the Executing Agencies in the participating countries were to be
  responsible for monitoring performance. Although each Executing Agency prepared and submitted a
  quarterly report covering a review of activities, reports were prepared in different formats which precluded
  cross-country comparisons.



c. M&E Utilization
  Results prepared by the Executing Agencies were used to assess project implementation. The Bank
  team used the indicators to monitor implementation progress and to restructure the Project.

  Overall M&E quality is rated as Modest,



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Project was classified as a Category C project under the World Bank's safeguard policies. Two
   safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal (PAD, page 86): Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
   and Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10). The safeguards on Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) in Fiji was
   triggered during implementation.

   Environmental Assessment. Two possible environmental impacts were identified as appraisal: (i) impacts
   due to the disposal of used lead acid batteries from solar PV; and (ii) the potential encroachment of

                                                                                                   Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pac Isl-GEF-Sustainable Energy Finance (P098423)



   distribution lines on private lands/properties. Under the GEF grant requirements the approved private
   financial institutions (PFIs) were required to adopt an Environment and Social Safeguards Framework
   (ESSF) and each PFI borrower was responsible for complying with the ESSF.

   Environmental and Involuntary Resettlement issues during implementation. The ICR (para 91) noted
   that no sub-projects were financed that triggered any Environmental Impact Assessment under Fiji
   legislation. The Project did not support any activity where land acquisition was involved.

   Indigenous Peoples. This safeguard was triggered as the vast majority of the intended beneficiaries were
   indigenous people. The ICR (para 91) notes that there were no issues with compliance regarding the
   safeguards on indigenous peoples.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Fiduciary and Procurement Management. The Bank conducted an assessment of the fiduciary
   management capacity of the Executing Agencies (EA) at appraisal. The assessment concluded that the
   arrangements were satisfactory. The ICR (para 92) noted that, although during implementation there were
   overdue audits and late submission of audits, at project closing, there were no overdue audited financial
   statements. The ICR does not report any procurement issues.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR (para 70) noted that although not set out in the PDO, the project contributed to catalyzing a local
   supply and service industry for RE equipment.



d. Other
   Not applicable.



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                    Efficacy rated Modest in two of
                                Moderately              Moderately
Outcome                                                                             three periods and Efficiency
                                Satisfactory            Unsatisfactory
                                                                                    rated Modest.
                                                                                    There were significant
                                Moderately              Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                    shortcomings in Quality-at-Entry
                                Satisfactory            Unsatisfactory
                                                                                    and during supervision.
Quality of M&E                  Modest                  Modest


                                                                                                      Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Pac Isl-GEF-Sustainable Energy Finance (P098423)



Quality of ICR                   ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICRR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this Project, with
some adaptation of language from the ICR.

1. Striking a balance between the scope of work that is suitable for a regional approach and
that is suitable for country-based operations, may raise the potential for project success.
While this Project was envisaged to be a regional project, there was little synergy between the
operations in different countries. and the Project's success and failure depended more on country-
specific factors.

2. An in-depth assessment of the demand side profile as well as the financial landscape may
help in providing tailored financial services for the target segments. Under normal commercial
banking practice requirements, local private financial institutions would be unable to provide loans to
borrowers who were deemed to be non-creditworthy. Of the three targeted end-user groups in this
project, households in rural areas were not considered as creditworthy by commercial banks. This
group could have been better served by microfinance institutions. The lesson is that providing
financial services may require a detailed understanding of the target market segments for designing
appropriate financial products that match their risk profiles.

3. Alternative financing instruments could help in reaching the rural poor. This Project aimed
to catalyze lending to rural poor through establishing a risk sharing fund to incentivize private
financial institutions by guaranteeing a portion of their potential losses. However, most of the rural
people either had seasonal income or insufficient credit history. The lesson is that for such
households, a different financing approach could have helped to reach the rural population.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clearly written. The theory of change articulated in the text provides the clear and logical links
between project activities, outputs and outcomes. The ICR clearly acknowledges the issues with project design.
The evidence provided in the text is adequate to assess the Project's performance. The ICR draws good
lessons from the experience of implementing this Project.

One shortcoming of the ICR is its excessive length. The table in Annex 3 on project cost by component is very
confusing. There are some discrepancies in reporting project costs and GEF financing. The ICR would have
benefitted by better editing and eschewing repetitions throughout the text (the main body of the text at 35 pages
is over twice the recommended length of 15 pages).


                                                                                                     Page 19 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pac Isl-GEF-Sustainable Energy Finance (P098423)



Based on the above, quality of the ICR is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                Page 20 of 20
