     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LB: Environment Pollution Abatement (P143594)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023766

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P143594                                     LB: Environment Pollution Abatement

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Lebanon                                     Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84100                                  31-Mar-2021                                           13,080,517.50

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 01-Aug-2014                                 28-Feb-2023

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             15,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                              15,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Actual                                          13,080,517.50                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Katharina Ferl              Stephen Hutton                Avjeet Singh                     IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. vii) and the Financing Agreement of October 24, 2014
   (p.4) the objective of the project was: ”(a) reducing industrial pollution in targeted Industrial Enterprises; and
   (b) strengthening the monitoring and enforcement capabilities of the Ministry of Environment (MOE)”.

   This review will conduct a split evaluation since the project’s scope was reduced during the 2018
   restructuring.


                                                                                                      Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LB: Environment Pollution Abatement (P143594)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project included two components:

   Component A: Technical Assistance (appraisal estimate US$3.0 million (parallel financing by the
   Italian Cooperation), actual US$3.0 million): This component was to finance technical assistance and
   training to strengthen the capacity of MOE, the banking sector and the industrial associations as well as
   provide project management support. This component was to finance the following activities: i) providing
   technical assistance for the detailed design, Environmental Assessments (EAs), Environmental and Social
   Impact Assessment (ESIA), and Compliance Action Plans (CAPs) to eligible enterprises to ensure
   compliance with the Environment Compliance Decree no. 8471-2012; ii) strengthening the MOE capacity in
   ESIAs/EAs for the industrial sector; iii) providing technical support and training to the banking sector and
   other relevant stakeholders for the development of guidelines on banking and the environment; iv)
   conducting environmental awareness with the help of the Association of Lebanese Industrialists (ALI), the
   Chamber of Commerce Industry and Agriculture (CCIA), and the Ministry of Industry (MOI) to market the
   project to their constituencies; and v) Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) activities.

   Component B: Investment sub-projects (IBRD) (appraisal estimate US$15.0 million, actual US$13.08
   million): This component was to finance sub-loans of at least US$100,000 per enterprise to an estimated
   20 to 25 public and private enterprises to bring their air emissions, effluent discharges, and industrial waste
   generation towards compliance with national environmental standards in a cost-effective manner. The
   project financing was to be channeled through the central Bank to participating commercial banks, who
   were then to lend to eligible enterprises at an interest close to zero percent.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$18.0 million. Actual cost was US$16.08 million.

   Financing: The project was financed by an IBRD loan in the amount of US$15.0 million of which US$13.08
   million disbursed. Also, the Italian Agency for Development Cooperation (AICS) was to contribute US$3.0
   million which materialized.

   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was not planned to make any contributions.

   Dates: The project was restructured three times:


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LB: Environment Pollution Abatement (P143594)



         On June 29, 2018, the project was restructured to add project indicators better reflect project
          activities and objectives, and to refine indicator targets to be in line with the implementation progress
          and expected results at the end of the project, with targets that were not defined at approval.

         On January 11, 2021, the project was restructured to extend the closing date from March 31, 2021,
          to December 31, 2021, to allow for the processing of the sub-loans by the commercial banks which
          had been significantly delayed due to Lebanon’s economic crisis, the COVID-19 pandemic as well
          as the Beirut explosion.
         On November 7, 2021, the project was restructured to extend the closing date from December 31,
          2021, to February 28, 2023, to allow for the completion of project activities which had been delayed
          due to Lebanon’s economic crisis, the COVID-19 pandemic as well as the Beirut explosion.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. According to the PAD (p. 1) the industrial sector in Lebanon was an
important pillar of the economy contributing to approximately 7.6 percent of the country’s Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) in 2011. At the time of appraisal, industrial activities in Lebanon had rising levels of pollution
and were putting greater pressure on the environment, and this pollution was becoming increasingly
prominent and visible. However, the Ministry of Environment (MOE) did not have sufficient capacity to
properly enforce pollution standards. The largest proportion of costs from pollution was attributed to water
pollution (1.1 percent of GDP) followed by air pollution (0.7 percent of GDP). Industrial enterprises were a
major source of this pollution. Lebanon produced roughly 310 million m³ of wastewater in 2012 of which 250
million m³ were from municipal and domestic establishments, and 60 million m³ were from industrial
enterprises. Furthermore, nationwide air pollution loads in 2005 reached: 36,000 tons/year of PM10 (of
which 20,000 tons/year came from industry), 185,000 tons/year of SO2 (of which 90,000 tons/year came
from industry) and 69,000 tons/year of NOx (of which 25,000 tons came from industry). Industries
generated solid waste of about 185,000 tons/year, being a major polluter in the country.

The government had recently introduced a combination of regulations and incentives to address industrial
pollution and encourage green investments. The government planned to minimize industrial solid waste
through process treatment or recycling which was to have positive impacts on the physical environment by
reducing air pollution, saving energy, preventing burning of plastics and rubbers, and reducing landfill uses.

According to the PAD (para. 13) the MOE believed that solutions aimed at remedying the challenges
related to industrial pollution should be implemented gradually and should prioritize issues based on the
severity of their effects on public health or degradation of natural resources. The government planned to
start with the establishment of an industrial pollution management system (IPMS) which consisted of a set
of processes and practices that were to enable the polluting enterprises to control and reduce their pollution
to an acceptable level, improve their environmental performance and promote their use of clean and
efficient technologies.

Alignment with the Government Strategy. The objective of the project supported the government’s
National Strategy for Air Quality Management (2015-2030), and the 2018 Law No. 78 on Air Quality


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      LB: Environment Pollution Abatement (P143594)



               Protection. The project was also in line with the country’s Nationally Determined Contribution,
               which identified the industrial sector as the key sector for greenhouse gas reduction and implementation of
               circular economy principles.

               Alignment with the World Bank Strategy. The objective of the project was in line with the World Bank’s
               most recent Country Partnership Framework FY17-22 (extended into FY24) and objective 1b “reduced
               industrial, hazardous and wastewater pollution” under focus area 1 “expand access to and quality of service
               delivery”.

               The objective of the project was pitched at an appropriate level to address a critical development problem.
               However, since the objective of the project only focused on targeted enterprises, it is unclear how
               meaningful the project’s contribution for reducing overall industrial pollution in Lebanon was.

               When the project’s scope was reduced in 2018, the PDO was not changed. Overall, the relevance of
               objective is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Reducing industrial pollution in targeted industrial enterprises

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change stated that providing sub-loans of at least US$100,000
                             per enterprise to targeted enterprises would help them to install functional equipment for pollution abatement
                             and to bring their air emissions, effluent discharges, and industrial waste generation towards compliance with
                             national environmental standards in a cost-effective manner by reducing the discharges, pollutants, and/or
                             industrial waste volume generated by enterprises. Also, the project’s theory of change stated that providing
                             technical assistance (TA) to the banking sector and other relevant stakeholders to develop guidelines on
                             banking and the environment as well as training on selecting and evaluation environment-related projects
                             from the technical, financial, environmental and social angels would help to build capacity to reduce industrial
                             pollution in targeted industrial enterprises.

                             The theory of change was sound and logical. According to the PAD (p. 12) in the past, enforcement actions
                             were generally taken against small and medium private enterprises that had less significant adverse
                             environmental impact than the larger industrial enterprises for which enforcement had been sporadic and
                             often neglected. The fact that MOE was not the only enforcement agency further complicated the
                             implementation of environmental laws. The costliness and technical complexity of recently enacted laws


                                                                                                                                Page 4 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LB: Environment Pollution Abatement (P143594)



posed some challenges for the MOE. Therefore, the MOE sought to pursue a sequenced approach, by first
targeting priority areas/sectors and assisting individual industries towards achieving compliance.

Outputs:

      Six banks participated in lending to enterprises, exceeding the original target of three banks.
      77 enterprises benefitted from the project’s technical assistance, exceeding the target of 40
       enterprises. Environmental services included the preparation of Environmental Impact Assessments,
       assessments of environmental status and provision of recommendations on appropriate mitigation
       measures, environmental audits, assessment of wastewater generation etc.
      US$13.08 million in sub-loans were issued to nine enterprises for pollution reduction, not achieving
       the target of US$14.96 million. The PAD (Annex 3, para. 15) defined the selection criteria for
       enterprises which had to meet creditworthiness and other financial criteria and were prioritized based
       the expected magnitude of environmental health benefits.
      Nine enterprises were financed through the project aiming towards the environmental compliance
       Decree no. 8471-2012, not achieving the revised target of 10 enterprises.

Outcomes:

      Five enterprises received support for air pollution, and all of them reduced their emission levels of
       PM10 by more than 50 percent, achieving the original target of five enterprises. Sub-projects included
       installing bag filters, monitoring systems, a resource efficiency and recovery system, and a petroleum
       coke cover and conveyer belts.
      The four enterprises receiving support for reducing Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD)/Chemical
       Oxygen Demand (COD) were able to reduce BOD/COD in discharged wastewater by more than 50
       percent, not achieving the target of 10 enterprises. Sub-projects included wastewater treatment plants
       (WWTPs) and a nutrient recovery and water recycling plant.
      Industrial solid waste was reduced by 10 percent under the project in the targeted enterprises, not
       achieving the target of 50 percent. According to the ICR (p. 32) the rendering plant of Wiclo PM was
       the only sub-project addressing solid waste and was only operated in batches. The rendering plant
       was operated one day per week while the slaughtering lines were operated five days per week. As a
       result, the plant was covering the waste generated during one day of production only.

While the project was able to achieve its target for reducing air pollutants in five enterprises, it was not able to
achieve the target for BOD/COD reduction in the targeted number of enterprises and the target for industrial
solid waste water reduction.




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective

                                                                                                      Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LB: Environment Pollution Abatement (P143594)



Reducing industrial pollution in targeted industrial enterprises

Revised Rationale
The project’s theory of change remained the same when the project was restructured.

Outputs:

The original output evidence remained relevant under the revised indicator targets. In addition, a new
indicator was added.

      Six banks participated in lending to enterprises, exceeding the revised target of four banks.

Outcomes:

During the restructuring, the targets of indicators measuring the achievement of the first objective were
adjusted to measure reductions in pollutants rather than the number of enterprises that achieved a reduction
threshold. This was done because the project enrolled fewer enterprises than initially expected.

      The five enterprises implementing air pollution reduction achieved an overall reduction of 91.90
       percent of particulate matter, exceeding the target of 50 percent.
      The BOD/ COD was reduced by 76.18 percent under the project, exceeding a reduction by 50
       percent. The Wastewater Treatment Plants (WWTPs) achieved a reduction in BOD from 8.8 tons/day
       to 1.2 tons/day with a resulting efficiency of 85.23 percent. The total load of COD before treatment
       was 14.1 tons/day and the total COD reduction achieved was 10.76 tons/day equivalent to a treatment
       efficiency of 76.18 percent.
      The indicator on solid waste management remained under the revised objectives.

After restructuring, the project was able to achieve the reductions in air pollutants and BOD discharges under
the revised targets that emphasized the magnitude of pollution abatement rather than the number of
enterprises. However, the project was still not able to reduce the industrial solid waste in targeted industries.
The overall achievement of the objective was Substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthening the monitoring and enforcement capabilities of the Ministry of Environment (MOE)

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project's theory of changes stated that technical assistance and training to the MOE
was to result in guidelines for sector ESIA and enforcement established, on-the-job training being provided,
assistance to enterprises in several areas including Environmental Assessments (EAs), Environmental and



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LB: Environment Pollution Abatement (P143594)



Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs), and Compliance Action Plan being provided. These outputs were to
result in the outcome of monitoring of environmental compliance by the MOE being improved.

The theory of change was sound and logic.

Outputs:

      12 guidelines and tools for environmental monitoring/compliance for specific industrial sectors were
       developed, exceeding the target of nine guidelines and tools.
      197 people were trained on environmental compliance/monitoring/enforcement and awareness,
       exceeding the original target of 60 people. The project would have benefitted from measuring the
       number of MOE staff and the number of people from banks and enterprises trained separately since
       they contributed to different objectives.
      Monitoring reports covering environmental compliance of participating enterprises by the MOE were
       produced but not published. Therefore, the target of five reports being published was not achieved.

Outcomes:

The original indicators only captured output data on monitoring and enforcement capacity. The project was
not able to achieve the target of enterprises aiming towards the environmental compliance decree. Overall,
the achievement of the objective was Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Strengthening the monitoring and enforcement capabilities of the Ministry of Environment (MOE)

Revised Rationale
The original output indicators remained relevant under the revised targets. A new output indicator was added.

      Industrial database including monitoring, permitting and enforcement data were developed and are
       operational, achieving the target of the database being operational.

Outcomes:

      The number of non-compliant operational enterprises addressed in letters from the MOE to Ministry of
       Industry, Ministry of Interior, governors, municipalities, and prosecutors increased by 339 percent,
       exceeding the target of a 50 percent increase. This indicator was added during the 2018 restructuring
       and is a proxy for enforcement capacity.




                                                                                                 Page 7 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                LB: Environment Pollution Abatement (P143594)



                            The project was able to substantially achieve the objective of improving monitoring of environmental
                            compliance by the MOE as demonstrated by the non-compliant operational enterprises addressed in letters
                            from the MOE and the number of enterprises financed aiming towards the environmental compliance decree.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Before the restructuring, the project was not able to enroll the initially expected number of enterprises for
                            wastewater reduction and did not have outcome indicators to capture monitoring or enforcement capacity.
                            The project restructuring removed targets around the number of enterprises and added new indicators, and
                            the project was able to achieve the revised air and water pollution abatement indicators, and to achieve
                            indicators on monitoring and enforcement capacity. However, the project was not able to meet the industrial
                            solid waste target under objective 1. Overall, the project’s efficacy was Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency:

   It was difficult to conduct an ex ante economic assessment because of data constraints. In particular, it was not
   known at the outset what type of subprojects would be implemented or what specific pollutants would be abated.
   Also, estimates on the value of air pollution abatement existed, but not for biological or chemical discharges.
   Consequently, the project tried to derive the breakeven values under which the project would be economically
   viable by conducting a scenario based analysis. The analysis assessed the economic value of air pollution
   abatement under three different parameter assumptions: a reduction in air pollution by 3.0, 3.5, or 4.0 percent
   reductions of emissions. The analysis then estimated net present value for each scenario based on a 10 percent
   discount rate. Under these assumptions, the 3.5 and 4.0 reduction scenarios led to NPV of $1.6 million and $3.3
   million over 7 years, though benefits would continue beyond this time. The benefit/cost ratio was 1.6. The
   economic internal rate of return (IRR) was calculated at 25 percent and 39 percent respectively.

   The ICR (p. 43) conducted a cost-benefit on data collected during project implementation and including benefits
   from air and water pollution abatement. Furthermore, the ICR’s analysis accounted for future O&M costs which
   was not done at appraisal.



                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       LB: Environment Pollution Abatement (P143594)



The ICR’s analysis included project costs of US$13.08 million along with other costs incurred by the companies
to effectively reduce pollution loads. The analysis (applying a discount rate of 7 percent) calculated a NPV of
US$60.4 million, an IRR of 102 percent and benefit-cost-ratio of 3.3.

These analyses indicate that the project was a worthwhile investment at appraisal and at closing.

Operational efficiency:

The project experienced delays in effectiveness (18 months between approval and effectiveness) and initial
disbursement due to the political deadlock in Lebanon. These delays were anticipated by the Bank team. Also,
the complexity and novelty of establishing the lending mechanism between BdL and commercial banks resulted
in delays. The project’s closing date was extended twice by a total of 23 months as a result of Lebanon’s
economic crisis, the COVID-19 pandemic, and the Beirut explosion.

Overall, the project’s efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?          Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   100.00
 ICR Estimate                                             102.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

                    Rating Dimension Before 2018 restructuring           After 2018 restructuring
Relevance of the Objective           High                                High
Efficacy
Objective 1: Reducing industrial
pollution in targeted Industrial
Enterprises                          Modest                              Substantial


Objective 2: Strengthening the
monitoring and enforcement               Modest                          Substantial
capabilities of the MOE

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LB: Environment Pollution Abatement (P143594)



Efficiency                               Substantial                           Substantial
Outcome Rating                           Moderately Unsatisfactory             Satisfactory
Outcome Rating Value                     3                                     5
Amount Disbursed (US$ million)           3.43                                  9.64
Disbursement (%)                         26%                                   74%
Weight Value                             0.78                                  3.70
Total weights                            4.48
Overall Outcome Rating                   Moderately Satisfactory



Relevance of the objectives was High before the restructuring. Achievement of both objectives was Modest,
before the restructuring. Efficiency was Substantial resulting in an overall outcome rating of Moderately
Unsatisfactory.

Relevance of the objective was High after the restructuring. Achievement of both objectives was Substantial after
the restructuring. Efficiency was Substantial resulting in an overall outcome rating of Satisfactory.

Overall, the outcome was Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project’s risks to development outcomes can be classified into the following categories:

Government commitment: The MOE was committed and continues to remain committed to the project’s
objectives as demonstrated through the continuation of its engagement with the Bank and other development
partners in various projects and key areas such as supporting industrial enterprises to becoming
environmentally compliant and sustaining their business operations in the Litani River Basin and transitioning
the private sector to a green and circular economy.

Economic situation: According to the ICR (para. 89) due to the current economic situation in Lebanon,
MOE staff are being paid a wage that is not being adjusted to the extreme levels of inflation in the country.

As a result, there is a high staff turnover and an inability to hire new staff. As a result, there is a high risk that
enterprises might not comply with regulations since it is not being monitored and enforced.

Technical capacity: Even though the project was able to strengthen the MOE’s capacity to monitor and
enforce industrial pollution regulations, the high staff turnover might negatively impact capacity built.




                                                                                                          Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LB: Environment Pollution Abatement (P143594)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the PAD (p. 11) the project incorporated several lessons learned from previous Bank
  operations in the country and the region such as: i) the need to strengthen institutional and regulatory
  capacity so that environmental regulatory agencies develop institutional capacity through a “learning by
  doing” approach; and ii) the importance of effective targeting of credit lines to ensure that the benefits are
  not dispersed as well as the importance of enforcement pressure and promotion of the credit lines as key
  factors to motivate enterprises to use the funds. This project relied on results of previous projects
  implemented by other development partners which carried out audits and facilitated the identification and
  gauging demand from potential industries.

  According to the ICR (para. 60) the Bank team conducted institutional, technical, economic, financial,
  procurement, and environmental and social safeguards assessments during project preparation. The
  project design also benefitted from technical studies conducted by development partners.

  The Bank team identified relevant risks and identified several as High including stakeholder risk and
  capacity risk due to the limited experience in implementing Bank financed projects. The project tried to
  mitigate these risks by sub-projects monitoring and safeguard implementation to mitigate possible risks
  (related to noise, sight and air pollution) affecting stakeholders will be entrusted to PMU. Also, mitigation
  measures included a skill mix that was to cover financial management, procurement, safeguards, and
  M&E within the PMU team. The Bank team also identified political uncertainty which was beyond the
  Banks control as potential risk to project implementation.

  The project experienced significant delays in disbursement for the first two years of implementation due
  to the project’s complex design for establishing the new financial mechanism between BdL and the
  commercial Banks.

  The Results Framework had several shortcomings such as not including indicators to measure the
  second PDO on strengthening monitoring and enforcement capabilities of MOE (see section 9a for more
  details).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (para. 86) the Bank team conducted regular supervision missions, mostly on a bi-
 annual basis. The Bank team engaged with all project stakeholders including the MOE, BdL, commercial
 banks and enterprises to identify and address implementation bottlenecks. For example, when the project
 experienced fund transfer delays related to the Hawa Chicken sub-loan, the Bank team worked with the
 PMU and BdL to address these delays. The ICR (para. 70) stated that the Bank team was able to change
 the implementation modality through the banks for the project to remain financially viable for BdL.



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LB: Environment Pollution Abatement (P143594)



 The Bank team restructured the project after the Mid-Term Review to modify the Results Framework to
 reflect implementation progress. Also, after the Mid-Term Review the Bank team developed an action plan
 to accelerate implementation which included several critical actions: i) establishing a firm sub-project
 pipeline; ii) confirming alternative funding arrangements for the technical assistance if the AICS funds were
 not released; iii) strengthening the monitoring and enforcement capacity of the MOE; iv) sharing a
 disbursement plan; and v) providing monthly action plan updates. These actions resulted in the
 acceleration of disbursement.

 According to the ICR (para. 67) the project would have benefitted from the Bank engaging at a higher
 political level to address the disbursement related delays during the first two years of project
 implementation. Also, the project would have benefitted from paying closer attention to the Grievance
 Redress Mechanism to capture specifics of reported grievances.

 In 2019, the government requested the Bank for Additional Financing (AF) in the amount of US$50 million
 to provide financing to a pipeline of 12 enterprises. However, the AF did not move ahead due the beginning
 of a major financial crisis in the country, exposing the project to further risks.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objective of the project was clearly specified and the theory of change and how key activities and
 outputs were to result in the intended outcomes was sound. For some the indicators (such as indicators on
 population and gender of beneficiaries) a baseline and target could not be set from the beginning. Also, the
 original Results Framework did not include indicators to adequately measure outcomes for the second
 PDO on strengthening monitoring and enforcement capabilities of MOE.

 Since the projects had not been defined at appraisal baseline values for core sector indicators on the
 number of people with exposure to particulate matter in the project area and the number of direct project
 beneficiaries could not be established. According to the World Bank team (November 8, 2023) the M&E
 design and arrangements were fully embedded in the MoE.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Bank team appropriately corrected shortcomings of the Results Framework during the project
  restructuring in 2018. Indicators were added to be able to better measure the second aspect of the PDO,
  some intermediate outcome indicators were moved to the PDO level as they were outcome indicators,
  and some output-oriented indicators were moved to the intermediate level. Also, the target of PDO

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LB: Environment Pollution Abatement (P143594)



  indicator 1 (enterprises financed through the project that conform to the environmental compliance
  decree no. 8471-2012) was reduced while the targets of two intermediate outcome indicators were
  increased.

  According to the ICR (para. 72) the project planned for the hiring of an M&E specialist, through AICS
  funding, in 2017, which was delayed until mid-2019, resulting in a downgrade of the ISR’s M&E rating
  from Satisfactory to Moderately Satisfactory. Since the project conducted field visits to sub-projects
  monthly and quarterly basis and submitted timely M&E reports to the Bank, the M&E rating was upgraded
  to Satisfactory in March 2020.

  M&E activities were supported by a steering committee, the Project Advisory Committee (PAC), which
  met regularly to review data and address implementation issues.

  According to the World Bank team (November 8, 2023) M&E data were found to be reliable and of good
  quality, as they relied upon third-party laboratories for water testing and known monitoring methods for air
  and solid waste testing. M&E specialists from the PMU were well-versed in the methods and worked
  closely with industries as they planned, installed, and troubleshooted their sub-project systems, therefore
  the specialists could identify if data appeared unrealistic or otherwise untrustworthy.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (para. 76) M&E reporting identified the issue of the rendering plant installed for the
  WilCoPM subproject operating only one day per week while the company’s slaughtering lines were
  operating five days per week. Therefore, they were only covering one fifth of the waste generated. M&E
  data showed that this issue was a result of high costs for operating the rendering plant while the
  rendering end products were not easily marketed due to Lebanon’s financial crisis. To address this
  issue, a rendering expert was hired to assess equipment operation and facilitate the marketing of end
  products. As a result, the company developed a marketing strategy for Lebanon and abroad and started
  to supply a fish farm in Lebanon.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policy OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment). According to the ICR (para. 78) the project prepared an Environmental and
   Social Assessment, which adopted a framework approach since the specific project interventions were not
   known when the project was prepared. The necessary mitigation measures and site-specific instruments
   were to be identified and prepared before the implementation of a sub-project. Also, the project prepared
   Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESM) for all sub-projects prior of the start of any civil works




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LB: Environment Pollution Abatement (P143594)



   activities. The MOE conducted quarterly monitoring and reporting on the safeguard compliance of each sub-
   project.

   The ICR (para 79) stated that there was a fatality at one of the industrial facilities which was unrelated to the
   project’s activities. As a result, the project required all beneficiary facilities to upgrade their occupational
   health and safety performance for the entire facilities, not just for the project interventions.

   The project established a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM), which was published on the webpage of
   the MOE. The project disseminated information about the existence of the GRM through a flyer and through
   monthly facility visits. The project did not receive any formal complaints.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management:

   According to the ICR (para. 81) the project’s Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) and audit reports were
   submitted in a timely manner and of acceptable quality. The project experienced some delays related to
   the transfer of funds from the Central Bank to the commercial banks of the enterprises and in executing
   refunds to the Bank for financing not used. These delays were a result of the country’s challenging
   economic situation. When the project closed, FM was rated Satisfactory.

   Procurement:

   According to the ICR (para. 82) since the project was a financial intermediary project, it followed
   commercial practices of the industries reviewed and approved by the Bank team. The PMU provided
   industries with a procurement manual and the technical and financial evaluation of sub-projects. When the
   project closed, procurement was rated Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       LB: Environment Pollution Abatement (P143594)



                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 29-30) included several lessons learned which were adapted by IEG:

        Failing to develop a pipeline and scoping of specific enterprises and subprojects
         during project preparation can delay implementation. In this project, no pipeline of
         participating enterprises was established during preparation, which resulted in
         implementation delays. When the project prepared AF in 2019, 12 enterprises were already
         onboard to receive sub-loans under the AF which would have enabled faster implementation.
        Allowing financing mechanisms for subprojects to adapt to changing circumstances
         can help with project implementation. In this project, a national financial crisis occurred,
         which threatened project implementation as the commercial banks could no longer meet the
         initial conditions of the subsidiary financing mechanism. Adapting the subsidiary agreement
         between the central bank and the commercial banks enabled the commercial banks to
         resume lending, which enabled the project to continue its activities, while other projects had
         to be closed early.
        Failure to lay out sufficient indicators to assess all aspects of the PDO can cause
         project restructurings and hinder project ratings. This project had to be restructured in
         2018 since the Results Framework did not include any outcome indicators to assess the
         second aspect of the PDO (Strengthening the monitoring and enforcement capabilities of
         MOE). It is possible that achievements of the second aspect of the objective would have
         been higher if an adequate set of indicators would have been used to measure
         implementation progress and identify bottlenecks.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a good overview of project preparation and implementation. The ICR was relatively concise
and sufficiently candid and provided suggestions on how implementation bottlenecks could have been
addressed. Also, it included an adequate economic analysis.

The ICR would have benefitted from explaining in more detail why specific targets were not achieved. Overall,
the quality of the ICR was Substantial.



                                                                                                   Page 15 of 16
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  LB: Environment Pollution Abatement (P143594)




a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                               Page 16 of 16
