     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN - E-Health Project (P131290)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023753

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P131290                                    MN - E-Health Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Mongolia                                   Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-54890                                  30-Sep-2019                                            7,971,808.56

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Jun-2014                                30-Sep-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            19,500,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             19,500,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                          7,971,808.56                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Sawsan Salameh              Salim J. Habayeb             Eduardo Fernandez               IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement dated June 18, 2015, page 4, the Project Development
   Objective (PDO) was "to improve integration and utilization of health information and e-health solutions for
   better health service delivery in selected pilot sites."

   During implementation, project objectives were not revised, but the project expanded its scope. Therefore,
   this ICR Review assesses the project based on the project’s expanded scope.


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN - E-Health Project (P131290)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components


   Originally, the project had five components according to the Project Appraisal Document Draft (page 14).

   Original Component 1: E-Health Foundational Activities (Total US$2.85 million; IDA USS$2.63
   million): This component aimed to lay the foundations for the successful deployment of e-Health solutions
   and developing the prerequisites needed for greater integration of health information between health
   facilities, the health insurance agency, public health agencies, private sector, and so on. Component 1
   comprised two subcomponents.

         Subcomponent 1.1: Enterprise Architecture Development (Total US$1.93 million; IDA US$1.82
          million) would support the development of an Enterprise Architecture (EA) for health, based on the
          National Enterprise Architecture (NEA) framework but adapted to the specifics of the health sector.

         Subcomponent 1.2: Health data standards (Total US$0.92 million; IDA US$0.81 million): would
          establish a suite of Health Data Standards (HDS), which would form the ‘common language’ needed
          for diverse computer systems to interoperate.

   Original Component 2: Clinical Data Collection, Access, and Sharing (Total US$16.06 million; IDA
   US$12.37 million): Component 2 aimed to establish a solid basis for standardized data and medical image
   exchange between healthcare providers and users, develop the mechanism for such data exchange to take
   place, and pilot test this mechanism in selected sites. The development of the data and medical image
   exchange systems would be based on the detailed assessment of business processes carried out under
   Component 1. Component 2 comprised four subcomponents.

         Subcomponent 2.1: The e-Health portal and viewer (Total US$2.12 million; IDA US$1.12 million)
          aimed to establish a basis for standardized data exchange between healthcare providers and
          access for users to the Health Information Exchange Platform (HIEP) initially and links between the
          Hospital Information System (HIS) and other individual systems that could come online in the
          future.

         Subcomponent 2.2: HIEP including enterprise service bus and secure gateway (Total US$7.23
          million; IDA US$6.38 million) would enable different HISs from a range of providers to exchange
          data and, as the e-Health system became fully functional, between health insurance and health
          services utilization reporting and epidemiology (H-Info).

         Subcomponent 2.3: Analysis and implementation of Picture Archiving and Communication Systems
          (PACS) (Total US$4.85 million; IDA US$4.00 million) would comprise the development of a central

                                                                                                  Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MN - E-Health Project (P131290)



         archiving and communication environment for digital medical images, the upgrading of selected
         facilities to be able to use digitally acquired imagery (mini PACS) and upgrading of local networks to
         be able to share digital imagery.

        Subcomponent 2.4: IT infrastructure, maintenance, and support and pilot tests (Total US$1.86
         million; IDA US$0.87 million) would finance the servers required for the HIEP (to be housed and
         supported at the National Data Center-NDC) and the pilot testing of the clinical and imaging data
         exchange mechanisms developed under Subcomponents 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3.

Original Component 3: National Health Information Center (NHIC) (Total US$2.44 million; IDA
US$2.23 million) would establish a center that oversees all aspects of e-Health in Mongolia, thus ensuring
the long-term sustainability of e-health investments. The Project would finance the establishment costs of
the NHIC, while the government of Mongolia (GOM) would finance operating costs and office space. The
NHIC would play a leading role in designing and implementing a change management strategy for e-Health
with guidance and advice provided by the Change Management Advisor recruited under the Project
Implementation Unit (PIU). Component 3 would finance two subcomponents.

        Subcomponent 3.1: NHIC standards and applications (Total US$0.77 million; IDA US$0.56 million)
         would finance (a) standards enforcement comprising the ongoing work of maintaining,
         disseminating, and enforcing the HDS access for all interested parties and stakeholders throughout
         implementation and (b) specialized e-Health application support in the areas of clinical practice,
         clinical care, and other processes relating to the health venues themselves.

        Subcomponent 3.2: Health Data Statistics (Total US$1.67 million; IDA US$1.67 million) The Health
         Information Dashboard system supports complex data analysis for policy development and health
         statistics. This subcomponent would finance two contracts: one contract encompassing hardware
         and database management software and a second contract financing analysis tools.

        Original Component 4: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (Total US$1.20 million; IDA
         US$1.20 million) would invest in the human capacity for the successful implementation and
         institutionalization of e-Health in Mongolia. It would finance (a) user training to improve the computer
         literacy of health service providers and (b) IT technical training to improve the IT skills and
         competence of NHIC staff.

        Original Component 5: Project Management (Total US$1.20 million; IDA US$1.10 million) would
         finance the PIU, domain expert consultation, and annual monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of the
         Project. The PIU would comprise a Project Coordinator, an implementation and procurement
         specialist, a financial management (FM) specialist, EA specialist(s), a clinician to offer clinical
         support and a change management specialist.



To simplify implementation, the second restructuring approved in September of 2018, adjusted and
consolidated the Project’s five components into three components, as follows:

 



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MN - E-Health Project (P131290)



  Component 1: Build the E-Health Integration System (Appraisal Cost US$15.98 million, Actual Cost
  US$6.9 million) (Restructured original components 1 & 2)

  The revised component 1 was focused on the practical implementation of the HIEP and the completion of
  foundational activities under the original components 1 and 2. It included the development of the electronic
  health record (EHR), electronic medical record (EMR) for primary health care providers, e-referral services,
  network services for primary health care providers' connection, statistical reporting, and security and privacy
  protocols. It also included financing additional hardware for pilot sites.

  Component 2: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (Appraisal Cost US$2.3 million,
  Actual Cost US$0.31 million) (Restructured original components 3 & 4)

  The revised component 2 was focused on institutional strengthening and capacity building. It included
  activities such as strengthening health professionals' basic computer skills, training IT specialists on
  network administration and information security management, establishing a training center, ensuring facility
  connectivity, and developing the legal literacy and health information management capacity among health
  professionals.

  Component 3: Project Management (Appraisal Cost US$1.22 million, Actual Cost US$0.76 million)
  (Original component 5)

  The revised component 3 involved the establishment of a PIU responsible for the implementation of the
  project. The PIU included a project coordinator, implementation and procurement specialists, a financial
  management specialist, EA specialists, a clinician for clinical support, and a change management specialist.
  The project management component also included domain expert consultation and annual monitoring and
  evaluation of the project.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost:

  The project cost was estimated at US$19.5 million at approval. The actual cost at project closing was
  US$7.97 million because of underachievement in implementation and representing only 40.9% of the
  approved amount despite the project having three additional years of implementation.

  The ICR reported the opportunity cost of capital and the administrative costs to the GOM. The government
  only utilized US$8.88 million out of the US$19.5 million IDA credit, and the remaining US$8.5 million funds
  were canceled.

  The government also committed US$4.25 million in government financing which could have been used for
  other investments.



  Dates and Restructuring:

  The key dates of the project were as follows:


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN - E-Health Project (P131290)



       1.   Approval: 06 - Jun - 2014
       2.   Effectiveness: 17 - Aug - 2015
       3.   MTR Review: 18 - May - 2018
       4.   Original Closing: 30 - Sep - 2019
       5.   Actual Closing: 30 - Sep - 2022
       6.   Restructuring Dates:
                 a. June 11, 2015
                b. September 11, 2018
                 c. June 18, 2020



   The restructuring dates for the Mongolia E-health project are:

       1. First restructuring (June 11, 2015) extended the Closing Date by 12 months to September 30, 2020.
          The reasoning of this was to reflect the delay in the signing of the financing agreement and project
          being approved by Parliament and made effective in addition to the change in the name of the
          implementing agency from Ministry of Health and Sports to the Ministry of Health (MOH).
       2. Second restructuring (September 11, 2018): PDO indicators were expanded to capture the impact
          and benefits flowing across all parts of the health system, beyond ‘pilot sites. To simplify
          implementation, the second restructuring adjusted and consolidated the Project’s five components
          into three components as shown in section 2e.
       3. Third restructuring (June 18, 2020) extended the Closing Date by 24 additional months, to
          September 30, 2022.

   As mentioned earlier, the PDO was not revised in the restructurings.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Mongolia, a unique country with extreme features, such as being the most sparsely populated country in the
world and experiencing rapid urbanization, made significant investments in information and communication
technology to help improve public service delivery including continued commitment to the health sector
through the E-Health Strategy (2010-2014) developed in 2009. However, the implementation of this
strategy faced multiple health system challenges. These challenges included large technical and allocative
inefficiencies in health service delivery, the inability to meet the growing burden of non-communicable
diseases (NCDs), the limited IT literacy and capacity of the health sector and the need to transition to a
high-value more-integrated delivery system supported by efficient use of public expenditures. To address
these challenges, the government of Mongolia requested financing to improve integration and utilization of
health information and e-health solutions. This was the first World Bank supported project in the health
sector for Mongolia.


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN - E-Health Project (P131290)




Relevance to the national priorities at approval:

At the time of appraisal, the PDO was relevant to the country conditions and well-aligned with national
priorities, specifically with the commitment to use information and communication technology (ICT) to
deliver inclusive and efficient public services and a high value delivery system. The project was strongly
relevant to address many shortcomings that arose from the implementation of Mongolia's E-Health Strategy
(2010-2014) that was developed in 2009. The strategy recognized the critical role that e-Health solutions
could play in addressing health care challenges and a more integrated system of financing and delivery, in
line with the broader e-Government strategy. However, this strategy had many shortcomings that included:
(a) the lack of a robust Enterprise Architecture (EA) or roadmap for the development of e-Health activities;
(b) inconsistent data formats, coding schemes, and timing of information delivery due to lack of HDS; (c)
lack of data interchange between different HISs to match information about patients and no link to the wider
administrative and financing systems; (d) incomplete data in the existing health information system that
limited the ability to create useful, consistent ‘maps’ for tracking diseases, especially non-communicable
diseases (NCD); and (e) limited IT literacy and capacity and fragmented IT resources to manage a modern
health information system. This project was relevant to the GOM in addressing these shortcomings at
appraisal.



Relevance to the WBG’s assistance Strategies at approval:

The project was aligned with the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Strategies (CPS) for Mongolia at
the proposal time for the period FY13–FY17 (PAD, page 5), which aimed to “Address Vulnerabilities
through Improved Access to Services and Better Service Delivery”. Mongolia's health sector faced
challenges in delivering quality service and the health system was not equipped to meet the growing burden
of NCDs, the leading cause of mortality and morbidity in Mongolia. The project aimed to address these
challenges by focusing on effective management and control of NCDs through the exchange of patient
information and providing accurate and regularly updated data and transition to a high-value delivery
system supported by the efficient use of public expenditures.



Relevance to WB and national priorities at closure:

The objectives continued to be highly relevant at project closing, both to the World Bank Group's Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) for Mongolia for the period FY21-FY25 and to the country's health sector
needs and current financing reforms. The CPF’s Focus Area 3 (Improving quality of life), Objective 3.1
(Enhancing quality of health services) for Mongolia for the period FY21-FY25, mentions that Mongolia’s
health sector faced challenges in delivering quality service, as health service delivery is characterized by
large technical and allocative inefficiencies. Further, it highlighted that the system is not equipped to meet
the growing burden of NCDs, the leading cause of mortality and morbidity in Mongolia, and that Mongolia
needs to transition to a high-value delivery system supported by the efficient use of public expenditures. By
focusing on effective management and control of NCDs by facilitating the real-time exchange of patient
information and providing accurate and regularly updated data to monitor NCDs, the PDO and design were
fully relevant to these priorities during and after project closure. The project became even more relevant
following the COVID-19 pandemic, as it exposed weaknesses in Mongolia's public health systems and

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      MN - E-Health Project (P131290)



               highlighted the need to build and strengthen preparedness. The GOM also emphasized the urgent need for
               an integrated e-health system, even after project closure, particularly considering recent financing reforms
               that require consistent and accurate data from service providers as critical step for achieving efficiency and
               equity as Mongolia moved away from input-based to performance-based financing.

               The project's objectives were strongly relevant to both the World Bank's country partnership framework and
               strategies for Mongolia and to the country's health sector needs and current reforms at appraisal and
               continued to be strongly relevant at project closing.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                             To improve integration and utilization of health information and e-Health solutions for better health service
                             delivery in selected pilot sites.

                             Rationale


                             Interpretation of the PDO: Both this ICR Review and the ICR (p. 17) considered that the wording of “for better
                             health service delivery” indicated an ultimate long-term outcome and that the objective of the project was to
                             improve integration and utilization of health information and e-Health solutions, as reflected by the theory of
                             change (ToC) and results framework (RF).

                             Further, as integration and utilization in terms of e-Health are very closely related and intertwined, they were
                             evaluated together rather than separately.

                             Integration is the bringing together of different inputs and only part of the process of making information
                             usable by health providers, managers, and patients.

                             The objective was evaluated based on 2 outcomes/result chains:

                                       1. Building E-Health integration system (PDO outcome 1).
                                       2. Institutional strengthening and capacity building (PDO outcome 2).

                             Theory of Change:



                                                                                                                                  Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MN - E-Health Project (P131290)



The theory of change developed for the ICR, showed a direct, logical causal chain from inputs to outputs and
further to the intermediate and then PDO outcomes.

The first part of the results chain showed how building the e-health system foundations would result in the
following Intermediate results:

    1. develop health data standards.
    2. design, develop and implement successful e-health portals and piloting of HIEP.
    3. develop and implement PACS that will allow the exchange of digital images among central PACS and
       health care facilities.
    4. Supply working computers for primary health care facilities.
    5. Improve storage capacities and servers required for health data information for the HIEP.

These intermediate outcomes of building the e-health system would plausibly lead to integration of the system
and making it usable (PDO outcome 1).

The second part of the results chain showed how setting up and establishing training centers and connecting
some pilot sites to high speed internet and gathering beneficiary feedback would lead to the intermediate
outcomes of providing computer and IT skills training for health service providers, ensuring health facility
connectivity to high speed internet and information and communication technology advances, utilizing
beneficiary feedback as well as developing the legal framework for e-health systems and utilize e-signatures
as valid endorsement for health insurance claims. These intermediate results would plausibly result in
institutional strengthening and improvements in IT and health information management capacity among
health professionals (PDO outcome 2).

Progress at the PDO level was to be assessed with the following 4 PDO indicators:

    1. Percentage of statistical reports out of total report produced by pilot facilities that are transmitted
       electronically through the HIEP to the National Center for Health Development (NCHD).
    2. Percentage of electronic referrals out of total referrals at pilot facilities.
    3. Number of project area soums and family health centers transmitting monthly e-Health statistical
       reports.
    4. Improvements in IT and health information management capacity among health professionals.

The ToC captured the logical cause-effect relationships from the lower-level results to the higher-level ones.

However, the ToC did not discuss any of the assumptions or risks that hinder the achievements of the
outcomes. The ICR fully discussed these assumptions that led to underachievement in outcomes.

Achievement of the Project’s objectives was highly dependent upon the successful implementation of the
contract for the design and implementation of the HIEP platform and, to a lesser extent, to that of the PACS.

The successful design and implementation of the HIEP is crucial for improving integration and utilization of
health information and e-Health solutions. However, there were several issues with the procurement and
implementation of the HIEP, including duplication concerns. These issues put the achievement of the project's
objectives at risk. This was mostly because implementation of the contract for the HIEP came too late, was



                                                                                                      Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MN - E-Health Project (P131290)



unsuccessful, and was duplicated and overlapped with a system to extract health information to support
health financing developed by the Ministry of Finance (MOF).

However, as mentioned earlier, the complexity of the project, lack of familiarity with WB policies as well as
frequent transitions and capacity constraints led to problematic underachievement of outputs and activities
for most of the project timeline and after project closing per Task Team Leaders (TTLs) clarifications on
November 2, 2023.

Outputs and intermediate results indicators achieved:

      On May 31st, 2022, only 24 Health Data Standards were developed and submitted for review by the
         Ministry of Health E-health Committee. This target was partially met as indicated by the ICR. The ICR
         did not mention the target number for this indicator.
        On May 31st, 2022, 100% of digital images were transmitted at central PACS compared to an 80%
         target. This indicator was achieved and exceeded the target.
        Only 192 out of the expected 500 primary health care facilities had at least 1 upgraded and working
         computer (Baseline: 100) - This target was partially met. The ICR indicated that the actual value of this
         indicator was not available at project closure to include in the last Implementation Status and Results
         Report. The MOH provided evidence on August 15, 2023 (ICR page 40) during consultation on the
         draft Implementation Completion and Results Report that 82 primary health care facilities were
         provided with working computers in 2019 as part of the Project.
        On May 31st, 2022, the storage capacities for health data information were improved and enhanced to
         reach 20 Tb.
        On May 31st, 2022, ‘Training Center’ was designed, implemented and was ready to use. The target
         was achieved.
        On June 29, 2022, 443 soums were connected to high-speed internet. The target was achieved and
         exceeded the target of 300.
        On May 31st, 2022, legislation was passed and became effective from May 1 to use e-signatures as a
         valid endorsement for health insurance claims, but the regulation was not yet issued. This target was
         thus partially met.
        On May 31st, 2022, beneficiary feedback was incorporated into implementation. This target was
         achieved.

Only some of the PDO indicators and outcomes were partially achieved as follows:

Outcomes

      On May 31st, 2022, the number of project area soums and family health centers transmitting monthly
         e-Health statistical reports was 453 exceeding the target of 450. The target was achieved and
         exceeded.

      On May 31st, 2022, 1,180 health professionals had improved their IT and health information
         management capacity and exceeded the target of 1000. The target was achieved and exceeded.




                                                                                                    Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MN - E-Health Project (P131290)



As discussed earlier, the implementation of the contract of the HIEP was unsuccessful. As a result, the first
two PDO indicators and one of the Intermediate Results Indicators IRIs were not met and progress towards
these targets was not seen as it depended on the successful completion of the HIEP.

      The percentage of statistical reports out of total report produced by pilot facilities that are transmitted
       electronically through the HIEP to the NCHD was 0% and the indicator was not met. (Baseline: 0
       percent; Target: 75 percent; Actual: 0).
      The percentage of electronic referrals out of total referrals at pilot facilities was 0% and not
       met (Baseline: 0 percent; Target 50 percent; Actual: 0).
      The percentage of pilot facilities which design, develop and implement successful piloting of HIEP was
       0% and the IRI was not met (Baseline: 0; Target: 80; Actual: 0).

Thus, adequate integration and utilization of e-health systems by health service providers were dependent on
the collective contributions of the above noted outputs and results. If each of the above outcomes,
intermediate results and outputs were met, then collectively and plausibly that would contribute to integration
and utilization of health information and e-Health solutions for better health service delivery in selected pilot
sites.

The unsuccessful implementation of the HIEP, the complex nature of the project that did not properly evaluate
the risk and assumptions of the project had resulted in the underachievement of the envisaged project
objective.

Despite this, the project was able to produce some tangible achievements that can provide the foundation for
the design and implementation of a strong e-Health system. The PACS is reported to have achieved good
results in five central, pilot hospitals. However, the ICR reported that an independent assessment found that
there are still some crucial functionalities outstanding, including a licensed clinical viewer, integration of
existing local PACS with the central PACS, and data exchange between existing electronic medical records
and PACS and lack of integration with new systems. In addition, several project-supported activities had
helped build the capacity of clinicians, IT specialists, and health units to help them successfully develop and
utilize an integrated eHealth system.

Although these outputs and intended outcomes seemed fragmented, they represented progress towards the
creation of an integrated e-Health system in a challenging environment and thus overall efficacy would be
rated as modest. The MOF was developing an Information and Communication Technology system that was
temporarily halted in 2020/21 due to concerns about duplication as reported in the ICR (page 20). This
system closely followed the design of the HIEP and facilitated the exchange of financial information across
various sectors, including health insurance claims.

Overall, the project did not achieve the intended objective of integration and utilization of e-health systems
but made tangible achievements that can provide the foundation for the design and implementation of a
strong e-Health system. For this reason, efficacy is rated modest.



Rating
Modest



                                                                                                     Page 10 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                MN - E-Health Project (P131290)




OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project objective of integrating and utilizing solutions and e-health services was partly achieved,
                            indicating a modest overall efficacy rating.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   At appraisal, the economic analysis for the Project was not performed. No Economic Rate of Return (ERR) or
   Financial Rate of Return (FRR) was estimated. This was because it was challenging to estimate the impact of
   the project's investments on health outcomes and better health service delivery through integration and
   utilization of e-health systems. The Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (page, 55) pointed out these challenges
   in conducting the economic analysis. The ICR (page, 21) pointed out that these difficulties persisted at closure,
   and as a result, the value of conducting a full cost-benefit analysis was further diminished by the lack of tangible
   benefits from the project activities and achievement of objectives and some outcomes. Although at completion
   the project had financed some separate outputs, these were very few, especially when viewed in the context of
   its eight-year implementation period. The successive implementation issues that continued even after
   streamlining its design and implementation arrangements constantly put the achievement of its objectives and
   efficiency at risk.

   The decision to continue developing the HIEP under the Project did not take into account the MOF's system,
   resulting in the creation of a parallel system and the possibility for duplication. However, the outputs of the
   Project would ultimately contribute to the integration and utilization of e-Health systems within the MOF's
   system.

   The efficiency analysis in the ICR compared the actual component costs to the estimated costs at appraisal,
   highlighting the underachievement of activities. This analysis only focused on the utilization of funds, opportunity
   costs and administrative costs of the World Bank-supported e-health project in Mongolia.

   The government only utilized US$8.88 million out of the US$19.5 million IDA credit, and the remaining US$8.5
   million funds were canceled. The ICR pointed out that if the project had canceled funds or closed earlier as its
   main components were at risk due to HIEP delays, it may have been possible for the GOM to reallocate this
   capital to other World Bank-financed projects in Mongolia. The opportunity cost of retaining this funding for the
   project was the loss of potential impact in other World Bank-financed projects in Mongolia. The analysis also
   noted the government's commitment of US$4.25 million in government financing, which could have been used
   for other investments.


   Efficiency Rating
          Negligible

                                                                                                                               Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MN - E-Health Project (P131290)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives was rated high in view of full alignment with the World Bank CPF strategies, and the
country's health sector needs and current reforms and even more relevant following COVID-19 pandemic.
Efficacy is rated modest, as the project partly achieved its objectives. Efficiency is rated as Neglegible in view of
major shortcomings.

The aggregation of these findings is indicative of a Unsatisfactory outcome rating.


a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to the development outcome, which is the risk, at the time of completion, that development
outcomes that have been achieved or are expected to be achieved will not be maintained, can be assessed
from two perspectives. First, there is a risk that the outputs and outcomes that were achieved will not be
sustained. Second, there is a risk that what was achieved will not contribute to further development. For
example, there is a risk that the staff trained and the PACS systems financed and developed will not be
utilized in future developments or other duplicate systems will be developed as part of the new future project
design. However, the government of Mongolia has demonstrated a strong commitment to continue to
prioritize its e-Government strategy, which is a positive sign for maintaining the investments supported by the
project and pursuing an integrated e-Health platform. Although there may be a risk related to financing
further development, the government remains committed and has consistently allocated counterpart funding
for key activities under the project and should not have difficulties in securing funding if it decides to proceed
with the platform's development. The SMART Project referenced in the ICR (pages 23, 25, 33), which faced
similar implementation issues as the e-Health project, was able to achieve its objectives, albeit with less
efficiency than expected. The World Bank has approved a follow-on SMART Government II project
(P176631) to support Mongolia's e-Government strategy, but it does not include specific support for the
health sector.


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN - E-Health Project (P131290)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The overall design and objectives were well suited to support the clearly defined goal of the Government
  of Mongolia in improving efficiency of health service delivery. The appraisal and design were informed by
  the results of the e-health Feasibility Assessment carried out by the Ministry of Health in 2011 (PAD,
  page, 13). The assessment showed that although a range of electronic Health Information Systems
  already existed in Mongolia, these systems were largely independent and did not coordinate together to
  improve service delivery. It identified the need for health information systems and services that are
  interconnected and communicate together to share data. As a result, the HIEP formed the core of the
  project design.

  The design of the e-health project was suited to support improving the integration of health information
  and e-health solutions and utilizing them at selected pilot sites. The project aimed to establish and build
  the e-health system through developing health data standards and designing, developing and
  implementing data exchange through HIEP including digital imaging generated and transmitted
  electronically through PACS, e-referrals, electronic health and medical records and electronic health
  reports. The project design also focused on improving relevant Information Technology (IT) (working
  computers, high speed internet and data storage capacities). The design also included training of
  healthcare professionals, utilizing beneficiary feedback, and utilizing e-signatures for health insurance
  claims. These activities could help increase interoperability and strengthen the human and government
  institutional capacity for successful implementation and institutionalization of e-health services in
  Mongolia.

  Looking at the implementation arrangements (PAD page 10), MOH was in charge of implementing the
  Project, which included overall coordination, monitoring of results, and communication with the World
  Bank regarding financial aspects. To oversee and provide strategic policy advice and guidance to the
  Project and the MOH, a Project Steering Committee was established, with the Minister of Health as the
  chairperson. The Project Steering Committee also ensured that there was coordination between the E-
  Health Project and the proposed SMART Government Projects done through the Steering Committee.

  The Vice Minister of Health served as the Project Director and had direct responsibility for the Project.
  The Department of Monitoring and Evaluation and Internal Audit (DMEIA) was the Implementing Agency
  for the Project with an E-health PIU established within. The PIU reported to the Project Director was
  responsible for the overall management of the Project, including financial management, monitoring and
  evaluation, and reporting. The General Procurement Agency (GPA) managed the procurement for the
  Project, but the PIU was responsible for working with the beneficiary units to develop technical inputs
  such as terms of reference and technical specifications.

  To assist the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in effectively managing the Project, a Project
  Implementation Manual (PIM) was created by September 30, 2014. The PIM provided detailed
  information on the division of responsibilities within the PIU, operational systems and procedures, and the
  organizational structure of the PIU. It also outlined office operations and procedures, finance and



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MN - E-Health Project (P131290)



accounting procedures (including how funds would flow and be disbursed), and procurement procedures.
The initial work on the PIM was initiated during the grant for project preparation.

During preparation, the World Bank team worked in consultation with a working group from the GOM and
different local specialists and government stakeholders to prepare the design of the project and plan the
different activities. The World Bank team and the GOM also built the project based on the best practices
of similar projects and studies in different countries, mainly Estonia. The Bank team undertook good
preparatory work at appraisal and engaged in a comprehensive dialogue with the GOM to ensure the
PDO was in line with the GOM’s priorities and health needs and the World Bank's CPS for Mongolia.
During appraisal, the Bank team and the GOM also worked on different Project implementation
arrangements to mitigate the identified risks. The risks included: stakeholder risks (reduced commitment
from government for e-health, duplicative efforts by donors, and lack of capacity among beneficiaries);
implementation agency risks (weak technical capacity, fiduciary weaknesses, inadequate oversight, lack
of familiarity with World Bank projects); and project risks (compliance with standards, interface layer, as
well as technical complexity of the project and unproven internet environment) (PAD, page,12).

The project design at entry took into account these risks and had some mitigating measures to manage
them. However, there were major shortcomings in addressing the acknowledged risks. This was the first
World Bank project in Mongolia's health sector, which meant that the MOH staff had to familiarize
themselves with the World Bank's policies and procedures. Despite these challenges, the project was
overly ambitious and had complex institutional arrangements, with many institutions lacking experience
working with the World Bank. This complexity was underestimated during preparation. The project
involved multiple components and sub-components, and there were various institutional arrangements
and agencies involved in its implementation.

In addition, the World Bank had expectations that international partners with experience in e-Health
would collaborate with the Mongolian government, but this did not happen. Moreover, the project design
aimed to follow the model of an e-health project in Estonia and the design was relevant at appraisal.
However, the capacity and level of development of information technology in Estonia and Mongolia were
very different and, thus, led to underachievement of outcomes.

Even though the World Bank also supported, in parallel, the SMART Government Project, which showed
the government's commitment to e-Government, including health, and while the project was designed to
adapt to the already existing Health Information Systems, identified in the Feasibility assessment and
discussed during preparations, it was unclear if the Bank had a full understanding of the existing
information systems and plans in the health sector and might have prepared the project without a
complete understanding of the health sector's information systems. The Appraisal discussed that the
preparation and planning involved many consultations and working group meetings that could have
discussed the opportunity to simplify the project at an earlier stage. The project focused on a broader
approach rather than a simplified specific area, such as the PACS system.

The project's risk assessment did not adequately address these issues and underestimated the
implementation risks. Although the risks were acknowledged during the World Bank's review process, the
evaluation considered the project to be high-risk but potentially high-reward and transformational. The
recommended mitigation measures, such as including a change management specialist, did not align
with the context and other mitigation measures such as a simpler project design could have been
introduced earlier.



                                                                                                 Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN - E-Health Project (P131290)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The complexity of the original design was addressed in the second restructuring that simplified the project
 design, activities, increased scope and revised implementation strategies to improve efficiency and
 likelihood of achieving the objectives and allowing proactive monitoring of progress. In addition, the design
 did not adequately address the unique challenges and assumptions that would risk the achievement of
 certain objectives based on completion of others. The project's design proposed the establishment of a
 new institution, adding further complexity. A simpler project with fewer activities and institutions involved
 would have been more suitable for developing information systems. The successful implementation of the
 project relied on the implementation of a single, large contract (HIEP), which faced repeated delays and
 was not implemented. The project's risk framework was flawed and did not effectively measure progress or
 identify major issues during implementation. There were warning signs during the preparation phase,
 particularly regarding the HIEP, that should have prompted caution.

 The World Bank's implementation support team faced challenges in implementing the project due to delays
 and issues with project design. Despite efforts to improve implementation, the team faced difficulties due to
 changes in management and staffing, fluctuating commitment to the project, and repeated requests by new
 staff that were overly optimistic about improving implementation to deliver results. The team also had to
 deal with difficulties of PIU attracting and working with contractors, the need to coordinate project activities
 with other initiatives (SMART project and other donor projects) and deal with the challenges of virtually
 supporting and supervising after the onset of COVID-19 in 2020.

 Fiduciary compliance was regularly reviewed, and the team provided timely and detailed documentation
 with candid ratings of implementation performance and prospects for achievements of objective. However,
 the team faced difficulties in focusing on development impact due to the dependence on a single contract
 (HIEP). The team constantly continued recommending and prioritizing activities that will lead to the best
 use of project funds to deliver the project objective of integrating and utilizing e-Health systems. However,
 they did not recommend a major restructuring that should have occurred earlier, and the project's objective
 was not adjusted with the second restructuring to eliminate reference to pilot sites. In addition, the team did
 not further clarify the MOF’s proposal to develop its own health information system and determine if it
 would duplicate the efforts of the Project.

 The World Bank team on the other hand was always optimistic and attended to the new staff’s requests
 that implementation would improve with the new team and constantly gave them extra time. The World
 Bank team did not do a full review of implementation. The ICR (page 33) reported that if a full review of
 implementation was performed, the Bank team would have reached the conclusion to justify the
 suspension of support or even cancellation of the project.

 Even as the Bank Team took steps to address design issues, streamline the project and simplify
 institutional arrangements to enhance and achieve outcomes and output, there were significant
 shortcomings in the team’s supervision as they had inherited a complex project. Thus, the quality of
 supervision is rated as moderately unsatisfactory.


                                                                                                     Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN - E-Health Project (P131290)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Overall, the development objective was clearly stated and reflected by the selected PDO indicators. The
 Project's RF was systemic, adequately reflected the Project interventions and was sufficiently linked to the
 PDO.

 The RF was linked to the ToC and was measuring the PDO outcomes, as well as the intermediate
 outcomes and outputs. The RF was streamlined and contained the three PDO outcomes, 9 Intermediate
 results indicators (IRIs) and several outputs. The ICR reported that the RF contained 7 IRI’s instead of 9.
 However, the RF could have been strengthened by further explaining how qualitative measures could be
 measured by indicators and by using more SMART quantitative and qualitative indicators that are time-
 bound and measurable. Most of the indicators were quantitative, and most had baselines and targets.
 However, some of the indicators were not time-bound and thus made the assessment of these outputs and
 outcomes hard.

 The M&E design of the project as noted in the PAD (page 11) included four types of monitoring and
 evaluation: regular/routine monitoring, MTR (Mid-Term Review), completion review, and impact
 assessments for the pilots under component 2. The ICR pointed out that the project's M&E activities were
 going to be integrated to the extent possible into the existing data collection mechanisms at the Ministry of
 Health, National Center for Health Development and health facilities i.e., the current Health Management
 Information System (HMIS). The ICR also highlighted that the pilot’s impact assessments were built into the
 design and include baseline and similar surveys to be carried out at regular intervals during project
 implementation.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E Implementation proceeded with some challenges. Throughout the implementation of the project,
  regular update reports were submitted by the PIU to monitor and evaluate progress.

  However, the ICR reported that there were some difficulties in the M&E data collection and monitoring
  progress according to the indicators in the RF during the earlier implementation phases and throughout
  the project due to delays in implementation and the slow start of activities. These delays in
  implementation and the fact that only a few indicators could be used to measure actual implementation
  progress limited the use of the RF. This was partly because the PDO indicators were defined as end-of-




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN - E-Health Project (P131290)



  project outcomes, and the activities relating to most of the IRIs were off to a slow start, making any
  attempt to measure progress difficult.

  The ICR (page 28) also stated that the project's M&E activities were integrated into existing data
  collection mechanisms of the MOH, NCHD, and health facilities under the existing Health Management
  Information System based on the original proposed design.

  Initially, all PDO indicators were designed to measure impact at the pilot sites, but the MOH expressed a
  desire to measure the project's impact over the entirety of the health sector, not just the pilot areas
  because the project’s reach would be much larger. This part of the M&E design was then reflected in the
  second restructuring and the MTR resulted in a detailed proposal to adjust the project scope,
  components, implementation arrangements and revise the RF to address these issues and allow
  proactive monitoring of the project’s progress. The impact assessments of the pilots were not carried out.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reported that the utilization of M&E activities was challenging in early stages. The project faced
  delays in implementation, which made it difficult to track progress according to the indicators in the
  project's RF. Only three indicators were reported in the project's Implementation Status and Results
  Reports (ISRs) before the project was restructured. Additionally, the project's indicators were defined to
  measure outcomes at pilot facilities only, while the Ministry of Health expressed a desire to measure the
  project's impact across the entire health sector. The delays in implementation and limited use of
  indicators that hindered the ability to measure actual progress led to the second restructuring in
  September 2018 that expanded the scope of the project. Following the MTR and the second
  restructuring, the expanded PDO indicators were utilized to capture the impact and benefits flowing
  across all parts of the health system, beyond ‘pilot sites’ and thus monitor project achievements.

  Overall, the issues with the M&E design and the shortfalls in implementation reflected a modest M&E
  quality.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The overall safeguards rating was satisfactory.

   The project was classified as category C, as only minor works were to be financed, such as the installation
   of new equipment in existing offices and buildings, and no adverse environmental impacts were expected.

   The ICR noted that the Indigenous peoples (IP) safeguard policy was triggered (page, 29) since IPs in
   Mongolia were among project beneficiaries. The project design incorporated elements to ensure the
   provision of culturally appropriate e-health benefits for indigenous peoples, such as conducting


                                                                                                    Page 17 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MN - E-Health Project (P131290)



  consultations with IPs, using IP languages in service provision, and addressing any concerns. It stated that
  compliance with the IP safeguard policy was considered satisfactory throughout implementation.

  The ICR reported that throughout implementation, no issues were reported in regard to compliance with the
  IP safeguard policy. As of June 2022, the Project’s grievance redress mechanism had received five
  complaints related to HIEP and PACS contract payments. As of July 2022, the PIU had organized meetings
  with the respective contractors and with end users (IT specialist, director, and doctors of several hospitals)
  to obtain feedback, but the complaints had not been fully resolved.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  The ICR (page 29) noted that the project's financial management assessment considered its risk rating as
  substantial, but with mitigating measures defined in a plan of action. It reported that fiduciary compliance
  was reviewed and supervised regularly. The World Bank carried out periodic financial management
  reviews that concluded that the Project maintained acceptable FM arrangements and practices and
  complied with the World Bank’s financial reporting requirements. FM actions were agreed during each
  such review and were closely followed up by the PIU. One issue that was addressed in the ICR (page 30)
  and further clarified by the TTLs on November 2, 2023, was that the government’s statutory audit of the
  Project’s FY21 financial statements contained a qualified opinion due to material misstatements found in
  the financial statements. The PIU was subsequently able to address those misstatements and revise the
  financial statements accordingly and was advised by the Bank to prepare the financial statements
  submitted to the government well in advance to allow for time to consider and address the auditors’
  findings before the specified statutory deadline. All 6 audit reports submitted to the Bank were received in a
  timely manner and were of fair and transparent and all 25 submissions of the Quarterly Interim Financial
  Reports were done in a timely manner.

  The ICR highlighted another significant financial management issue that was connected to the findings of
  an independent technical audit of the HIEP contract. This audit was recommended by the World Bank to
  the PIU due to the lack of technical capacity of the government and the increased concerns about the
  limited time available to achieve a functioning HIEP. This technical audit revealed several problems with
  the HIEP contract: firstly, the contractor did not achieve any of the objectives or outcomes specified in the
  contract; secondly, payments made against the invoices and deliverables were not in accordance with the
  contract conditions; and thirdly, certain components within the contract's scope were not fully implemented.
  As a result, the World Bank was unable to consider any of the expenses incurred under the contract as
  eligible for the Project. Consequently, the payments made totaling US$1,718,360 were deemed ineligible
  expenditures and were refunded.

  In terms of procurement, the ICR's procurement capacity and risk assessment assigned a high-risk rating
  to procurement due to various factors such as low staff capacity, unfamiliarity with World Bank procedures,
  lack of experience with implementing World Bank-financed projects, inadequate planning, lack of oversight
  mechanism, and possible elite capture and political interference. Risk mitigation measures included
  developing a procurement manual, providing training, involving technical staff and users in the preparation
  of specifications, ensuring realism in procurement planning, and providing implementation support.

  Throughout Project implementation, delays in contracting procurement staff initially and subsequent staff
  rotation, coupled with the time-consuming processes of the evaluation committee established at the MOH

                                                                                                  Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN - E-Health Project (P131290)



   and issues with the lack of suitable bidders, led to long delays in contracting consultants and procuring
   goods and services. To allow the possibility of using more modern methods of procurement and specific
   procedures that would be more suited to the development of the HIEP, the second project restructuring
   adjusted the Project’s procurement requirements to adopt the Procurement Framework (results-oriented
   procurement packages) rather than the World Bank’s Procurement Guidelines.

   The ICR (page 31) reported on an ongoing case/ investigation by the World Bank’s Integrity
   Department concerning allegations of sanctionable practices, including collusion, fraud and corruption
   related to contracts financed under the Project.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   As an unintended positive impact of the World Bank-supported e-health project, the ICR (page, 23)
   reported that a positive outcome was the procurement of diagnostic equipment for the onset of the COVID-
   19 pandemic. The project delivered US$2.2 million worth of digital equipment, including fixed x-rays,
   portable x-rays, and portable ultrasound, to health facilities as part of the emergency COVID-19 response.
   This was not originally planned as part of the project, but it was a result of the pandemic and the need for
   additional equipment to address the crisis.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                 Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance
                                 Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (page 33 - 35) provided several lessons and recommendations that are were restated by
the IEG review:

    1. When the World Bank is financing a first project in a client's sector, especially if the operation
         is complex, a realistic understanding of the client's capacity, experience with World Bank
         policies and procedures, and ability to handle the technical requirements of the project can
         limit the challenges and shortcomings during implementation and can lead to better
         performing and achieving projects.

                                                                                                     Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MN - E-Health Project (P131290)



     2. Digital health projects can benefit from an enhanced review process to adequately assess
        technical risk. Digital health is a growing area of need in modern health systems. Yet it is
        also a highly technical area with multiple risks, and numerous projects have failed to achieve
        intended objectives from low- to high-income countries. An enhanced and early technical
        review and risk assessment of digital health projects, similar to reviews conducted for
        environmental or social risks, can adequately evaluate the technical risk of an overly
        designed project in a low-capacity context. This review can lead to a reconsideration of the
        project's scope and complexity, especially when risks cannot be mitigated.
     3. Considering the unique capacities and levels of development in each country when designing
        and implementing projects can lead to more effective implementation and better outcomes.
        Projects and investments that have been successful in one country cannot easily replicated
        in another country, especially when it comes to complex sectors like healthcare. In the case
        of the project in Mongolia's health sector, the aim was to follow the model of an e-Health
        project in Estonia. However, the capacity and level of development of information technology
        in Estonia and Mongolia were significantly different. The ICR suggested that instead of trying
        to directly replicate Estonia's system, it can be more effective to help the MOH prioritize and
        divide the design and implementation into smaller parts for phased implementation. Instead
        of immediately implementing a complex HIEP, it can be more feasible to start with a less
        technically complex PACS.
     4. The project design cannot rely on the implementation of its critical activities in a different
        project, even if both projects are financed by the World Bank. If activities are dependent on
        other sectoral initiatives as with the SMART project, a higher-level implementing agency or a
        smaller e-Health project integrated as a component of the SMART Project can be more
        effective. It emphasizes the need for greater complementarity in project design. For example,
        the design of the HIEP under the e-Health project, required the definition of the system's
        Enterprise Architecture (EA) that was being financed under the SMART Project. Delays in
        developing the EA under the SMART Project led to delays in the design and implementation
        of the HIEP which led to unaccomplishment of project outcome and objective.
     5. When client commitment fluctuates, achieving results is not feasible and other factors
        compromise the project's objectives and relevance, the World Bank can carefully reconsider
        whether continued engagement is justified and can make a decision whether to continue
        supporting a project or not even with prior investments in time, effort and sunk costs.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate assessment of the project's performance. It had a strong focus on results and
outcomes. The report clearly and systematically explained the theory of change, illustrating the intended
outcomes and the justifications behind failing to achieve the project objective. The narrative in the report was
candid, detailed and aligned with the development objective. The analysis in the ICR was comprehensive,
mostly well-structured, and supported by sufficient evidence. Both the narrative and the evidence presented in


                                                                                                   Page 20 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN - E-Health Project (P131290)



the report supported the overall ratings and conclusions made by the ICR. Additionally, the ICR highlighted
additional gains in strengthening the health system beyond the intended outcomes by supporting the Mongolia
health system to procure diagnostic equipment upon the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.

The ICR followed guidelines and derived valuable lessons from the project's experience that would be valuable
for future World Bank supported projects in other similar countries. The ICR was not concise, with some
repetitive elements and inconsistencies in the narrative, mainly in fiduciary management.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                Page 21 of 21
