     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chad Statistical Development (P159434)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023596

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P159434                                      Chad Statistical Development

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Chad                                         Poverty and Equity


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D1760                                    31-Mar-2022                                           12,362,636.62

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 03-Apr-2017                                  31-Dec-2022

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             12,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                              12,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Actual                                          12,362,636.62                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Sarosh Sattar               Vandana Chandra                Gabriela Chamartin Escobar      IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, p. 5) and the Program Appraisal Document (p. 11), the
   Program Development Objective (PDO) of the Chad Statistical Development Project is "to strengthen the
   capacity of the national statistics institute to collect, process, and disseminate data with improved quality,
   frequency, and timeliness". Chad's national statistics organization is the National Institute for Statistics and
   Economic and Demographic Studies (INSEED).



                                                                                                      Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chad Statistical Development (P159434)



   The PDO can be parsed into two objectives, reflecting distinct results chains:

   PDO 1: Strengthen INSEED's capacity to collect and process data with improved quality and frequency.

   PDO 2: Strengthen INSEED’s capacity to disseminate data with improved timeliness.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   To achieve the PDO, the project was structured to deliver results through three components (Financing
   Agreement, Schedule 1): (a) Strengthening institutional capacity and developing human resources; (b) Data
   collection, processing, analysis and dissemination; and (c) Project management and improving of IT
   infrastructure. The project implementing entity was INSEED.

   Component 1: Strengthening institutional capacity and developing human resources (US$4.10 million
   at appraisal; US$4.10 million actual) contained the following activities:

          i. Support for institutional reform by (a) technical assistance for the preparation of draft legislation on
               regulatory reform needed to improve INSEED’s governance structure, (b) technical assistance (TA)
               for the development of a modern human resources framework for INSEED, and (c) financing the
               costs of piloting the implementation of the new HR framework.
         ii.   Support for (a) a Scholarship Program, (b) a training program to train selected statisticians at
               Technicien Superieur de la Statistique (TSS), (c) an assessment of long-term training needs, and (d)
               a test preparation program to prepare students for entrance exams for selected training programs.
        iii.   Support for targeted workshops and short training sessions to build capacity of INSEED’s existing
               staff.
        iv.    Support for recruitment of graduates of African statistics schools and other key personnel for
               INSEED.
         v.    (a) Technical assistance for (i) evaluation of the Government of Chad’s (GoC) National Strategy for
               Development of Statistics (NSDS) I for 2011-2015; (ii) assessment of the national statistics system;
               (iii) drafting a new NSDS II for 2022-2026; (iv) identifying strategic areas and priority statistics
               operations; and (v) support for carrying out workshops and the management of operations and
               equipment for the working group on such technical assistance, including financing of related
               equipment.

   Component 2: Data collection, analysis, and dissemination (US$6.70 million at appraisal; US$6.70 million
   actual) contained the following activities:

   Support for the preparation, implementation and dissemination of Survey on Household Living Conditions
   and Poverty No. 4 in Chad (Enquête sur les Conditions de vie des ménages et la Pauvreté au Tchad)
   (ECOSIT 4), support for cleaning, archiving and disseminating of anonymized


                                                                                                          Page 2 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chad Statistical Development (P159434)



        i. Support for the preparation, implementation and dissemination of Survey on Household Living
           Conditions and Poverty No. 4 in Chad (Enquête sur les Conditions de vie des ménages et la
           Pauvreté au Tchad) (ECOSIT 4), support for cleaning, archiving and disseminating of anonymized
           microdata, and preparation of a statistical abstract including consultant services, training, equipment
           and financing of operating costs.
       ii. Support for the preparation, implementation and dissemination of ECOSIT 5, support for cleaning,
           archiving and disseminating of anonymized microdata and preparation of a statistical abstract
           including consultant services, training, equipment and financing of operating costs.
      iii. Support for improving macroeconomic statistics through: (a) implementation of enterprise surveys,
           updating the supply and use of input-output tables, implementation of the new method of calculating
           GDP to help close the main data gaps in Chad’s national accounts, and updating methods to
           improve monitoring of the economy, (b) expanding price data collection for rebasing the CPI and
           carrying out a pilot test to integrate innovative techniques in data collection, and (c) preparation of
           quarterly economic summaries, each including TA and training for preparation; funding of related
           equipment and operating costs.

   Component 3: Project management and improving of IT infrastructure (US$1.20 million at appraisal;
   US$1.20 million actual).

        i. Support for project implementation and management of INSEED and its PIU, including through TA,
          training, provision of consultants’ services, equipment and financing of operating costs.
       ii. Support for the improvement to the IT infrastructure for data dissemination and development of an
          online data access portal, including through training, provision of consultant’ services, equipment
          and financing of operating costs.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The Program was approved on April 3, 2017 and became effective four and half months later on August 25,
   2017. The Mid-Term Review occurred on December 6, 2019. The original closing was on March 31, 2022
   and the actual closing was on December 31, 2022. The Program was restructured on March 8, 2022 to
   extend the closing date by nine months to allow for the completion of ECOSIT 5 data collection, processing,
   and quality validation.

   The original and revised amount of the project cost was US$12,000,000. This amount excluded borrower
   contributions. The GoC committed to providing US$0.43 (3.5 percent) of actual total program cost. The
   counterpart funding was for the estimated cost of building rental fees, water and electricity bills by the
   Government.

   A grant from the International Development Association (IDA) provided the funding for this project.
   The grant was for Special Drawing Rights (SDR) 8.9 million (US$12.0 million equivalent). The payment
   currency was in Euros. The final amount disbursed was US$12,362,637. The increase was due to the
   currency appreciation during the period of disbursement.




3. Relevance of Objectives

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chad Statistical Development (P159434)




Rationale
In 2017, Chad had a weak statistical system. Its Statistical Performance Index overall score was 31.7 which
fell in the lowest quintile globally and below the low-income country average of 45.4. This reflected the
paucity of reasonable quality data, an unfavorable regulatory framework, and an overall weak data
infrastructure. INSEED had limited capacity and weak human resources. These shortcomings were
identified in the Data Production and Capacity Building in Chad study that was financed by the World
Bank’s Recipient Executed Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building Project and involved an in-depth
review of INSEED’s strengths and weaknesses.

Relevance to WBG’s priorities

The weaknesses of Chad’s statistical system were documented in “Priorities for Ending Poverty and
Boosting Shared Prosperity: 2015 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD)”. It stated, “Many knowledge gaps
would need to be filled to better assess Chad’s poverty reduction progress, in particular through the timely
production and dissemination of statistical data” (p. 50). It also specifically noted the limited availability of
data (page i, para. 4) and weak capacity of Chad’s statistical system (p. 50). Thus, PDO1’s and PDO2’s
focus on statistical capacity development, data collection, processing, and dissemination and are directly
relevant to the country’s needs. The SCD also stated that given Chad’s fragile context, having higher
frequency data to monitor poverty are especially important for maintaining a current understanding of the
situation as economic conditions can (and did) change rapidly. Moreover, the SCD noted that “national
accounts are a real problem in the country. They are produced very irregularly and are still not applying the
full 1993 Systems of National Accounts. In addition, the structural statistics needed for national accounts
are poor.”

PDO 1 and PDO2 were aligned with theme 1 of the CPF FY16-FY20 (p. 22, Table 4): “Strengthening
management of public resources.” The World Bank underscored the relevance of microdata, and a subset
of the knowledge gaps from the SCD, such as the need for high quality data on poverty dynamics and
consumption surveys with a strong agriculture component (p. 22 para. 74). The CPF also included an
operation “poverty surveys and tools to monitor poverty on a high-frequency basis.” PDOs 1 and 2 were
directly relevant as they sought to establish the missing link by enabling INSEED to collect better poverty
and national accounts data, and through statistical production, facilitate more efficient management of
public resources by GoC. The project was also aligned with CPF FY23-24 which was “current” at the time of
project closing and was substantially informed by the data collected under the project on monetary and
multidimensional poverty, social statistics, and national accounts.

The timing of this project was opportune since, concurrently, the Bank was financing a regional statistics
project titled the Regional Program to Harmonize and Modernize Living Conditions Surveys Project in eight
member states of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU). Though Chad is not a
member of WAEMU, it was willing to collaborate with them and benefit from adopting similar standards,
techniques, technology and participate in training.

The choice of the IPF instrument was appropriate as it served as a channel for global knowledge transfer
and TA to build national statistical capacity. The project addressed critical gaps in Chad’s statistical system
though its three components: (i) strengthening institutional capacity and developing human resources, (ii)
data collection, processing, analysis and dissemination, and (iii) project management and improving of IT
infrastructure. The choice of these components was informed by assessments, high-level government input,
and international good practice. The PAD notes (para. 45) that capacity building was built into each

                                                                                                       Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Chad Statistical Development (P159434)



               component of the project since “learning by doing” (i.e., through data outputs) had been found to be more
               effective than providing TA alone.

               Relevance to the country’s development agenda

               The PDO was central to the GoC’s development agenda as reflected in the National Development Plan
               (NDP) (2017 –2021) and the first National Strategy of Development Statistics (NSDS1) 2011-2015. The
               NDP noted the importance of timely and high-quality statistics in the monitoring and evaluation of the
               National Development Strategy. GoC’s objective in NSDS1 was to build the institutions, structures, and
               human resources necessary for the statistics system and to create a robust and effective statistics
               infrastructure. However, the implementation of this strategy was delayed due to insufficient financing. In
               addition, the project supported the development of the NSDS2 (2022–2026).[1] NSDS2 was aligned with
               the NDP which aimed to, among other things, strengthen institutional, material, and human capacities of
               INSEED; operationalize the National Council of Statistics and implement a National Statistical Coordination
               Strategy; and improve Chad’s M&E system of public policies.

               [1] The final evaluation of NSDS1 (2011-2015) was carried out in May 2017. The development of NSDS2
               started in October 2018. A first version of NSDS2 covered the period 2019 -2023 but this was later revised
               to cover 2022- 2026 due to delays in the approval of this strategy by the government.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Strengthen capacity of the national statistics institute to collect and process data with improved quality and
                             frequency.

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change (TOC) for this objective held that the following inputs: improved institutional capacity of
                             INSEED, development of human resources, workforce training for INSEED staff, recruitment and retention of
                             qualified staff, and drafting of a NSDS2, would result in the improvement of the following outputs: legal
                             framework for statistics, strategic assessment of INSEED’s structure and personnel, increasing the pool of
                             statistical candidates, increasing qualified staff, and the completion of NSDS2. These outputs were expected
                             to contribute to the achievement of PDO1 by strengthening INSEED’s capacity to fill data gaps. The TOC for
                             PDO1 also held that implementation of two consumption surveys, and improving national accounts would
                             result in the availability of two consumption databases, rebased CPI, and revised national accounts.
                             These outputs would, in turn, contribute to the objective of improving statistical production.



                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Chad Statistical Development (P159434)



The PAD included a cursory [JC1] [SS2] sketch of a TOC (Annex I, p. 35). The ICR constructed a more
thorough TOC (p. 10). Although the ICR’s TOC presents an easy-to-understand list of activities/inputs, it is
not fully in alignment with the Results Framework.

Inputs:

The key activities (inputs) were:

(i) Legal and institutional reform:

      Institutional reform of INSEED
      Drafting a new NSDS2

(ii) Human resource development, management, and training:

      Development of human resources (i.e., workforce pipeline development)
      Workforce training for INSEED staff
      Recruitment and retention of qualified staff

(iii) Surveys and improving statistics:

      Implementation of ECOSIT 4 (Survey on Household Living Conditions and Poverty in Chad or
          “Enquête sur les Conditions de vie des ménages et la Pauvreté au Tchadd”)
      Implementation of ECOSIT 5
      Improving macroeconomic statistics

The project’s achievements under PDO1 were evaluated with four Development Objective Indicators (DOI)
and four intermediate results indicators (IRI). The project’s DOI for monitoring implementation of the inputs for
PDO1 were as follows:

DOI 1: National Strategy for Development of Statistics (NSDS2) is drafted and adopted.

Rationale: The project supported the preparation of the NSDS2 which covered 2022-2026 and was informed
by NSDS1. NSDS2 was needed to identify strategic areas, future priorities and a roadmap for achieving
them. A new NSDS would help to sustain Government’s support for the national statistical system to produce
high-quality statistics in a timely fashion.

DOI 2: Number of scholarships awarded for advanced degrees in statistics.

Rationale: The project financed scholarships with the aim of contributing to strengthening INSEED’s weak
human capacity by increasing the pool of qualified job applicants. Scholarships were given to students to
attend one of the francophone regional statistics schools to gain specialized knowledge of statistics that they
could apply to better collection, processing and archiving of data.

DOI 3: Number of household surveys completed.




                                                                                                   Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Chad Statistical Development (P159434)



Rationale: The project supported two household consumption surveys that were necessary for: (i) collection
of updated socioeconomic data including poverty statistics to close knowledge gaps, (ii) providing INSEED
two opportunities to implement a large household survey and thereby consolidating design
and implementation knowledge acquired from the first household survey, (iii) compliance with the international
guidance on suggested frequency of HHS data collection (every 3 years), and (iv) assisting with the
calculation of national accounts.

DOI 4: The number of household surveys implemented with improved data collection methods and
computerized data checking to improve data quality.

Rationale: Replace outdated data collection methods with modern approaches to data collection, processing,
and archiving to secure higher quality data for policy purposes. The modern data collection methods had
cheaper supervision costs, fewer data entry errors and oversight, and quicker turnaround time for data
processing.

The project’s four intermediate results indicators (IRI) under Objective 1 are as follows:

IRI 1: Regulatory reform is drafted and ready for adoption.

Rationale: At the time of project inception, the national statistical system was regulated by the 1999 statistics
law which established INSEED as a public institute but did not allow it financial independence to compensate
statisticians at market rates, and recruit and retain technical staff.

IRI 2: Number of INSEED staff trained.

Rationale: Staff training was one pathway to reduce INSEED’s human capacity constraint.

IRI 3: Number of students to complete the statistics entrance exam preparation program.

Rationale: The expectation was that by training Chadian students to pass exams for regional statistics
programs, they would return to Chad’s labor market upon graduation, thus increasing the labor pool of trained
and qualified statisticians that INSEED could recruit from to improve the quality of its staff.

IRI 4: Rebasing of CPI measure using expanded geographic coverage of price data collection.

Rationale: As the CPI survey did not cover rural areas, the project supported making it more representative
by rebasing it using expanded geographic coverage and collection of price data.

Outputs:

The project was broadly successful in achieving PDO1.

Two legal and institutional reforms related to PDO1 were achieved.

      NSDS 2 was drafted and technically validated on August 28, 2019, with the involvement of line
       ministries, civil society, and development partners. It was adopted by the National Statistics Council
       on July 13, 2021, and the Cabinet on October 14, 2021. [Achievement of DOI1 was substantial]



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Chad Statistical Development (P159434)




      A new Statistical Law and implementing decrees was drafted and adopted. Specifically, the
       implementing decrees related to the operations of INSEED, the National Statistical Council (NSC),
       and the National Statistical Development Fund (NSDF) became effective. The 1999 statistics law
       which established INSEED as a public institute did not grant it an independent governance structure, a
       separate line item in the budget or the right to compensate employees in accordance with their
       technical qualifications. The new Statistical Law appropriately modified these
       deficiencies. (Achievement of IRI1 was substantial).

       The human resource development, management and training reforms fully achieved their targets but
       their contribution to PDO1 is less certain.

      The Statistics entrance exam preparation program was implemented. It supported the training of
       students who were preparing for the entry exam for statistical schools. The number of students who
       completed the exam preparation was 336 which exceeded the target by 34 percent. [IRI3].
       (Achievement of IRI3 was substantial).
      37 students were awarded scholarships for advanced degrees in statistics, overshooting the target of
       30 (DOI3) although there is no data to confirm whether they completed their degrees. In addition to
       the scholarships, the project strengthened the capacity of INSEED by supporting the recruitment of 15
       statisticians who benefitted from scholarships and successfully completed their studies. The impact of
       the capacity building to improve the technical quality of INSEED’s human resources is strong
       [Achievement of DOI2 was substantial. (Achievement of DOI2 was substantial).
      A substantial number of INSEED staff were trained in accordance with INSEED-specific training needs
       and programs that boosted INSEED’s human resources, especially because the trained staff had an
       opportunity to implement what they had learned through the upcoming surveys. The project trained
       121 staff, exceeding the target by 142 percent (IRI2). The project successfully executed several
       capacity-building training events for INSEED staff in accordance with the training plan that was
       developed as part of the project. The training also included WAEMU-sponsored capacity-building
       trainings for the household surveys. (The achievement of IRI2 was substantial).

Surveys and improving statistics:

      Two household surveys, ECOSIT 4 and ECOSIT 5 (Survey on Household Living Conditions and
       Poverty in Chad) were as implemented and met the target (DOI3). Four rounds of high-frequency
       surveys (including two rounds with a subsample of refugee households) to monitor the impact of
       COVID-19 on households were also implemented under the project. The survey data helped close the
       knowledge gaps in socioeconomic and poverty statistics. In addition, the surveys trained INSEED’s
       staff in consolidating design and implementation knowledge acquired from ECOSIT4 and applying it in
       the implementation of ECOSIT5. (Achievement of DOI3 was substantial).
      Two household surveys (ECOSIT 4 and ECOSIT 5) were implemented with improved data collection
       methods and computerized data checking to improve data quality. Four rounds of high-frequency
       surveys (including two rounds with a subsample of refugee households) to monitor the impact of
       COVID-19 on households were also completed. (Achievement of DOI4 was substantial).
      Improving macroeconomic statistics - The CPI was rebased using expanded geographic coverage of
       price data collection in three cities (IRI4). (The achievement of IRI4 was substantial).

Outcome:


                                                                                               Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Chad Statistical Development (P159434)



Overall efficacy under the targets for PDO1 is rated Substantial as the project significantly improved
INSEED’s institutional framework, data collection and data production capacity, and data outputs with
improved frequency.

The project contributed substantially to improvements in INSEED’s human resource development through
direct staff training and hiring of statisticians trained through the scholarship programs. This achievement
occurred despite the difficult country context of fragility. The four DOIs and four IRIs were Substantially
achieved. INSEED made good progress collecting and processing data with improved frequency. In addition
to the two scheduled rounds of household surveys, four rounds of high-frequency surveys (including two
rounds with a subsample of refugee households) to monitor the impact of COVID-19 on households were also
implemented and processed. These high-frequency surveys helped expand INSEED’s capacity to conduct
phone surveys for data collection. PDO1’s efficacy would have been higher if there was an indicator for
national accounts more broadly compared to only the CPI to indicate progress on better macroeconomic
statistics.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthen the capacity of the national statistics institute (INSEED) to disseminate data with improved
timeliness.

Rationale
The TOC for this objective held that the improvement of IT infrastructure was critical for the development of
an online data access portal, an offline access point, and INSEED staff trained in data anonymization and
archiving. Access to these outputs would also facilitate the dissemination of data by INSEED staff in a timely
manner.

Inputs:

The key activity of “improvement of IT infrastructure for data dissemination” was aligned to PDO2.

DOI 5: Dissemination of statistical abstracts, key findings, and updated poverty statistics to take place within
12 months of data cleaning for each round of household surveys.

Rationale: Improvements in the timely publication of the findings of the newly collected poverty and national
accounts datasets would provide evidence for policy making. Delayed publication of data collection, analysis,
and findings would reduce the usefulness and relevance of data as well as the credibility of INSEED in the
eyes of both the government and the public.

DOI 6: The number of datasets from household surveys implemented under the project that are publicly
released within 12 months of data cleaning.



                                                                                                    Page 9 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Chad Statistical Development (P159434)



Rationale: IIncreased and timely public access to anonymized microdata would provide information and
socioeconomic data for various stakeholders in the government, donors, academic, nongovernmental
organizations, and civil society sectors. Better data would also help to increase government accountability
and transparency.

IRI 5: Web based data portal available to the public.

Rationale: This would aid in increasing data access, data dissemination and use, and expand the influence of
statistical evidence in public debate and public accountability. Good quality survey data are important inputs
for research and analytics.

IRI 6: Annual production of a data user feedback report for the project steering committee.

Rationale: The user feedback report would be based upon data gathered from a short pop-up survey of online
users of the web portal. The survey results informed recommendations for improving the usefulness
of INSEED products. Furthermore, the survey was intended to establish a feedback loop between users and
producers of data.

Outputs:

    1. The project was successful in achieving the targets set for the four indicators (2 DOIs and 2 IRIs).
       ECOSIT 4 and ECOSIT5 results were validated during a workshop within 12 months (DOI5).
    2. ECOSIT 4 dataset was publicly released and posted on the data portal within 12 months (DOI6).
    3. An online data access portal was developed, and data was posted on it within 12 months (IRI5).
    4. A data user feedback report was produced and published on INSEED’s website.

These four outputs align well with PDO2 which focused on data dissemination.

ECOSIT 5’s data collection, processing and production were completed in December 2022. The data is
expected to be publicly released and posted on the data portal upon the validation of the poverty estimates.

In addition, there were two other useful outputs, namely (i) the development of an offline access point, and (ii)
INSEED staff trained in data archiving and anonymization were mapped to PDO2 but did not have any DOI
indicators (ICR, Figure 1).

There were three outputs that aligned with the activity of “improvement of IT infrastructure for data
dissemination.” The online and offline data access points were new developments in Chad. While the web
based data portal made survey data available to the public, it was only one of the three outputs that had a
specific DOI/IRI. There was no information on whether data was downloaded from the website. The offline
data access point was not clearly described so it is unclear what if any data were released, whether there was
any demand for the products, in what form(s) and whether this access point was easily accessible. The
successful training of staff to archive data and anonymize was important and a prerequisite to sharing survey
data, especially online. This appears to have been done but information on whether the capacity developed
was sustained is lacking.

Outcomes:



                                                                                                  Page 10 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Chad Statistical Development (P159434)



                            Overall efficacy under the targets for PDO2 is rated Substantial. The objective of improving INSEED’s
                            capacity to disseminate data in a timely manner was achieved and all four indicators met their targets. The
                            two large consumption surveys (ECOSIT 4 and ECOSIT 5) were validated for quality. ECOSIT 4 was publicly
                            released on the web portal making microdata on Chadian households available to the public within 12 months
                            of the survey. Though ECOSIT 5 was completed in December 2022, as of late-November 2023 its public
                            release is pending validation of poverty estimates. In addition, the data user feedback report was also
                            completed. The Financing Agreement Results Framework did not include an indicator for the quarterly
                            economic summaries.

                            The preparation of quarterly economic summaries was listed as an output in the Financing Agreement but
                            was not included as an indicator in the results framework.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project’s efficacy is rated Substantial as both PDOs achieved their main DOI and intermediate
                            indicator targets and were rated Substantial. The project achieved expansion of statistical capacity as evident
                            from INSEED’s implementation of two complex consumption surveys that used modern CAPI technology, four
                            unplanned high frequency surveys during the COVID-19 pandemic using phones, timely release of ECOSIT 4
                            within 12 months of completion, a more robust CPI, and dissemination of data online and on time. Simply
                            collecting and posting survey data online does not naturally mean that the posted data is also of better
                            quality. The extensive use of the poverty and other socioeconomic data by the World Bank for the Chad SCD
                            (Report No. 169037 – TD), and the Government for the Voluntary National Report, and report on monitoring
                            of the National Development Plan 2024-2028 are examples of its perceived quality. The Statistical
                            Performance Indicator increased from 31.7 in 2017 to 38.5 in 2019, reflecting improvements in data service
                            and data source. The project would have benefited from incorporating a direct measure of usage of data, for
                            example, number of data downloads or demand for offline access point products.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The project does not easily lend itself to cost-effectiveness analysis but the ICR could have done more to
   explore this issue. The ICR notes correctly that the collection, processing, production, and dissemination of
   official statistics are public goods and financed by the government and donors with no expectation of earning a
   financial return. However, one approach to determining efficient resource management at the project component

                                                                                                                             Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Chad Statistical Development (P159434)



level is to apply international cost comparisons for selected activities (such as household surveys). The average
cost of data collection for ECOSIT 4 was $492 per household and included data collection, processing,
production, and dissemination. For ECOSIT 5 the unit cost of data collection, processing and production was
$393. The cost per surveyed household in similar countries ranged from $243 in Benin to $355 in Guinea-
Bissau. Thus, survey implementation and dissemination cost are high in Chad.

The project did not experience a cost overrun. Competitive bidding on contracts helped to contain costs. The
project also benefited from an appreciated exchange rate which, according to the ICR, allowed additional
statistical activities to be financed.

The project closure was delayed by nine months. The extension was requested by the government to complete
remaining activities, especially the implementation of ECOSIT 5. Though ECOSIT 5’s data collection,
processing, and production were completed by the project end-date, the data was not disseminated due to
pending completion and validation of the consumption aggregate and poverty estimates.

Procurement and financial management of the project led to delays in implementation of activities. The ICR
notes that the main reasons were: “(a) the PIU experienced some disruptions when the fiduciary specialists of
the project resigned; (b) the COVID-19 pandemic delayed data collection during the poverty survey; (c) the
WAEMU Commission postponed the start date of the harmonized survey that negatively affected the timeline of
the survey in each participating country, including Chad; (d) the political crisis in the country that led to the
launch of the World Bank’s Operations Policy (OP 7.30) in April 2021 also increased the delay in the start of the
household survey’s fieldwork; (e) contracts beyond the threshold set at CFAF 10 million had to be approved by
senior officials in the Presidential office; and (f) underestimation of the costs of some activities such as internet
connectivity delayed the development of the data access portal for the public,” (ICR, p. 21-22, para. 59).

In sum, the project responded to the delays to ensure completion of most project activities (except the
dissemination of ECOSIT 5 data) plus additional statistical activities to benefit from the currency appreciation.
The procurement and financial management practices appear to have been reasonable with several factors
leading to the delay of the closure date beyond the control of INSEED. The project remained within the original
budget envelope and used the windfall from the currency changes appreciation for statistical development.
Hence, project efficiency is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                         Not Applicable



                                                                                                       Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Chad Statistical Development (P159434)



* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s objective of strengthening INSEED’s statistical capacity to collect, process, produce, and
disseminate data with improved quality, frequency and timeliness was relevant to Chad’s development
challenges and the World Bank’s priorities and is rated Substantial. The overall Statistical Capacity Index (SCI)
score for Chad rose from 48.9 in 2017 to 54.4 in 2020. The SCI prepared by the World Bank is a composite
score assessing a country’s statistical system based on a diagnostic framework assessing three components:
methodology, data sources, and periodicity and timeliness. The increase of the score for Chad is explained by
improvements noticed in the methodology (score rose from 20 in 2017 to 30 in 2020), periodicity, and timeliness
(score rose from 77 in 2017 to 83 in 2020 (ICR para 53)).

The objective of the project continues to remain relevant even after project closure since the sharing of
accessible, timely and quality data is especially important for policy making in a context of economic volatility,
fragility, and widespread poverty. Overall project efficacy was Substantial since the government successfully
completed consumption surveys, national accounts improvements, and better data dissemination. The
project's efficiency is rated Substantial due to remaining within the original project cost, reasonable
procurement and financial management, and moderate delay despite factors such as the COVID19 pandemic
which was beyond GoC’s control.

Given Substantial relevance, Substantial efficacy and Substantial efficiency, the overall outcome rating is
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR highlights two main risks to the sustainability of development outcomes. They are:

    1. The lack of funding for implementation of the institutional reforms post-completion of the project.
       The new Statistical Law initiated the establishment of an institutional and functional legislative
       framework that ensures the ongoing production of high-quality statistics; consolidated INSEED’s
       administrative autonomy and financial independence; strengthen the institutional capacities of the
       national statistical system; and established the National Statistical Development Fund (NSDF) to
       finance INSEED. The ICR calls for the Government to allocate more funds to the NSDF, otherwise
       INSEED will need continued donor support to sustain improvements (such as broader coverage of
       the CPI) and to fill existing data gaps.

    1. Retain and increase qualified human resources at INSEED. During the project, INSEED recruited
       15 statisticians and increased staff participation in regional technical workshops. To retain these
       higher skilled staff, INSEED needs to change its human resource policy to ensure they receive
       competitive salaries and provide them with a career path. However, the government has not yet


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chad Statistical Development (P159434)



      adopted the necessary changes (called “personnel status”) to human resource management required
      for this to occur.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design was informed by (i) an assessment of the strengths and weaknesses of the national
  statistical system (financed by the Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building Project - Data Production
  and Capacity Building in Chad); (ii) in depth discussion with government counterparts; and (iiii)
  international good practice on what combination of activities are most beneficial for advancing statistical
  capacity – which is combining technical assistance and training with actual outputs (i.e., statistical
  products).

  The project was well-designed to address some of the main challenges facing Chad’s statistical system.
  The project’s focus on institutional reform, capacity development, statistical outputs, and data sharing
  were aimed at improving evidence for policymaking and greater government accountability. Furthermore,
  regional cooperation with the WAEMU project from inception played an important role in enhancing
  quality-at-entry by harmonizing consumption surveys and poverty estimation methods, reducing risk of
  government interference, and opening up opportunities for statistical training.

  The project design attended to the sustainability of results through (i) the support to a new strategy
  (NSDS2 2022-2025), (ii) investment in INSEED's human resources, (iii) the legal establishment of NSDF
  which consolidates resources directed to INSEED, and (iv) promoting (though not succeeding in) the
  adoption of a human resource management management practice that included staff qualifications-based
  compensation. Moreover, the project was designed to ensure that INSEED -- despite its initial weak
  institutional capacity -- was able to implement a project with several different statistical products as well
  as carry out M&E.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank conducted regular supervision missions (twice per year, plus the mid-term review), regular
 project updates and periodic project implementation support missions. According to the ICR, these were
 necessary to (i) facilitate effective project implementation and ensure value for money, transparency, and
 accountability, (ii) resolve issues that came up during the course of project implementation, and (iii) provide
 training and advice to the client, including in the areas of fiduciary, to support staff involved in project
 implementation. The Bank showed a strong commitment to successful project implementation and staff and
 other experts based in Ndjamena and Washington, DC made themselves available to INSEED to provide
 any necessary support needed.


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chad Statistical Development (P159434)



 Project supervision was carried out well above specifications spelt out in the project Financing Agreement.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Results Framework provided a useful method of tracking the PDO and outcomes; however, it was not
 based on a clear theory of change. A TOC table/figure was constructed for the ICR. The development
 indicators (DOI/IRI) were broadly relevant, measurable, and time-bound (annual, or by end of project), and
 baselines and targets were well-defined. However, there were some weaknesses in the M&E design: (i) it
 lacked clarity in the classification of direct and intermediate output indicators, and (ii) select DOI/IRI
 indicators lacked comprehensiveness as discussed below.

 Classification of indicators: Under PDO1, “strengthening capacity of the national statistics institute to collect
 and process data with improved quality and frequency,” included four DOIs and four IRIs. DOI #2 focused
 on the number of scholarships awarded for advanced degrees in statistics is not indicative of the progress
 made toward PDO1. Though scholarships can be useful in increasing the future pool of qualified applicants
 for jobs at INSEED, they may not increase INSEED’s capacity either directly or with certainty.

 Lack of comprehensiveness of selected indicators:

 The M&E design had three major gaps: (i) DOI(s) for national accounts (beyond the IRI for the CPI), (ii) a
 direct measure of capacity which was an important part of PDO1, and (iii) inclusion of an indicator
 measuring data usage.

 Firstly, the DOI/IRI captured only some of the outputs of the project since the project decided to focus on
 M&E of components rather than sub-components. Though this was easier for INSEED to monitor given its
 weak capacity and lack of experience with M&E, many of the project’s results were not captured. For
 example, except for the CPI, the DOI/IRIs did not capture regular annual production of national accounts,
 application of the 1993 Systems of National Accounts, and the rebasing of the national accounts, regular
 production of the production of new indices such as Construction Cost Index, the Turnover Index, and the
 Industrial Production Price Index. The lack of inclusion of improved National Accounts in the M&E
 framework represents a missed opportunity to highlight one of the long-standing and significant data gaps
 in Chad (as noted in the SCD).

 Secondly, given the importance the project placed on increasing the capacity of the national statistics
 institute (INSEED), there is little discussion in the ICR on how capacity was measured. There is a literature
 on this topic that the PAD could have drawn on, for example, Measuring Capacity (UNDP 2010). The lack



                                                                                                      Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chad Statistical Development (P159434)



 of focus on a holistic assessment of M&E capacity represents a missed opportunity for the project to
 highlight many of the positive actions it helped the GoC to take.

 Thirdly, M&E design could have been improved by the inclusion of an indicator which measures data
 usage, such as from the online portal. This would be a better measure since increased data accessibility
 does not guarantee that data is used. Possible indicators could include data downloads from the online
 portal, use of data in official publications (such as the development plan), or projects that relied on the data.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Results Framework (pages 28-32) incorporated baseline and target values for all the outcome and
  intermediate indicators. The ICR reported achieved values.

  According to the ICR, the PIU hired an M&E specialist who supported the project coordinator in
  monitoring and evaluating the project’s activities and results. The PIU prepared annual work plans and
  quarterly progress reports that were used to monitor project implementation closely. Specifically, the
  progress reports summarized recent developments and included information on budget, capacity
  building, data production and dissemination, procurement, and financial management.

  The World Bank monitored progress in project implementation through regular supervision missions and
  reports (including 11 ISRs, 4 audit reports, and Aide Memoires).

  In addition, a table “Key Outputs by Component” (ICR, p. 38-39) in Annex 1 of the ICR compared the
  actual achievements of the project with the project components in the Financing Agreement. The
  table shows that there was significant and in-depth monitoring of project implementation beyond the
  Results Framework.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (p. 27) states that M&E reports were used to provide evidence of achievement of project
  development outcomes. The PIU progress and annual reports and the Bank’s ISRs and Aide Memoires
  complemented each other since the PIU reports highlighted implementation challenges and provided an
  update on issues raised by previous supervision missions’ ISRs and Aide Memoires.

  The Government used the data to produce several national reports including the Voluntary National
  Report (VNR) presented at the high level political forum on sustainable development held in 2020
  presented online, the report on the monitoring of the National Development Plan (NDP 2017-2021) and
  the preparation of the new National Development Plan 2024-2028, the report on the multidimensional
  poverty index in Chad.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

                                                                                                      Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Chad Statistical Development (P159434)




10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project did not trigger any environmental or social safeguards.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The project performed well in terms of financial management. The PIU had a financial management
   specialist and accountant. Processes were put in place such as quarterly IFRs that provided reliable
   information on financial management of the project. Fiduciary compliance was furthered through giving
   priority to competitive bidding on contracts.

   The ICR states that “there were no delays in the submission of annual audit reports on the project financial
   statements to the World Bank.” The project performed well in terms of disbursement: contract payments
   were made on time and all funds were disbursed at project completion.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported in the ICR.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR offers several lessons with which IEG concurs. They are:



                                                                                                  Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Chad Statistical Development (P159434)



     1. The project was well designed as evidenced by the successful capacity development of
        INSEED. This was achieved through INSEED’s “learning by doing”, that is, implementing,
        processing, producing and disseminating survey data. The project was designed to have
        INSEED implement and process consumption surveys with an agricultural module, make the
        CPI more representative by collecting rural data, rebase the national accounts, carryout
        national accounts related surveys, and quarterly economic summaries, and disseminate
        data. Technical assistance, assessments, and training were part of the package of statistical
        products. This lesson aligns with international experience on building statistical capacity
        through data production.
     2. The project succeeded in collecting useful data and generating statistical products because
        of a comprehensive package of support provided to INSEED including TA, equipment and
        ICT improvements, investments in human resource development within INSEED, and close
        collaboration with INSEED management and GoC, more broadly. The combination of these
        multiple inputs speaks to the careful consideration given to the institutional, human resource,
        and technological input requirements as well as the importance of ownership of the project
        by INSEED.

An additional lesson identified by IEG is:

     1. A strong M&E system within INSEED, effective World Bank supervision, and responsive in-
         country technical Bank consultants were key factors supporting the completion, processing,
         and dissemination of survey data on time. This was despite the initial weak capacity and
         fragile country conditions. INSEED had detailed annual work plans and progress reports to
         monitor the status of the project implementation on a day-to-day basis. These reports
         highlighted implementation challenges and provided updates on issues, recommendations,
         and progress on actions agreed with previous World Bank supervision missions. The World
         Bank’s local office in Chad maintained continuous dialogue with the authorities and provided
         them with timely advice on challenges impeding project implementation.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides an in-depth discussion of the project’s design and implementation processes that support the
ratings. The narrative has detailed information on activities, outputs (e.g., surveys) and project implementation
(such as government actions taken to facilitate the achievement of objectives) which allowed better
understanding of what was accomplished by the project. The ICR contained several useful summary tables that
allowed the reader to quickly absorb some of the main points of the narrative. It also provided a good
explanation of why the project required an extension, what was achieved by INSEED, and useful lessons
learned.

The ICR could have been stronger if it explored pertinent topics such as (i) how could the project have been
designed and performed better; (ii) what were the additional outputs resulting from the currency appreciation

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Chad Statistical Development (P159434)



and how did they align with the PDO; and (iii) what was the best way to achieve sustainability in the national
statistics system given Chad's need for fiscal consolidation. The ICR did not elaborate on why the Results
Framework was so narrowly formulated though this was explained by the team during the interview; and (iv)
there are numerous grammatical errors throughout the ICR.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 19
