     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Eastern Ukraine: 3R Project (P172348)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023704

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P172348                                     Eastern Ukraine: 3R Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Ukraine                                     Social Sustainability and Inclusion


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-91750                                  30-Nov-2025                                         99,571,662.69

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Nov-2020                                 31-Dec-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                              99,571,662.69                                              0.00

 Actual                                          99,571,662.69                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Maria Shkaratan             Christopher David             Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was “To improve transport connectivity and promote agricultural
   sector recovery in project areas with the active engagement of conflict-affected communities” (Legal
   Agreement, page 6). The PDO was stated identically in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (PAD, page 1).

   The PDO was revised as follows: “To improve the living conditions of IDPs by providing them with short term
   financial assistance to respond to urgent, basic needs.”


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Eastern Ukraine: 3R Project (P172348)



   For the purposes of this Implementation Completion Report (ICR) review, the objective will be assessed as
   follows:

   For the original PDO:

   PDO1: To improve transport connectivity in project areas with the active engagement of conflict-affected
   communities.

   PDO2: To promote agricultural sector recovery in project areas with the active engagement of conflict-affected
   communities.

   For the revised PDO:

   PDO1: To improve the living conditions of IDPs by providing them with short term financial assistance to
   respond to urgent, basic needs.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  07-Jun-2022

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Original components

   Component 1 RECONNECT - Road Investments to Link Rural Communities to Processing, Markets, and
   Services (cost at appraisal: US$65.0 million; actual cost: US$0.522 million) was to include road network
   rehabilitation to integrate agricultural areas of Luhansk Oblast with the network of Ukraine and the EU
   Trans-European Network and connect rural communities to agricultural service centers. The component
   also was to finance related technical assistance, capacity building, and community engagement.

   Component 2 RECOVER - Agriculture Investments to Support Sector Recovery and Modernization (cost at
   appraisal: US$32.0 million; actual cost: US$0 million) was to complement the connectivity investments of
   Component 1 through agricultural investments by financing the design and construction of an agricultural
   hub in or around Starobilsk City; a regional agricultural testing and food safety laboratory in the Luhansk
   Oblast; and the piloting of productive smallholder farming and value chain development in the Luhansk
   Oblast.

   Component 3 REVITALIZE - Implementation Support Platform, including communications, community,
   youth, and private sector engagement (cost at appraisal: US$3.0 million; actual cost: US$0.053 million) was

                                                                                                  Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Eastern Ukraine: 3R Project (P172348)



   to provide an implementation support platform for Project investments, promote transparent state-citizen
   dialogue, and inform communities and other stakeholders in Project areas about the Project.

   Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) (US$0)

   2. Changes in objectives, components, and indicators during implementation

   There was a significant change in the Project’s objectives and components following Russia’s invasion of
   Ukraine on February 24, 2022. The invasion made the original PDO and the continuation of the ongoing
   activities no longer viable. The Project was restructured, with the following changes:

   - The PDO was revised; the results framework (RF) was replaced accordingly; and the closing date was
   modified.

   - The Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) was activated on June 7, 2022 to respond to
   the needs of the Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs), utilizing an existing social program to provide cash
   transfers for basic needs including food, health care, and energy. The activation of the CERC allowed for a
   reallocation of all uncommitted Project funds from Components 1, 2, and 3 to Component 4 (the CERC).
   These were transferred to the State Treasury Service of Ukraine.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The appraisal estimate was US$100.0 million, and the actual disbursement was US$99.575
   million. The disbursed amount included: (i) US$99.0 million transferred to the government of Ukraine under
   the CERC for emergency response; (ii) US$521,925, the cost of the Component 3 activities prior to the
   CERC activation; and (iii) US$52,810, the cost of two contracts tendered to facilitate the activation of the
   CERC. The amount of US$425,265 was unused and returned to the World Bank. (ICR, page 11-12)

   Project Financing: The Project was financed by an IBRD loan.

   Borrower/Recipient contribution: There was no Borrower’s contribution.

   Project Dates: The Project was approved on November 6, 2020 and became effective on March 25, 2021.
   The original closing date was November 30, 2025. The Project was restructured once, on June 7, 2022,
   when due to the Russia’s invasion of Ukraine of February 24, 2022, the Project’s funds were approved to be
   reallocated for emergency response. The Project’s actual closure was on December 31, 2022.

   Split Evaluation: Due to the invasion of Ukraine by Russia, the Project’s PDO was revised and the CERC
   was activated. Therefore, this evaluation will undertake a split evaluation approach.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Eastern Ukraine: 3R Project (P172348)



Country and Sector Context. At the Project’s approval, Ukraine was dealing with the aftermath of Russia’s
aggression towards Eastern Ukraine in 2014, where over five million people were affected: the estimated
14,300 deaths included nearly 3,500 civilians, in addition to damaged infrastructure, interrupted markets
and services, restricted movements, and lost employment. Despite the Minsk II ceasefire agreement
(February 2015), there were daily hostilities along the border between the Government-Controlled Areas
(GCAs) and Non-Government-Controlled areas (NGCAs) in the Donbas Region. A new conflict zone
emerged in 2018 around the Sea of Azov. While agriculture was critical for the regional economy, the
conflict of 2014 had a significant negative impact on the sector. Surveys of 2019 showed the decreasing
levels of trust in local institutions and citizens’ low opinion of the level of accountability of government
institutions.

Relevance to Government Strategies at approval. The government’s reform agenda for Eastern Ukraine
included prioritization of outreach and support to conflict-affected communities. The Project was aligned
with the Luhansk Regional Development Strategy of 2016-2020, which highlighted agricultural development
as a key objective, including increased productivity and efficiency and facilitated agricultural processing and
access to markets. In October 2019, a key initiative - the Mariupol’s Investment Forum, with participants
from the central government, local administrations, private sector, and international organizations -
underscored the government’s commitment to promote investment, economic opportunity, and growth of
the region.

Relevance to the World Bank Group's (WBG’s) Assistance Strategies at approval. The Project was
loosely aligned with the World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 2017-2021, specifically, with
the second Objective under the CPF’s Focus Area 3 Efficiency and Inclusiveness of Social Service
Delivery, which was formulated as Increase of the Targeting of Social Assistance, including in the conflict-
affected communities of Eastern Ukraine. While key parts of the design identified the service dimension of
the activities, there is only a cursory connection to this aspect of the strategy. The Project was also aligned
with the CPF’s cross-cutting issues such as public administration reform and citizen engagement, but again
this did not align well across the various activities committed in the strategy. The Project did respond to the
World Bank Group Strategy for Fragility, Conflict, and Violence (FCV) 2020–2025, which committed to
increasing “the effectiveness of [WBG’s] development support to both low- and middle-income countries
that are dealing with diverse challenges across the FCV spectrum, including subnational conflict.”

The Project built on the World Bank’s previous experience in Ukraine and used lessons from the following
projects: Road Sector Development Project (P149322); Accelerating Private Investment in Agriculture
Program (P166941); and Conflict Response and Recovery Pilot and Capacity Building Project (P158091),
which aimed at improving the capacity of the Ministry for Reintegration of Temporarily Occupied Territories
of Ukraine to support the development of the conflict-affected Eastern Ukraine.

Relevance to the World Bank Group's (WBG’s) Assistance Strategies at the time of Russia’s
invasion. Due to the military activities in or close to the Project areas, the Original Project was no longer
relevant. The Project was revised in response to the government’s request and was aligned both with the
government priorities (expressed in the request to the World Bank to activate the CERC on May 25, 2022),
and the WBG’s new priorities in the country.

The relevance of objectives is rated Substantial given various shortcomings in strategically linking the
objectives to the World Bank country strategy. Due to the February 2022 Russia’s military invasion; the
revised objectives were aligned with the new priorities of the government and the WBG.



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Eastern Ukraine: 3R Project (P172348)




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve transport connectivity in Project areas with the active engagement of conflict-affected
                             communities.

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change (ToC) for the Project was developed for the PAD. It showed a direct, logical causal link
                             from inputs (activities) to outputs, and to the PDO outcomes of the Project. There were three results chains.
                             The first results chain showed that the rehabilitation of roads, supported by the related technical assistance,
                             would produce the outputs of improved local roads and responsible road usage, ultimately resulting in the
                             achievement of the PDO1: improved connectivity of agricultural communities to processing facilities, market,
                             and services. The second results chain demonstrated that the agricultural investments in Luhansk oblast
                             GCAs would lead to the improvement of services, market access, and access to technology, ultimately
                             resulting in the achievement of PDO2: the recovery of the agricultural sector in Project areas. The third results
                             chain exhibited that strategic communication and engagement activities would support investment and
                             community forums and the preparation of the communication strategy, leading to the achievement of PDO3:
                             revitalized agricultural communities with increased capacity for investment decision making.

                             The ToC is logical, covers all main inputs and outputs, as well as the PDO outcomes; it also shows the links
                             from inputs to outputs, and to the PDO outcomes, thus presenting the logic of the Project. The critical
                             assumptions are also listed. However, the ToC has the following shortcoming, the intermediate outcomes are
                             missing, making it hard to understand how exactly the delivered outputs will amount to the achievement of the
                             PDO outcomes. As such, the ToC does not fully show the logic of the Project The results chain is missing the
                             expected cause-effect relationships between outputs and intermediate results and between intermediate
                             results and PDO outcomes. This makes it difficult to understand the required transformations and changes
                             required to meet the designated objective.

                             Progress toward the achievement of Objective 1:

                             At the time of the invasion, the Project had been effective for only 11 months, and less than one percent of
                             the Project funds had been disbursed. The progress toward the expected outcomes under Objective 1 was
                             negligible as no real activities had been undertaken.

                             Rating. The Project did not achieve its Objective 1 outcomes, and its efficacy rating is Negligible.




                                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Eastern Ukraine: 3R Project (P172348)




Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve the living conditions of IDPs by providing them with short term financial assistance to respond to
urgent, basic needs.

Revised Rationale
No ToC was prepared for the Revised Project. The focus of the revised project was on the urgent utilization of
the CERC to respond to the internal conflict and support relevant populations.

Outcomes:

1. Outcomes based on objective data:

- The Original Project’s remaining funds were fully transferred to Component 4 (the CERC) and further to the
State Treasury Service of Ukraine for the emergency support of the IDPs.

- PDO indicator 1: The number of individuals benefitting from the cash assistance provided by the Project was
467,930, as targeted. The target was met.

- Intermediate indicator: All requested funds were disbursed four weeks after the Government requested the
activation of the CERC, against the target of five weeks. The target was exceeded.

2. Outcomes based of the beneficiary survey

- PDO indicator 2: Percentage of beneficiaries reporting that the cash assistance improved their living
conditions was 86 percent, against the target of 90 percent. The target was almost reached.

- PDO indicator 3: Percentage of beneficiaries reporting that the cash assistance helped to reduce feelings of
stress was 89 percent, against the target of 90 percent. The target was almost reached.

- PDO indicator 4: Percentage of beneficiaries reporting that they used cash assistance for food was 57
percent, against the target of 70 percent. The target was partially achieved.

- PDO indicator 5: Percentage of beneficiaries reporting that they received their first monthly cash assistance
in less than a month after applying for it was 49 percent, against the target of 80 percent. The target was
partially achieved.

- Intermediate indicator: Percentage of beneficiaries satisfied with the response they received from the
government regarding the IDP social assistance program was 96 percent, against the target of 90 percent.
The target was exceeded.

Under Objective 1, the Revised Project achieved or exceeded most of its intended results. In the
circumstances, a rapid beneficiary survey was a useful way to track the effectiveness of the emergency
funds. While it is difficult to ascertain the impact of the funds given the on-going conflict, the CERC tool

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 15
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Eastern Ukraine: 3R Project (P172348)



                            became an important mechanism to distribute support to those in need. Thus, the objective is rated
                            Substantial.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


                            OBJECTIVE 2
                            Objective
                            To promote agricultural sector recovery in Project areas with the active engagement of conflict-affected
                            communities.

                            Rationale
                            Please see the discussion of the TOC under Objective 1, Original Project.

                            Progress towards the achievement of Objective 2:

                            At the time of the invasion, the Project had been effective for only 11 months, and less than one percent of
                            the Project funds had been disbursed. The progress towards the expected outcomes under Objective 2 was
                            negligible.

                            Rating. The Project did not achieve its Objective 2 outcomes, and its efficacy rating is Negligible.



                            Rating
                            Negligible


                            OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective
                            There was no Objective 2 in the revised Project.

                            Revised Rationale
                            NA



                            Revised Rating
                            Not Rated/Not Applicable


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY

                                                                                                                                   Page 7 of 15
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             Eastern Ukraine: 3R Project (P172348)




         Rationale
         For the Original Project, the efficacy is Negligible. None of intended outcomes was achieved under either of
         the two Original Project’s Objectives.



         Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
         Negligible                                                External shock
 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         For the Revised Project, the efficacy is Substantial. The Project achieved or exceeded most of its intended
         outcomes.

         The overall Efficacy is rated Substantial: the Original Project was at a very early implementation stage at the
         time of the emergency restructuring, and therefore the performance of the Revised Project carries a
         significantly higher weight.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



 5. Efficiency
I. Original Project

At appraisal, economic analysis was conducted for Components 1 and 2, using a discount rate of six percent
(PAD, page 34). The benefits were calculated based on the expectation that the Project’s investments would
lead to a significant improvement in the livelihoods of the beneficiaries, resulting from the increased productivity
and trade, improved revenues, and market development. The overall economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for
the Project was 41.99 percent, and each of the specific activities had a positive net present value (NPV) (the
overall NPV was not calculated). The estimated appraisal-level EIRR was significantly above the opportunity
cost of capital reflected in the discount rate of six percent, making the anticipated efficiency high. The efficiency
at closure was not estimated because the Original Project was not implemented (the disbursement level at
restructuring was below one percent).

II. Restructured Project

No economic analysis was prepared for the Restructured Project because the restructuring was implemented in
the circumstances of a military invasion.

The Restructured Project was implemented efficiently: the CERC funds were disbursed within four weeks from
the activation of the CERC, reflecting a rapid response. The ICR reported that this was made possible by a very
close collaboration between the Bank and the government, which facilitated the identification of the costs
(eligible for the CERC to finance) and the viable implementation options. The World Bank mobilized social

                                                                                                            Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Eastern Ukraine: 3R Project (P172348)



protection specialists who provided technical guidance for the assessment of the government’s social protection
mechanisms (which were to be used to distribute the funds to the beneficiaries); and the assessment was done
diligently and rapidly. According to the beneficiary survey, 65 percent of the beneficiaries found the process of
applying for financial assistance under the program “very easy”, and the mean rating was 4.39 on a scale from 1
(“difficult”) to 5 (“very easy”). However, only approximately one-half of the applicants received their cash
assistance in the first month after the application, mainly due to significant demand, which was reported by 59
percent of the respondents. (ICR, page 16-17) This shortcoming is considered to be a minor deficiency, taking
into account the ongoing war in Eastern Ukraine.

Therefore, the Project’s efficiency is rated as Substantial due to the efficient implementation of the Revised
Project, albeit with minor shortcomings.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Original Project:

Relevance of objectives: Substantial

Efficacy: Negligible

Efficiency: Substantial

Outcome: Unsatisfactory (a value of 2).

Revised Project:

Relevance of objectives: Substantial

Efficacy: Substantial


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Eastern Ukraine: 3R Project (P172348)



Efficiency: Substantial

Outcome: Satisfactory (a value of 5).

With the Original Project being rated as Unsatisfactory and the Revised Projects being rated as Satisfactory, the
Overall Project outcome rating is Satisfactory. The shares of the disbursed funds before and after restructuring
were as follows: US$0.575 million or 0.6 percent of the Project costs at closure were disbursed before the
restructuring in June 2022 and US$99.0 or 99.4 percent were disbursed after the restructuring. Considering
disbursed funds at restructurings as percentage of total disbursement at closure, the Overall Project Outcome
rating is Moderately Satisfactory: (0.006*2)+(0.994*5) = 4.982


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The Revised Project was intended to provide support to IDPs for a short-term improvement in their living
conditions. As such, it had no longer-term objectives or expectations of the sustainability of outcomes,
against which risks to development outcome would be assessed. The Project funds were to help the
displaced persons to cope with their immediate needs shortly after displacement and help them to settle in
their temporary locations and regain capacity to provide for themselves. (ICR, page 34)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The ICR reported that the World Bank team was adequately staffed: there were two task team leaders,
  one from the Social Sustainability and Inclusion global practice and the other from Transport. The team
  had sufficient technical expertise on all relevant sectors: agriculture, transportation, and social protection.
  The selection and design of road investments under Component 1 was supported through another WB-
  financed roads project (Additional Finance to the Road Sector Development Project – P176081),
  increasing the efficiency of Project implementation. Project risks were adequately identified, and
  mitigation measures were appropriate. A comprehensive economic analysis was conducted. The Project
  was gender-tagged, based on an in-depth analysis of gender gaps in the transport and agricultural
  sectors. Citizen engagement was mainstreamed across the Project components. The implementation
  arrangements supported synergy between the two agencies involved. (ICR, page 23)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory



                                                                                                      Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Eastern Ukraine: 3R Project (P172348)




b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR reported that Project implementation was diligent. Five Implementation Status and Results reports
 were prepared, documenting progress with Project implementation. The missions were mostly virtual, first
 due to the Covid-19 travel restrictions and then due to the security-related restrictions.

 The CERC activation was implemented very efficiently, in four weeks instead of the planned five weeks. It
 was led by a team with sufficient expertise, including effective use of operational advisory support in the
 use of the CERC. Social protection in FCV contexts informed the design of the Revised Project and of the
 beneficiary survey. The client acknowledged the professionalism and dedication of the Bank team,
 commenting that the “effective communication, expert support, prompt feedback on all related issues, (and)
 timely financial disbursements” were critical for a successful Project implementation. (ICR, page 23-24)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The original RF reflected the logic of Project interventions in the PAD and was sufficiently linked to the
 PDO and to the ToC. Most of the RF indicators were quantitative, and all of them were time-bound, had
 baselines and targets, and were attributable to the Project. The RF was disaggregated by gender, youth,
 veteran, and IDP beneficiaries. The Project Operations Manuals (POMs) for each implementing agency, in
 M&E sections, defined the responsibility and methodology for the measurement of each indicator, and
 provided templates for regular reporting. Semiannual progress reports were to be provided to the World
 Bank by the implementing agencies, with clearly set timelines. Surveys and community forums were
 envisioned for feedback and dialogue in relation to the implementation progress. (ICR, page 21)

 The revised RF reflected the change in the PDO and expected outcomes and outputs. The new indicators
 were to be mainly derived from the beneficiary survey, to be administered ex-post. The design of the
 revised RF was informed by good practices on cash assistance programs to IDPs, based on a review of
 other social assistance programs to IDPs, as well as other experience summarized in the World Bank’s
 Strategic Note on Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts (June 2016) and the United Nations High
 Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR’s) report on Main Outcomes of Cash Assistance In 2021: Findings
 from Post Distribution Monitoring (2021). (ICR, page 21-22)



b. M&E Implementation
  For the Revised Project, the beneficiary survey results were used to monitor progress. The survey
  sampled 2,000 beneficiaries. The sample was representative of the adult (over the age of 18) IDP

                                                                                                 Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Eastern Ukraine: 3R Project (P172348)



  population across Ukraine, with the exception of the occupied territories, by gender, age, and region. The
  sample was constructed based on a random selection of mobile phone numbers, followed by the
  screening for being: (i) a resident of the government-controlled territory of Ukraine; (ii) meeting an IDP
  status; and (iii) a beneficiary of the government social transfers program financed by the Project. (ICR,
  page 22)



c. M&E Utilization
  The revised RF was sufficient to report on the revised PDO, even given the circumstances surrounding
  the CERC activation (active hostilities, urgency of needs and ex-post restructuring). The beneficiary
  survey was used to monitor and report on results indicators; it was methodologically robust and
  executed in a timely manner. The limitation of the survey was that it was focused on understanding the
  respondents’ perceptions with regards to the financial assistance received and not aimed at examining
  the actual impact in terms of improved living conditions. The latter would not be possible considering the
  active conflict. (ICR, page 32)



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards. At appraisal, the environmental and social risks were assessed as
   Substantial. Key environmental issues were related to road construction and included: construction waste,
   noise and air pollution, hazardous materials, limitations to travel, and impact on water, soil, and air quality.
   Social risks were related to the road works, challenges in engaging the local communities and other
   stakeholders, and challenging social environment and baseline conditions in Eastern Ukraine due to
   conflict. As required, The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) with a template
   Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), a draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), a draft
   Resettlement Policy Framework, and a Labor Management Procedure were developed prior to appraisal.
   (PAD, page 36-37; ICR, page 22). However, in the light of Project restructuring, this became irrelevant
   because the restructured Project was focused on the emergency response to the needs of the IDPs in the
   situation of the Russia’s military invasion and did not finance road construction activities any longer.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. The ICR reported that financial management did not face any issues during
   implementation, nor were any issues identified in the financial audit. The beneficiary survey served as a
   performance audit, examining whether the funds were received by the beneficiaries and used for the
   intended purposes. An audit was conducted to verify that the funds were used economically, efficiently,
   and for the intended purposes. However, an audit of compliance with the Emergency Response


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Eastern Ukraine: 3R Project (P172348)



   Operations Manual, World Bank Anticorruption Guidelines, as well as environmental and social policies
   and procedures and fiduciary guidelines of the World Bank were not conducted. (ICR, pages 22-23)

   Procurement. The implementing agencies followed the specified procurement procedures. With no
   physical investments, the revised Project mainly procured services contracts, all of which were guided by
   the Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD). The main procurement issues related to
   delays in tender committee processing and decision making, and were largely due to the frequent changes
   in the project leadership and committee composition. (ICR, page 23)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                    High


12. Lessons

The following lessons were derived from the ICR (ICR, pages 25-26):

1. In FCV contexts, it is critical to have projects with a CERC in the design. This allows for a rapid
response in case of conflict-related emergencies. It was not anticipated that the Project’s CERC
would be used to respond to a national emergency at the scale of the events following Russia’s
Invasion of Ukraine. However, the Project was the only one in the country portfolio to include a
CERC, and therefore played a critical role in country-level emergency support. It was able to
promptly disburse funds to respond to the urgent needs of the country at a time when fiscal
resources diminished greatly. However, having only one project with a CERC creates a risk of an
insufficient response. The lesson is that it is important that portfolios in the countries with a high risk
of conflicts include a reasonable number of CERCs.

2. The CERC’s design for the Project could have been more technical. At the time of the CERC’s
activation and implementation, the team had to attend to such technical issues as which activities
are eligible to be financed using the CERC and whether the existing government social transfer
systems can be used, while time and other resources to do so were limited. The lesson is that at

                                                                                                        Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Eastern Ukraine: 3R Project (P172348)



design stage, projects with CERCs should conduct an advanced vetting of the existing government
accountability and implementation mechanisms. Specifically, since it is likely that an emergency
response in the case of an armed conflict would include cash assistance to affected populations, a
pre-assessment of existing government social assistance programs could be beneficial. In the
Project’s experience in Ukraine, the IDP cash assistance program was already in place and could be
used, however, the situation can be more complicated in other countries.

3. The experience of this Project demonstrated the value of a multi-GP collaboration, especially in
FCV contexts and when using a CERC. The World Bank’s multi-disciplinary team offered invaluable
technical support to the Government of Ukraine, which was recognized by the government. The
agility of the Bank in navigating new externalities, while providing the Government of Ukraine with
professional expertise grounded in the World Bank’s global experience and knowledge, would not be
possible otherwise. The Bank’s collaboration across sectors was mirrored in the government’s
institutional arrangements, which were equally collaborative across ministries. The lesson is that a
multidisciplinary team composition and project design is commendable and beneficial for many
operations, especially in FCV contexts.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides sufficient background and technical details to understand the value-add of the activities and
the outcomes of the Project, a good justification of the PDO relevance, comprehensive and well-supported
evidence on all aspects of Project’s evaluation, and a clear linking of evidence to findings. The ICR is technical,
analytical, and has internal consistency. The lessons learned are based on core experience with Project
implementation, linked to the narrative, and are very useful for future lending operations in FCV countries.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 15
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Eastern Ukraine: 3R Project (P172348)




                                                                     Page 15 of 15
