      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Reengagement and Reform DPF (P175139)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023486

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                                Operation Name
 P175139                                     Reengagement and Reform DPF

 Country                                     Practice Area (Lead)
 Sudan                                       Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



  Non-Programmatic DPF

  L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
  IDA-D7880,IDA-D7890                                                                          1,309,186,587.69

  Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
  25-Mar-2021                               31-Mar-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                                      0.00                                              0.00

  Revised Commitment                         1,318,372,481.26                                                0.00

  Actual                                     1,309,186,587.69                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Paul J. Kaiser              Clay Wescott                 Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The project development objective (PDO) was “to facilitate Sudan's re-engagement with the World Bank
Group (WBG) and support the country’s economic reform agenda through policies that support: (i) correcting
macroeconomic imbalances - exchange rate liberalization and phasing out fuel subsidies; ii) strengthening
social protection and financial inclusion - implementing the Sudan Family Support Program (SFSP); and
(iii) improving transparency and accountability of the public sector - standards for publication of the budget

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Reengagement and Reform DPF (P175139)



and budget execution reports” (Program Document [PD], p. 3). For this implementation completion report
(ICR) review, the objectives of this operation (against which outcomes will be assessed) are taken to be the
following:

        PDO 1: Facilitate Sudan’s re-engagement with the World Bank Group (WBG);
        PDO 2: Correcting macroeconomic imbalances;
        PDO 3: Strengthening social protection and financial inclusion;
        PDO 4: Improving transparency and accountability of the public sector.

The Financing Agreement (Grant Number D788-SD [Portion A] and Grant Number D789-SD [Portion B],
March 24, 2021) does not include a PDO but contains three “Actions Under the Program” that are the same
as the objectives listed above.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The operation’s three pillars/policy areas were identical to the project objectives described above
(Financing Agreement, p. 5; PD, p. 22).

      Pillar/Policy Area 1: “Addressing macroeconomic imbalances” had 2 PAs.
      Pillar/Policy Area 2: " Strengthening social protection and financial inclusion" had one PA.
      Pillar/Policy Area 3: " Improving transparency and accountability of the public sector” had one PA.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The Re-engagement and Reform DPF (the operation) was approved on March 25, 2021, and became effective
on March 25, 2021. The operation provided US$1,375 million to the Government of Sudan (GoS) and closed as
planned on March 31, 2022. A total of US$1,309,186,588 was disbursed: (i) for IDA-D7890, US$215 million was
approved, and US$212,293,333 was disbursed; and (ii) for IDA-D7880, US$1,160 million was approved and
US$1,096,893,255 was disbursed (ICR, p. 2).


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Project objectives were relevant to tackling Sudan’s development constraints at approval. After a 2019 political
 agreement between the military and civilians/political groups ended decades of authoritarian rule, on October
 3, 2020, Sudan’s transitional government and parties to the peace process (including several armed groups)
 signed the ‘Juba Agreement for Peace in Sudan.’ The transitional government committed to an ambitious
 economic reform agenda to address many economic challenges that deepened under previous leadership.

 Sudan lost 75 percent of its oil reserves following the secession of South Sudan in 2011. The resulting
 collapse of oil revenues accounted for 50 percent of domestic revenues and 95 percent of export earnings,
 and they contributed to a major shock to fiscal and external balances. Substantial arrears, limited access to
 international financing, a multiple exchange rate regime, and comprehensive sanctions against the GoS

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Reengagement and Reform DPF (P175139)



exacerbated Sudan’s economic challenges. Consequently, there were sizeable macroeconomic imbalances,
with fiscal deficits rising sharply from 7.9 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2018, peaking at 10.8
percent of GDP in 2019 before reaching 5.9 percent in 2020. Amid rising international oil prices, exchange rate
depreciation, and increased fuel consumption, the share of fuel subsidies in total spending rose from 49.9
percent in 2018 to 56.5 percent in 2019 and 35.2 percent in 2020.

The DPF mobilized resources to pay off arrears and support reforms closely aligned with Sudan’s efforts to
stabilize the economy and promote inclusive economic growth. The DPF specifically focused on (i) addressing
macroeconomic imbalances with exchange rate liberalization, the removal of fuel subsidies, and debt
sustainability, (ii) strengthening social protection by strengthening the financial sustainability of the SFSP, and
(iii) improving transparency and accountability through enhanced public access to fiscal information. The
repayment of a bridge loan that enabled arrears clearance to IDA provided some budget support to meet cash
flow needs and helped build Sudan’s foreign exchange reserves by establishing a foreign currency account in
the Bank of Khartoum dedicated to budget support.

The PDOs were also fully aligned with the WBG Strategy for Fragility, Conflict, and Violence (FCV, 2020-
2025), highlighting the importance of macroeconomic stabilization and debt sustainability, strengthening
institutions and governance, and fostering economic growth and job creation. The PDOs were also aligned
with the World Bank Global Crisis Response Framework, Pillar 1 on strengthening resilience through macro-
fiscal reforms and Pillar 3 on building long-term resilience and enhancing crisis preparedness.

The DPF supported the implementation of the 2020 WBG Country Engagement Note, achieving four of six
objectives under its two focus areas of re-engagement and contributing to a renewed social contract. The
operation’s objectives were fully aligned with the following Engagement Note objectives: (i) macroeconomic
and fiscal policy reforms to address macroeconomic imbalances; (ii) mitigating the impact of economic reforms
and COVID-19 through an improved social program system; (iii) achieving comprehensive debt relief under the
highly indebted poor country (HIPC) Initiative; and (iv) strengthening the government’s institutional capacity
and accountability.

GoS priorities informed DPF PAs in the 2019-2021 Sudan Economic Revival Program (SERP). The SERP
focused on achieving economic stabilization, more significant regional equity, and fostering robust and
inclusive growth, specifically prioritizing emergency measures of economic stabilization in the short run,
including deficit reduction through addressing the burden of fuel subsidies, liberalizing the (customs) exchange
rate, and reforming the tax system. The DPF also supported the GoS’ medium-term reforms that focused on:
(i) reviving the agricultural sector; (ii) achieving industrialization and value chains; (iii) institutional, legislative,
and administrative reform; and (iv) developing human capital. The GoS prioritized increasing government
effectiveness and transparency with an initiative for a new Anticorruption Law, a plan for a modern merit-based
civil service, and diagnostics for developing a strategy to improve public financial management.

The 2019 Risk and Resilience Assessment (RRA), at the onset of the transitional period, identified five key
drivers of FCV in Sudan and several sources of resilience. Overall, the drivers of fragility and sources of
resilience identified through the 2019 RRA continued to be relevant throughout implementation. However, it is
not clear from the ICR if the RRA adequately considered the challenges of building the capacities needed to
institutionalize project achievements, especially related to PA3 and PA4. When this ICRR was written, the
initial achievements of PA3 and PA4 were not sustained, with the MoFEP website not working and poverty
levels increasing.




                                                                                                           Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Reengagement and Reform DPF (P175139)



The four PAs were consistent with the priorities identified in the RRA for Sudan. The supported reforms
addressed the significant factors contributing to macro imbalances (and restoring macro stability)
through strengthening social protection, financial inclusion, and improved public sector transparency and
accountability. The PAs were included as HIPC Completion Point triggers.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Table 1. Prior Actions (PAs) of Sudan Re-engagement and Reform DPF

 PDO 1: Facilitate Sudan’s re-engagement with the World Bank Group (WBG)
 PDO 2: Addressing macroeconomic imbalances
 PA1: To address exchange rate imbalances, the Recipient, through the Central Bank of Sudan (CBoS), has
 issued Circular No.1/2021 that: (i) unifies all official exchange rates other than the customs rate; and (ii) sets
 this unified daily official exchange rate based on average market rates of dealers of the previous day.
 PA2: The Recipient, through the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning (MoFEP), has taken measures
 for the rapid removal of gasoline and diesel subsidies by passing: (1) Decree No.66, which effectively
 eliminates retail price subsidies for imported fuel and increases subsidized retail prices on domestically
 produced gasoline and diesel; and (ii) Decree No.94, that effectively removes all gasoline and diesel retail
 price subsidies by the end-2020.
 PDO 3: Strengthening social protection and financial inclusion
 PA3: To support implementation and ensure the financial sustainability of the SFSP, as well as the gradual
 transition toward a permanent social safety net program, the Recipient: (i) through the MoFEP, submitted its
 draft 2021 budget to the Council of Ministers for endorsement that includes a provision for funding of the
 SFSP, as well as an allocation for the development and expansion of the national social safety net; and (ii)
 through the CBoS, has approved mobile money regulations that expand financial inclusion and ensure
 sustainable outreach of the SFSP.
 PDO 4: Improving transparency and accountability of government.
 PA4: The Recipient, through the MoFEP, has issued Decree No.92 to the effect that in 2021 and all
 subsequent years, the MoFEP will carry out: (a) immediate publication on its website of the 2020 central
 government budget, (b) publication of the central government budget on its website within one month after its
 approval by the Legislative Council (Joint Council), and (c) publication of quarterly budget execution reports
 within one month after the end of each quarter.

PDO 1: Facilitate Sudan’s re-engagement with the World Bank Group (WBG)

There were no PAs exclusively under this objective which was a cross cutting objective to which the entire
operation was to directly contribute. In this regard, the PAs largely capture the most important constraints to
the normalization of the relationship with the WBG and can therefore be of satisfactory relevance.

PDO 2: Addressing macroeconomic imbalances.

PA1: At approval, Sudan had a multiple exchange rate regime, which distorted economic incentives that
encouraged informal activities. They included: (i) the official exchange rate that remained at Sudanese Pound
(SDG) 55/US$1 from March 2020 to February 21, 2021 (when it was unified with the parallel rate at SDG

                                                                                                       Page 4 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Reengagement and Reform DPF (P175139)



375/US$1) used for government transactions and financial balances of government and the banking sector; (ii)
the customs exchange rate used for invoicing imports and customs duty calculations (SDG 15/US$1 in
September 2020 and was raised to SDG 55 in December 2020); (iii) subsidized exchange rates for the
provision of forex to finance priority imports such as wheat and fuel (the fuel exchange rate was set at SDG
6.7/US$1 to value the prices of imported fuel and maintain fuel subsidies); and (iv) the parallel market rate
which continued to depreciate from SDG 85/US$1 at the end of 2019 to SDG 375/US$1 in February 2021. The
parallel rate dominated foreign exchange transactions, accounting for about 80 percent of all transactions in
foreign exchange. These exchange rates caused significant economic inefficiencies and diverted external
inflows through informal channels. The multiple exchange rate currency practices led to inefficiencies. The
IMF’s 2020 Staff Monitoring Plan (SMP) provided the analytical underpinning for this PA. Relevance of PA1:
Satisfactory.

PA2: Sudan’s high fiscal deficits were mainly due to high subsidies, particularly for fuel. These subsidies were
about 50 percent of total budgetary expenditures in 2018. They increased to 57 percent in 2019, mirroring the
same trend as the fiscal deficit, which increased from 7.9 percent of GDP in 2018 to 10.8 percent of GDP in
2019. The resulting deficit monetization pushed inflation to 163 percent in 2020, tripling in one year (IMF-Sudan
SMP, October 2020). Fuel subsidies were the most significant component of spending, with unsustainable
increases (due to higher international oil prices and distorted incentives to overconsume) driving deficit
monetization, high growth in the monetary supply (88 percent in 2020), an inflation rate of 163 percent, and
sustained currency pressures. The removal of gasoline and diesel subsidies was directly linked to the objective
of economic stabilization. Eliminating fuel subsidies would reduce the fiscal imbalance, thereby correcting
macroeconomic imbalances. The SERP goal of shifting public spending “from financing commodities to the
empowerment of the Sudanese People.” informed the analytical underpinnings of this PA While the
macroeconomic logic of removing fuel subsidies is clearly presented in the PAD and the ICR, it is not clear from
either document if the Bank or the GoS seriously considered the potential impact of removing fuel subsidies on
political stability, which proved to be very fragile over time. Relevance of PA3: Highly Satisfactory.

PDO 3: Strengthening social protection and financial inclusion.

PA3: Three consecutive years of economic contraction from 2018-21, combined with COVID-19-related effects,
reduced living standards and pushed a larger share of the population into poverty. With poverty increasing from
54.3 percent in 2018 to 61.6 percent in 2020, the GoS needed to cushion the vulnerable and poor from the
increasing prices (expected from exchange rate unification). High inflation and food shortages in 2020 further
affected the ability of vulnerable groups to cover basic needs. Household survey and food insecurity data in the
IC reflected a rising poverty trend. Analytical underpinnings were drawn from Bank operations financed by Bank
trust funds, including the Impact Evaluation: Design of Sudan's Cash Transfer Program (TF0A2309) along with
the Sudan Social Safety Net Project and SFSP. The operation focused on strengthening the social protection
system and amplifying the impact of the SFSP.

Mobile money legislation was critical for the implementation of cash transfers through the SFSP and the
promotion of financial inclusion, improving access to SFSP resources for the vulnerable and the poor across the
country. At approval, Sudan had one of the lowest levels of financial inclusion in sub-Saharan Africa, with only
15.3 percent of adults (aged 15+) having a financial account (ICR, p. 13). The country had a cash-based
economy with limited access to essential financial services and bank accounts by the population. Increased
access to a mobile money agent was crucial for financial inclusion and to facilitate access to the SFSP,
particularly for women. The analytical underpinnings were based on the 2019 Sudan Financial Sector
Assessment Program and Sudan’s first Financial Inclusion Survey, which focused on agriculture and barriers
facing rural youth and women to inform the planned National Financial Inclusion Strategy. As part of the

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Reengagement and Reform DPF (P175139)



 payment systems diagnostic that fed into this planned Strategy, a mobile money assessment was conducted to
 help the CBoS develop regulations to support the new Mobile Payment Regulations. These regulations were
 approved on January 6, 2021. Relevance of PA3: Satisfactory.

 PDO 4: Improving transparency and accountability of government.

 PA4: Budget transparency was weak, reflecting the overall governance situation in Sudan. The country ranked
 113 of 117 for transparency in the 2019 Open Budget Survey and scored zero in the same survey on citizen
 engagement. The Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) Performance Assessment Report for
 2020 identified established procedures to determine which budget documents should be publicly available. The
 analytical underpinnings of PA4 were based on the 2020 PEFA and previous Bank operations. This PA
 continued the reforms initiated under closed Bank projects, including the Sudan Budgeting Capacity
 Strengthening Project and the Strengthening Subnational Fiscal Policy Management Project. Both operations
 aimed to improve public access to fiscal information. The SERP also informed this PA, specifically Priority 3 on
 “fighting anticorruption and enhancing transparency and accountability, along with Pillar 5 of the Poverty
 Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) on “strengthening the government’s institutional capacity” under the theme of
 “leveraging technology for accountability, efficiency and equity.”. The publication of the budget supported
 increased transparency as an initial step toward promoting increased citizen engagement around the budget.
 Relevance of PA4: Satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

The RIs are presented in Table 2, along with mapping, progress, and ratings. There were four RIs across
3 Pillar/Policy Areas.

Table 2: RI Framework and Ratings

                                               Baseline Target         Actual    Target vs. RI
                          Associated RI
 Indicator Name                                                                  Actual RI Achievement
                          PAs        Relevance 2020     2021           21-Dec
                                                                                 Change Rating
 PDO 2: Addressing Macroeconomic Imbalances
 RI1. Percentage                                                                 Over
 difference between                                                              100% of
                          PA1         S          450%       <10%       2.10%              High
 official and average                                                            Targeted
 market exchange rate                                                            Change
 RI2. Percentage share of
                                                                                 Over
 central government       PA2         S          35%        <15%       8.20%                High
                                                                                 100% of
 expenditures on fuel

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Reengagement and Reform DPF (P175139)



 subsidies in total                                                                   Targeted
 budgetary expenditures                                                               Change


 PDO 3: Strengthening Social Protection and Financial Inclusion
 RI3. Percentage of the                                                               30% of
 population having        PA3        MS         0%         40%             12%        Targeted Modest
 received SFSP transfers                                                              Change
 PDO 4: Improving Transparency and Accountability of Government
 RI4. 2020 and 2021
 budgets are available on
 the MoFEP website, as PA4           MS         No         Yes             Yes        Achieved High
 well as 2021 quarterly
 budget execution reports

 RI1 - This RI measured the implementation of the exchange rate reform, which captured PA1 on
 exchange rate imbalances and PDO2 on macroeconomic imbalances. The RI specifically measured the
 degree to which the official exchange rate deviated from the average market exchange rate from March to
 December 2021, following the trajectory of exchange rate unification. Relevance of RI1: Satisfactory.

 RI2 - This RI measured the share of budgetary outlays on fuel subsidies in 2021 in all central government
 expenditures. Together with RI1, both indicators fully captured PA1 on exchange rate imbalances and
 PDO 2 on macroeconomic imbalances. Relevance of RI2: Satisfactory.

 RI3 - This indicator was aligned with PA3. The indicator reflected PDO3 focus on strengthening social
 protection and financial Inclusion. The establishment of the mobile payment system was meant to expand
 the reach of SFSP and contribute to the regular and transparent transfer of social safety net funds.
 However, the indicator did not adequately reflect this. Relevance of RI3: Moderately Satisfactory.

 RI4 - This indicator captured the impact of PA4, which required the MoFEP to publish central government
 annual budgets and quarterly budget execution reports on its website. RI3 was also aligned with PDO4
 focus on government transparency and accountability. Relevance of RI4: Moderately Satisfactory.

 The four RIs captured the key outputs related to each objective. Additional RIs focusing on institutional
 capacity building would have focused the operation and the client on building the capacities needed to
 withstand political shocks related to political fragility, especially on the need to strengthen social protection
 and financial inclusion and improve government transparency and accountability.




Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)


                                                                                                         Page 7 of 15
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Reengagement and Reform DPF (P175139)


EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               PDO1: Facilitate Sudan’s re-engagement with the World Bank Group (WBG)

               Rationale
               As an explicit and cross cutting objective of the operation, all PAs fall under it and were relevant. The efficacy
               of each PA is assessed in the context of the specific sub objectives.



               Rating

               Satisfactory

               OBJECTIVE 2
               Objective
               PDO 2: Addressing Macroeconomic Imbalances

               Rationale
               The DPF was able to reduce macroeconomic imbalances caused by exchange rate imbalances and gasoline
               and diesel subsidies. For RI1, the percentage difference between the parallel and official exchange rates fell
               below the RI target after the CBoS issued Circular No.1/2021 on February 21, 2021. The difference between
               the official and average market exchange rate was 2.1 percent from March to December 2021, well below the
               RI target of less than 10 percent. The official and market exchange rates remained unified from June 2022,
               indicating the sustainability of the policy beyond the operation’s closing. The exchange rate reform exceeded
               targets, opening opportunities for Sudan to improve the balance of payments. Rating: High.

               For RI2, the percentage share of central government expenditures on fuel subsidies in total budgetary
               expenditures fell to 8.2 percent, below the RI target of less than 15 percent. The GoS raised the prices of
               imported gasoline and diesel to cost-recovery levels at the market exchange rate by issuing Decree No. 66 on
               October 20, 2020. At the same time, subsidies remained on domestically produced fuel until December 2020,
               when the GoS passed the follow-up Decree No. 94 to eliminate retail price subsidies on domestically
               produced fuel. After increasing prices, the government established the Fuel Pricing Committee to set fuel
               prices to reflect market prices. However, the Fuel Pricing Committee’s price adjustments became infrequent
               and insufficient in preventing a return to price subsidies. The MoFEP subsequently issued Decree 30 on June
               8, 2021, which removed the role of the government in setting the retail prices of gasoline and diesel and
               ended the role of the Fuel Pricing Committee, paving the way for market pricing of gasoline and diesel. The
               Ministry of Energy and Petroleum issued regulations (i.e., Decision 37) allowing the fuel marketing and
               distribution companies to set prices for gasoline and diesel to cover their costs. After these decrees, gasoline
               and diesel prices sold at retail stations were unsubsidized and represented close to 80 percent of the diesel
               and gasoline sold for final use in Sudan. Rating: High.



               Rating

               Highly Satisfactory


                                                                                                                   Page 8 of 15
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Reengagement and Reform DPF (P175139)




                      OBJECTIVE 3
                      Objective
                      PDO3: Strengthening Social Protection and Financial Inclusion.

                      Rationale
                      There was a 12 percent increase in the number of SFSP beneficiaries receiving cash transfers, falling short of
                      the target of 40 percent. RI3 measured the percentage of the population receiving SFSP transfers. While only
                      4.7 million were covered by the SFSP out of the targeted 16 million people, there were indications that
                      poverty would have been worse or the 4.7 million people would have been poorer in the absence of the
                      transfer, given Sudan’s high level of food insecurity caused by a poor 2020-2021 harvest together with
                      substantial declines in national cereal production, as well as rising international food prices. Rating: Modest




                      Rating

                      Moderately Satisfactory

                      OBJECTIVE 4
                      Objective
                      PDO4: Improving Transparency and Accountability for Government



                      Rationale
                      Decree No.92 required the MoFEP to publish central government annual budgets and quarterly budget
                      execution reports on its website, improving public access to critical fiscal budget information. As a result of
                      this decree, the target of publishing the central government budgets was achieved. The MoFEP posted the
                      central government budgets for 2020, 2021, 2022, and 2023 on its website, along with publishing quarterly
                      budget execution reports within one month after the end of each quarter. Evidence on the utilization of online
                      budget reports indicates that several civil society organizations, private sector representatives, academia,
                      women, youth groups, and government departments and agencies accessed fiscal reports. The MoFEP also
                      published citizen budget reports for 2022 and 2023 on its website. However, the link to these reports could
                      not be located providing mixed evidence of achievement. Rating: High.



                      Rating

                      Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

                                                                                                                        Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Reengagement and Reform DPF (P175139)




Of the targets for the four RIs, two exceeded their targets (exchange rate unification and removal of retail diesel
and gasoline subsidies). For the third RI, evidence was mixed resulting in a rating of moderately satisfactory. The
third RI, the percent of the population that received an SFSP transfer, reached 12 percent against the target of 40
percent. Achievement of RI4 was Substantial. Overall, this operation achieved notable results following Sudan’s
exchange rate liberalization, fuel subsidy removal, social protection strengthening, and enhanced budget
transparency through its publication.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Satisfactory


6. Outcome

Rationale

With Moderately Satisfactory Relevance of PAs and Satisfactory Efficacy, the overall outcome is rated as
Satisfactory.


a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

There is a high risk to the development outcome since efforts to reach a political solution have not been
successful and are subject to competing demands by different parties due to the instability and current
political impasse. Unless there is a political solution to the current crisis, Sudan will continue to be unstable
and cut off from financing sources and technical assistance support that are crucial to sustaining the
economic reforms. If the current impasse and instability continue, there is a high risk that macroeconomic
imbalances will reemerge, and the GoS will not be able to mobilize resources to address poverty and social
protection through the SFSP. There was a strong indication of sustainability, given the high level of
registration achieved (9.3 million people) and the government commitment to continue implementation of the
SFSP beyond the operation’s closing.


 8. Assessment of Bank Performance

 a. Bank Performance – Design

 Rationale



                                                                                                      Page 10 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Reengagement and Reform DPF (P175139)



At approval, the analytical underpinnings of the DPF were based on extensive research drawn from the
Bank, the GoS, and development partners. Still, the Bank did not adequately consider underlying political
tensions and fragility that resulted in OP/BP 7.30 status before the operation closed. The World Bank
Country Engagement Note identified priority actions that were integrated into the DPF, which also
benefited from related Bank projects, including the SFSP under the “strengthening social protection and
financial inclusion” Pillar. The Bank team also drew on the 2020 IMF SMP, the joint World Bank-IMF Debt
Sustainability Analysis, and the 2020 PEFA.

The simple design of the DPF targeted the most critical areas needed for macroeconomic stabilization
aligned with Sudan’s limited capacity but did not adequately consider the FCV context. The PD provided a
detailed and thoughtful description of the country context, the intervention logic, the economic
environment, recommended policy reforms, and associated risks. DPF-supported reforms were also
embedded in the country’s economic reform program. However, the analytic underpinnings of the project
did not sufficiently address the underlying political instability that resulted in the military takeover shortly
before the operation was scheduled to close.

The policy dialogue conducted during the preparation of the DPF ensured reform measures were directly
linked to the GoS’ reform priorities. Consultations held by the GoS as part of the September 2020 National
Conference on Economic Reforms covered the reform areas supported by the DPF. At this conference, the
GoS presented the SERP, which was prepared in close consultation with conference participants that
included the political parties Forces for Freedom and Change, leading civil society groups such as the
Sudanese Professionals Association, along with academics and women and youth groups.

The Bank coordinated closely with the IMF, development partners, and the international community and
conducted joint debt data reconciliations and debt relief analyses with the IMF. The Bank, IMF, and African
Development Bank also coordinated closely on the timelines and financing for the arrears’ clearance
operation. The clearance of IDA arrears was facilitated by a US$1.15 billion short-term bridge loan from the
United States Government. This loan was repaid using financing from this operation. Development partner
supported the SFSP through the Bank-administered Sudan Transition and Recovery Support Trust Fund.

The Bank identified some of the risks to achieving the program objectives and incorporated mitigation
measures during implementation, but it did not adequately assess the stability of the political coalition. The
DPF-supported reforms were recognized as high-risk and high-reward, with the opportunity to contribute to
stability and growth during Sudan’s transition. The high risks were clearly articulated in the project
document, which included political, economic, and social risks, given the political changes and economic
transition. Potential poverty, gender, conflict, and environmental impacts were also clearly identified at
appraisal. Consideration was given to the risk of renewed conflict as well as the risk of weak
implementation capacity. The Bank outlined mitigation measures, including the SFSP, to address potential
adverse poverty effects of eliminating fuel subsidies and exchange rate unification. Identified reforms were
directly taken from the GoS’ reform agenda to ensure strong ownership and commitment to implementing
identified reforms. Other mitigation measures focused on building implementation capacity in relevant
ministries, including operationalizing the digitization of SFSP payments.

The ICR notes that actions to reduce the FCV and low-capacity risks could have been further
strengthened, especially in Objective 2 related to the identification, registration, and payment of SFSP
beneficiaries. Improved sequencing of reforms through more robust communication with development
partners on Bank processes would have helped to implement the SFSP better. While the SFSP was
approved on October 8, 2020, it did not disburse until the exchange rate reform was implemented (on


                                                                                                       Page 11 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Reengagement and Reform DPF (P175139)



February 21, 2021) to ensure the program would not lose one-fifth of the value of the funds by using the
official exchange rate at that time. The delayed implementation of SFSP, following exchange rate
unification, enabled the operation to take advantage of the depreciated exchange rate to stretch further the
funds received under the SFSP. The ICR did not, however, address the longer-term risks to political
stability that compromised institutionalizing the reforms and outcomes achieved by the project, especially
related to strengthening social protection and financial inclusion and improving government transparency
and accountability.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The Bank provided technical assistance to the MoFEP to monitor the implementation of required reforms. The
Bank seconded three senior staff from its headquarters to the MoFEP to help the Minister, Undersecretary, and
the General Directorate of Budget implement the PFM reforms and the arrears clearance process, focusing on
building MoFEP capacities where required. Prior to the pause in operations due to the military takeover, inter-
ministerial and technical committees convened regularly to oversee the SFSP at the national level, including the
hiring and training of focal points, social workers, and enumerators. Mobilization of community volunteers also
began at the local level. Tools for data collection for routine monitoring and evaluation were prepared, including
a baseline survey, project evaluation strategy, quarterly report, and an annual work plan and budget.

The monitoring of project RIs was built on the institutional mechanisms that the MoFEP developed for
managing the IMF SMP. The MoFEP established a high-level program-monitoring committee chaired by the
MoFEP First Undersecretary and comprised of senior officials from the MoFEP, the Ministry of Minerals,
Energy, the CBoS, the Ministry of Labor and Administrative Reforms, and other relevant agencies.
The committee convened regularly to monitor reform progress and address constraints. A sub-committee was
also established to report progress on reforms, which was headed by senior officials reporting monthly to the
MoFEP First Undersecretary. The Bank participated in a joint government/development partners group formed
by the MoFEP to monitor the implementation of the 2021 PFM Roadmap. It used to supervise and monitor PFM
reform progress, including the timely publication of the budget and the timely release of monthly, quarterly, and
end-of-year budget execution reports.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Reengagement and Reform DPF (P175139)




The rating for project design was Moderately Satisfactory, and for implementation, Satisfactory. Regarding
design, the analytical underpinnings of the DPF were based on extensive research drawn from the Bank, the
GoS, IMF and other development partners. The approach to macroeconomic stabilization was well suited to
Sudan’s FCV context, policy dialogue with the GoS ensured that reform measures were directly linked to the
GoS’ reform priorities, and coordination between the Bank and relevant stakeholders helped to raise needed
resources and move forward required reforms as part of the HIPC Initiative. During implementation, the Bank
provided strong technical assistance to the MoFEP to monitor the implementation of required reforms, building
on the institutional mechanisms that the ministry developed for managing the SMP.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

According to the ICR, the overall decline in inflation benefitted the poor by increasing their purchasing power.
With the significant reduction of monetization, inflation decreased from 318 percent in December 2021 to 87
percent in December 2022, and this stretched the value of SFSP cash transfers to the poor. However, the lack
of current household data made it difficult to assess the impact of the four PAs on social inclusion and poverty
levels in Sudan.



b. Environmental

The DPF had no direct impact on the environment, although the reduction of fuel subsidies was expected to
result in rationalizing of energy prices, thus moderating energy consumption, contributing to energy conservation,
and consequently reducing climate-related emissions as well as local air pollutants harmful to public health.



c. Gender

The DPF addressed barriers that hindered women from participating in the SFSP (PA3). Targeted interventions
addressed barriers and promoted women's empowerment by expanding mobile payments for SFSP beneficiaries,
with 10 percent of women (compared to 20 percent of men) having a bank account. The management information
systems and registration portals were also upgraded to include gender-disaggregated data to facilitate data-driven
analysis that informs ways to address gender barriers. Before the pause in external grants and development
partner activities, there was ongoing stakeholder orientation on gender issues under the SFSP, and the selection
of gender mainstreaming specialists had reached the contract-issuing stage.




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Reengagement and Reform DPF (P175139)



d. Other

Fuel price increases eliminated incentives for smugglers that had been marketing heavily subsidized fuel outside
of Sudan. The SFSP promoted innovative, effective reforms, including the expansion of financial sector services
as a catalyst for the expansion of national identity card issuance services, the inclusion of youth as local
ambassadors and enumerators for program registration, the establishment of local grievance and complaint
mechanisms staffed by social workers from the Ministry of Social Development, and the intensive use of
technology in public service delivery.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

On October 25, 2021, there was a military takeover in Sudan, triggering a pause in all project disbursements in
accordance with OP/BP 7.30. The pause made it challenging to assess Bank performance. The ICR was based
on a desk review of World Bank supervision reports, project progress reports provided to the Bank prior to the
military takeover, interviews with Bank staff and development partners, and publicly available information.
Because of the circumstances in Sudan following the military takeover on October 25, 2021, the preparation of
the ICR did not involve any interaction with the authorities. Despite this challenge, the analyses provided in the
ICR provided an honest and thoughtful understanding of project outputs and outcomes based on the available
data, both intended and unintended. The lessons learned were appropriate but did not address the risk to
development outcome due to underlying political tensions that were emerging during appraisal and
implementation. Overall, ICR guidelines and methodology were appropriately followed.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreement/Comments
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Reengagement and Reform DPF (P175139)



The following three lessons were informed by project documents and the ICR.

Proactive and ongoing policy dialogue between the Bank and the client, supported by high-quality,
relevant and timely analysis, is critical to building consensus among policymakers to adopt sound,
sustainable and challenging reforms. The Bank’s continued policy dialogue, underpinned by technical
assistance based on high-quality analytical work and complemented by other operations, informed
engagements with the transitional government at the time of appraisal. This was especially important in
sensitive policy areas related to exchange rates and fuel subsidies, where political resistance initially slowed
down progress. Patience and persistence in this policy dialogue, involving the Bank’s Senior Management when
appropriate and needed, proved effective in supporting the GoS macroeconomic reform agenda in the SERP.

The clear focus on critical reforms enabled the client, development partners, and key stakeholders to
promote local ownership of complex macroeconomic reforms, especially in Sudan’s fragile
environments. The simple but clearly prioritized design of this DPF was appropriate in light of capacity and
implementation constraints. The DPF’s focus on four PAs and RIs helped concentrate efforts, helping to focus
attention around foundational macroeconomic reforms. This, in turn, facilitated progress in the HIPC process.
Overall, the Bank recognized that Sudan was a low-capacity environment and developed focused PAs on a few
highly impactful measures that were major constraints to longer term development.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 15
