     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EDUCATION REFORM (P127388)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023628

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P127388                                   EDUCATION REFORM

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Moldova                                   Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-51960,IDA-61810                       31-Aug-2018                                          45,961,871.68

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Jan-2013                               31-Dec-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           40,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            50,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        45,961,871.68                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Judyth L. Twigg            Salim J. Habayeb             Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                         Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement of February 7, 2013 (p. 5), the project's original objectives were "to
   strengthen the quality of education while supporting the efficiency reforms being implemented in the education
   sector."

   At a February 2017 restructuring, the objectives were revised: "to improve learning conditions in targeted
   'receiving schools' and strengthen the Recipient's education monitoring systems, while promoting efficiency
   reforms in the education sector." The outcome target on education quality/learning conditions was also

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EDUCATION REFORM (P127388)



   reduced significantly at this restructuring. ("Receiving schools" are those that receive students from closed or
   reorganized schools.)

   At a March 2018 restructuring and Additional Financing (AF), the objectives were again revised: "to improve
   learning conditions in targeted schools and strengthen the Recipient's education monitoring systems, while
   promoting efficiency reforms in the education sector." This adjustment to the objectives reflected the addition
   of some activities that would benefit all schools, including some not designated as receiving schools, and
   therefore represented an expansion in the project's scope.

   For purposes of this Review, the latter two statements of objectives are taken to be essentially identical, as
   the wording at the March 2018 restructuring was meant only to clarify that both receiving and non-receiving
   schools were included. This Review also interprets the objectives to "strengthen the quality of education" and
   "improve learning conditions" as essentially the same in this instance, with the same results chain and only
   the outcome target having been revised. The objectives will therefore be assessed as follows:

          Original objectives: (1) strengthen the quality of education / improve learning conditions (original
           outcome target) and (2) support / promote efficiency reforms in the education sector
          Revised objectives as of the February 2017 restructuring: (1) strengthen the quality of education /
           improve learning conditions (revised outcome target), (2) support / promote efficiency reforms in the
           education sector, and (3) strengthen education monitoring systems

   At the time of the February 2017 restructuring, US$19.85 million, or 43.2 percent of total Bank financing, had
   been disbursed.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  06-Feb-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project contained three components:

   1. Strengthening the quality of education (appraisal: US$30.5 million; AF: US$9.28 million; actual:
   US$39.78 million) was organized around four main areas: implementation of quality assurance standards
   for receiving schools; establishment of teacher and school directors' training and remuneration programs;
   improvement in student assessment systems (national and international); and improvement in the quality of
   data and management systems. Quality assurance standards had been developed under the predecessor
   "Quality Education in the Rural Areas of Moldova" project (P090340, 2010-2013, US$11.9 million) and
   covered school organization, teaching and learning, information technology equipment, school

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  EDUCATION REFORM (P127388)



infrastructure, curriculum, evaluation, school governance, certification, and values. Specific activities under
this component were to include Ministry of Education and Research (MoER, structured as the Ministry of
Education until 2017) approval of quality assurance standards for schools; implementation of school quality
assurance standards in at least 70 percent of receiving schools; official approval and launched
implementation of an updated program for training of school directors and teachers; adoption of a new
program of teacher and school director remuneration; Moldova's participation in the Programme on
International Student Assessment (PISA) 2015; public dissemination of the results of PISA 2015; revised
national testing for fourth- and ninth-grade students; and sending out of school report cards to all schools,
with comparative performance outcomes and trends at the regional and country level. Disbursements were
to be made against disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) framed around these activities.

      The project initially intended to support 96 schools to meet the new quality standards, but this was
       later reduced to 15 schools at the February 2017 restructuring and then increased slightly to 17
       schools at the 2018 restructuring, as it was realized that significantly more extensive rehabilitation
       than was initially planned was needed for each school to meet the standards. The financing modality
       for rehabilitating these schools was also changed from DLI-based to traditional disbursement
       methods at the 2017 restructuring, as civil works proved challenging under the DLI approach.
      At the 2018 restructuring, additional funding was allocated for provision of science laboratories and
       information technology equipment to 160 schools; training programs were expanded to 3,200
       additional teachers and school managers; learning materials and equipment were added for 100
       schools to facilitate inclusion of students with disabilities; and training and equipment were provided
       to enhance MoER's monitoring and improvement of teaching and learning at the school level.

2. Improving the efficiency of the education sector (appraisal: US$8.0 million; AF: US$0.16 million;
actual: US$8.16 million) was to support the government's implementation of school network reorganization
reforms and the nationwide rollout of per-student education financing down to the school level. As
demonstrated in the PAD (p. 65), the new financing formula benefited larger schools over smaller schools,
incentivizing districts and cities to consolidate and reorganize small, costly, inefficient schools. Specific
activities were to include 80 percent of all primary and secondary schools having their budgets approved
according to a new per-student formula methodology; reorganization (elimination as a result of closure or
merger with another class) of 980 classes in primary and secondary schools; increase in the student-
teacher ratio for grades 1-12 from 10.5:1 to 11.5:1; and establishment of a system for monitoring and
mitigating school dropouts (by gender). As with the first component, disbursements were to be made
against DLIs framed around these activities.

      At the 2018 restructuring, additional funding was included to carry out a review of the per-student
       financing formula and propose adjustments, and to develop a new financing formula for pre-schools.

3. Improving MoE's capacity to monitor the reform (appraisal: US$1.5 million; AF: US$0.56 million;
actual: US$2.06 million) was to finance technical assistance (TA) for the MoER to support implementation,
monitoring, and measurement of the education reform program. Specifically, it was to follow on TA provided
under the predecessor project that supported development and implementation of school standards,
development of human resources, participation in international student assessments, improvement in the
education management information system (EMIS), monitoring of school dropouts, implementation of per-
student financing nationwide, social marketing campaigns in support of the reform program, a school
census, and a small group of local consultants to assist MoER with project implementation. This component
was to be financed under traditional specific investment loan disbursement methods.


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EDUCATION REFORM (P127388)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The project was approved on January 24, 2013, as a credit from the International Development
   Association in the amount of US$40 million. It became effective on July 1, 2013. The mid-term review was
   held in March 2016. US$10 million in AF was approved at a January 2018 restructuring and became
   effective on July 19, 2018. US$45.96 million was actually disbursed. After four extensions of the original
   closing date (August 31, 2018), the project closed on December 31, 2022. No government contribution was
   planned or made.

   The project was restructured seven times:

         June 30, 2015: Change in the environmental assessment category and safeguards.
         February 6, 2017: Change in development objectives and results framework, as well as some
            outcome indicators and targets, as it became clear that the physical needs of schools in order to
            meet quality standards were "far greater" than originally anticipated (ICR, p. 12); change in
            disbursement methods from DLI-based to traditional disbursement for upgrading of schools to meet
            national quality assurance standards; transfer of responsibility for school rehabilitation from MoER to
            the Moldova Social Investment Fund (MSIF); and extension of the closing date by ten months, to
            May 2019.
           September 21, 2017: Slight decrease in the size of schools (defined by number of students) eligible
            for project support.
           January 16, 2018: Additional financing to deepen and expand the scope of some interventions;
            change in development objectives and results framework; reallocation of an additional US$2 million
            to finance rehabilitation of two more schools under traditional disbursement methods rather than
            DLIs; and extension of the closing date by twelve months, to May 2020.
           September 24, 2019: Extension of the closing date by 22 months, to March 2022, to provide
            additional time for school rehabilitation.
           August 10, 2021: Change in the results framework and extension of the closing date by eight
            months, to December 31, 2022, due to implementation delays caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
           September 19, 2022: Renaming and restructuring of the fund responsible for school rehabilitation
            into a public institution.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project's objectives were relevant to country and sector conditions. At the time of project appraisal,
Moldova was experiencing sharp demographic decline stemming from low fertility rates and massive
outmigration. Its student population had shrunk by 48 percent since 1991. The Moldovan education sector
suffered from uneven quality and low efficiency. Results from PISA 2009 placed Moldova's 15-year-olds
among the lowest-ranked in Europe in reading, math, and science. The share of teaching staff above
retirement age had doubled from 2002 to 2007, and resources for training existing and new teachers were
spread too thin across a large number of under-qualified and poorly paid teachers. The sector was

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EDUCATION REFORM (P127388)



organized with an oversized network of increasingly small schools. A 2010 MoER-sponsored study had
concluded that up to half of rural schools would need to be consolidated or closed in the next three to five
years to match population trends. The average Moldovan school was operating at 54 percent of the
capacity for which it had been designed, leading to wasteful spending on heat, other utilities, and
administrative costs. The system of education financing, which tied resources to teachers rather than
students, resulted in some of the smallest class sizes and lowest student-teacher ratios in the world. Recent
investments had been made in modernized textbooks, curricula, and teacher training practices, as well as a
2010-12 program piloting per-student financing in a small number of districts, but these had not yet
produced quality or efficiency outcomes sufficient to improve the country's competitiveness in the global
economy.

The project was also well aligned with government strategy. The first strategic objective of the 2012-2020
National Development Strategy "Moldova 2020" was "to align the education system to labor market needs
in order to enhance labor productivity and increase employment." The government's 2011 "Action Plan for
Education Structural Reform Implementation" contained three objectives: ensuring access of students to
quality education, increasing flexibility in labor relations in education, and enabling the efficient use of
financial allocations by applying per-student funding nationwide. In April 2012, Parliament approved a
package of amendments to existing legislation enabling the implementation of efficiency reform measures,
including the incorporation of per-student financing into the law on public finances. The
government's follow-on 2014-2020 Education Development Strategy was laid out along three pillars—
access, relevance, and quality—with objectives to increase the efficiency of spending of public money on
education and the efficiency of the education system itself. However, the information base on which to
implement these plans was incomplete. While a school mapping exercise had been completed in the five
years prior to project appraisal, the database was populated through self-reporting by schools, and
information on school conditions was "patchy and piecemeal" (PAD, p. 3). At project appraisal, there was no
consolidated EMIS linking school-based data with financial data and with the country's student assessment
system. Development and use of an effective EMIS was critical for implementation and monitoring of
policies and reform initiatives. The addition of the objective to strengthen education monitoring systems at
the February 2017 restructuring therefore enhanced the overall relevance of the objectives. At the time of
the ICR, a new Education Strategy and Action Plan 2030 was under development, expected to focus on six
objectives, three of which are aligned with the project: ensuring access for all to quality education through
life, strengthening socio-educational cohesion for quality education, and promoting innovation and change
in education (ICR, p. 35).

The objectives were relevant to the Bank's Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) at appraisal (2009-2012),
which contained a pillar on building human capital, a goal of increased quality of and access to education,
and indicators measuring both quality and efficiency of spending in the sector. The project's objectives
remained aligned with the 2014-2017 CPS, which had a pillar on enhancing human capital and
minimizing social risks, and objectives to strengthen the quality of education and improve the efficiency of
the education sector. The objectives also remained aligned with both the pillar on skills development and
the objective to enhance efficiency and quality of primary and secondary education of the subsequent
Country Partnership Framework (CPF, 2018-2022). Finally, the project's objectives were relevant to the
CPF at closing (2023-2027). This CPF shifts focus from education sector efficiency at the primary and
secondary levels to labor market relevance at the post-secondary level; this adjustment was primarily in
response to Moldova's progress in addressing efficiency concerns during the prior CPF. The current
CPF contains a high-level outcome on improved human capital and an objective to increase the quality and
relevance of education services.



                                                                                                   Page 5 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      EDUCATION REFORM (P127388)




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Strengthen the quality of education / improve learning conditions (original outcome target)

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change for this objective held that strengthening quality assurance standards for schools,
                             training of teachers and school directors and improving their pay structure, implementing improved student
                             assessment systems, and consolidating existing EMISs would lead to increased competencies and more
                             effective performance incentives for teachers and school staff, and to increased availability of high-quality
                             education sector data that could be used for policy making and planning. Together, these intermediate results
                             would lead to improved learning conditions and education quality.

                             Outputs

                             New minimum quality assurance standards were formally accepted by the MoER (DLI1). In addition to
                             schools supported by the project, six receiving schools were brought up to national quality assurance
                             standards with financing from the national budget.

                             A work plan to update the existing system for training of school directors and teachers was approved (DLI5),
                             and pilot training was completed. This met the target that new training programs would be approved and
                             implementation initiated. 50.7 percent of school managers were trained under the revised in-service training
                             program, exceeding the original target of 30 percent and the revised target of 50 percent of managers. 22
                             percent of school directors were trained in gender awareness, exceeding the target of 20 percent.

                             1,376 additional primary teachers were added to the education system as a result of project interventions,
                             exceeding the target of 830 teachers. 21.56 percent of primary and general secondary teachers were trained
                             under the revised in-service training program, exceeding the original target of 10 percent and the revised
                             target of 20 percent of teachers (DLI6). 11.1 percent of primary and general secondary teachers were trained
                             in gender awareness, exceeding the target of 10 percent.

                             840 support staff and psycho-pedagogues were trained on in-depth skills in education of children with
                             disabilities, exceeding the target of 450 staff. 100 schools were equipped with teaching and learning materials
                             for students with disabilities, meeting the target of 100 schools.

                             160 schools were equipped with new science labs and technology equipment, meeting the target of 160
                             schools.


                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EDUCATION REFORM (P127388)



133,404 students benefited from direct interventions to enhance learning, exceeding the target of 98,450
students.

84 percent of beneficiaries of rehabilitated schools reported that their concerns were considered in the
planning and implementation process, exceeding the target of 70 percent of beneficiaries.

Outcomes

17 schools met infrastructure requirements under national quality assurance standards, not meeting the
original target of 70 schools. Gradual achievement of the target was originally represented by DLIs 2-4, but,
as noted earlier, school rehabilitation was transferred to the traditional investment financing modality at the
2017 restructuring, and those DLIs were cancelled. The 17 schools were chosen based on clear and
transparent criteria: schools serving over 600 students located in rayons affected by school consolidation and
with relatively large and growing shares of young children.

99.79 percent of trained teachers demonstrated a defined minimum level of competency, surpassing the
target of 50 percent of trained teachers.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Strengthen the quality of education / improve learning conditions (revised outcome target)

Revised Rationale
Outputs were the same as those reported under the original outcome targets.

Outcomes

17 schools met infrastructure requirements under national quality assurance standards through financing
provided by the project, meeting the revised target of 17 schools. Six additional schools met infrastructure
requirements under the national standards through financing provided by the national budget. An external
verification process found that, on average, 92 percent of standards were met by each school.

The ICR reported some results of PISA 2015 and PISA 2018 indicating improved performance in several
areas relative to PISA 2009, but attribution of those results to project-financed interventions is not clear.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EDUCATION REFORM (P127388)




Objective
Support / promote efficiency reforms in the education sector

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective held that implementation of the per-student financing formula, in
parallel with school network reorganization, would lead to consolidation and closure of excess capacity in the
sector, improving sectoral efficiency. Importantly, potential negative impacts of this reform, such as longer
travel distances for students, staff reassignments and reductions, and general disruptions to education
processes, possibly leading to increased dropout rates, were to be closely monitored, though the PAD did not
specify what mitigation actions would be taken in the event that dropout rates increased.

Outputs

3,486 classes were reorganized in primary and general secondary education schools, far exceeding the
target of 980 classes (DLI14). The percentage of schools that had their budgets approved according to the
new per-student financing formula increased from 38 percent in 2012 to 100 percent in 2022, exceeding the
target of 80 percent of schools (DLI13). Parents in 71 percent of schools reported that information, community
engagement, and school responsiveness had improved, meeting the target of 70 percent of schools, and
indicating that stakeholder concerns were adequately addressed during the potentially disruptive and
contentious reform process.

A new performance-based remuneration system for teachers and school directors was not implemented as
planned, as systems for inspection and monitoring of teacher performance were not made operational (DLI7,
cancelled).

A system to monitor dropouts was put in place, with data disaggregated at the level of schools and used in
policy making, achieving the target (DLI16). The MoER approved an Action Plan in 2015 with measures to
designate a responsible person at the school level to monitor and follow up on each individual case of dropout
or extended absenteeism, involve other responsible school officials, and work with families toward student re-
enrollment. The ICR noted that the enrollment rate of senior secondary-age youth increased from 74 percent
in 2014 to 85 percent in 2021, indicating that the reform did not push enrollments downward (ICR, p. 57).
However, the ICR did not report on specific actions or results under the 2015 Action Plan, meaning that there
was no information to demonstrate that students moved through the education system with a minimum of
waste.

Outcomes

The student-teacher ratio for grades 1-12 of primary and general secondary education increased from 10.85:1
in 2012 to 13.9:1 in 2023, exceeding the original target of 11.5:1 and the revised target of 11.85:1 (DLI15).

Although targets were overachieved for classroom optimization, no data were provided on dropouts or
repetitions, despite the project having established a monitoring system. With no information on this key
aspect of efficiency, achievement of the objective is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial

                                                                                                 Page 8 of 18
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               EDUCATION REFORM (P127388)




                            OBJECTIVE 3
                            Objective
                            Strengthen the Recipient's education monitoring systems

                            Rationale
                            The theory of change for this objective held that technical assistance and capacity building for the MoER, its
                            project management team, and the National Office for Regional and Local Development would lead to
                            increased capacity to monitor structural reform in the education sector. This increased capacity would
                            produce a monitoring system capable of tracking results that could contribute to sector policy making and
                            planning.

                            Outputs

                            A consolidated EMIS covering all levels of education from pre-school through primary and general secondary
                            education, including vocational education and training, was established and made operational, meeting the
                            target (DLI11)

                            2,791 National School Inspectorate Staff were trained, exceeding the target of 300 staff.

                            A system for learning assessment at the primary level was established and maintained, meeting the target. 27
                            large-scale primary and secondary learning assessments were completed, almost achieving the target of 30
                            assessments. 15,500 laptops were provided to primary and secondary education students to facilitate
                            assessment of remote learning during the COVID-19 pandemic, exceeding the target of 10,000 laptops.

                            All fourth and ninth grade students were tested in Romanian language and math based on revised national
                            testing, meeting the target. Four reports analyzing the results of national assessments were publicly
                            disseminated, exceeding the target of three reports (DLI10). Moldova's PISA 2015 (DLIs 8 and 9) and PISA
                            2018 reports were also publicly disseminated, meeting the target.

                            Outcomes

                            Eight school report cards with comparative data on school performance (2014-2018) were publicly
                            disseminated, exceeding the target of five report cards (DLI12). In view of this important achievement, along
                            with the establishment of well-functioning consolidated EMIS and learning assessment systems, as well as
                            enhanced monitoring capacity and skills, achievement of this objective is rated High.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale

                                                                                                                              Page 9 of 18
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             EDUCATION REFORM (P127388)



         Overall efficacy under the original objectives and outcome targets: (1) modest achievement of strengthening
         the quality of education / improving learning conditions (original outcome target), and (2)
         substantial achievement of support / promotion of efficiency reforms in the education sector. Taken together,
         these ratings indicate that there was Substantial achievement under the original objectives and outcome
         targets, with the caveat that there were moderate shortcomings in achievement of the quality objective under
         the original outcome target.



         Overall Efficacy Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Overall efficacy under the revised objectives as of the February 2017 restructuring: (1) substantial
         achievement of strengthening the quality of education / improving learning conditions (revised outcome
         target), (2) substantial achievement of support / promotion of efficiency reforms in the education sector, and
         (3) high achievement of strengthening education monitoring systems. Taken together, these ratings indicate
         that there was Substantial achievement under the revised objectives and outcome targets.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The PAD's economic analysis (pp. 12-13 and Annex 6) found, over a 20-year time horizon, a net present value
(NPV) of savings related to the project equivalent to US$301 million (8.4 percent of total recurrent costs over the
20-year period), robust under low-case (US$217 million) and high-case (US$454 million) scenarios. These
estimates were based on a discount rate of ten percent and benefits accruing primarily from gains in sector
efficiency and quality of education services. The analysis assumed that savings resulting from the restructuring
of the school network would be directed to quality-enhancing inputs, resulting in enhanced skills and
competencies for Moldova's students and graduates.

The ex-post economic analysis, based on the same methodology and assumptions, found a 28.7 percent rate of
return, primarily due to fiscal savings resulting from reduction in the number of teachers per student and from
improvements in human capital generated by the project's contributions to education quality. The estimated
NPV, with investments costs being incurred from 2014 through 2022 and annual savings per student per year of
US$117 from 2023 through 2032, was US$198 million, producing a benefit-cost ratio of 5.1:1. The findings were
robust to a wide sensitivity analysis. One key assumption driving the analysis—that a reduction in the number of
teachers needed per student of 23 percent would automatically produce a savings of 23 percent in teacher
remuneration costs per student (ICR, p. 57)—was not necessarily valid, as the actual savings would also



                                                                                                           Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EDUCATION REFORM (P127388)



depend on factors such as distribution of teachers and teacher remuneration patterns. However, the analysis did
not include savings from reductions in energy and other classroom overhead costs, which were likely significant.

Project implementation initially relied primarily on existing structures of the MoER, eliminating the need for a
parallel structure or full-scale project implementation unit. A group of local consultants was hired for project
coordination, procurement, and financial management. The ICR (p. 24) reported that early implementation was
challenged by an environment of high political instability, resulting in "volatile project management" with high
turnover of MoER staff and delayed decision making, and additional time required for school rehabilitation
activities due to redefinition of rehabilitation needs. In addition, an economic recession in 2015 affected the
availability and timing of budget resources to support project implementation, as DLIs required budget advances
for their attainment. In 2015-2016, responsibility for school rehabilitation was transferred from MoER to MSIF, as
it became clear that MoER did not have the capacity to implement such large-scale works. The MSIF had a
successful track record in school rehabilitation, but the handover may have entailed expenditure of additional
time and resources; the ICR (p. 34) reported that there was a "long-lasting disagreement between MoER and
MSIF on funding" that resulted in suspension of several planned contracts. The ICR also stressed, however, that
these shortcomings were resolved, and that both financial management and procurement were being smoothly
implemented by project closure.

Beginning in early 2020, implementation was challenged by the COVID-19 pandemic and then Russia's invasion
of Ukraine. Because of the pandemic, there were delays in provision of science labs and equipment, some
teacher training, and piloting of a new financing formula for pre-school education. The war in Ukraine disrupted
supply chains, leading to delays in delivery of goods. It also sent more than 400,000 refugees from Ukraine into
Moldova (as of April 2022), a large number of whom are children. The Moldovan government has issued orders
allowing all Ukrainian students access to all levels of education in Moldova, creating challenges for local
institutions to deliver basic services already stretched during the pandemic and disrupting some project
activities.

Although there were moderate shortcomings in implementation efficiency, the project's high rate of return
coupled with its efficient reliance on existing government structures, which facilitated smooth reporting and
disbursement against DLIs, produce an efficiency rating of Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      100.00
 ICR Estimate                                              28.70
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EDUCATION REFORM (P127388)




6. Outcome

Under the original objectives and outcome targets, relevance was rated High, efficacy was rated Substantial but
with moderate shortcomings in achievement of one objective, and efficiency was rated Substantial, producing
an Outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.

Under the revised objectives and outcome targets, relevance was rated High, efficacy was rated Substantial,
and efficiency was rated Substantial, producing an Outcome rating of Satisfactory.

According to OPCS/IEG harmonized guidelines, the overall Outcome rating is determined by weighting these
ratings according to the percentage of the Bank credit disbursed under each set of objectives and outcome
targets. At the time of restructuring, 43.2 percent of the credit had been disbursed.

      Moderately Satisfactory (4) * 0.432 = 1.728
      Satisfactory (5) * 0.568 = 2.84

1.728 + 2.84 = 4.568, rounds to 5 = Satisfactory.

The project's overall Outcome is rated Satisfactory, indicative of minor shortcomings in its preparation,
implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The Moldovan government remains fully committed to improving access to and quality of education,
particularly in light of its having achieved European Union candidate status in June 2022. The per capita
school financing formula is now well established, and local authorities and school directors operate with
increased autonomy under their resulting annual budgets. There are minimal threats to the functioning of the
consolidated EMIS system and transparent use and dissemination of its data. The most serious threats to
the project's outcomes stem from the lingering impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and Russia's war on
Ukraine. The influx of refugees and pandemic-induced learning losses may continue to drain scarce
resources, challenging the government's fiscal accounts, its ability to integrate students, and the prospects
for reducing inequities in service delivery (ICR, p. 35). The project's contributions to enhancing education
sector efficiency will continue to bolster the government's capacity to withstand these shocks, as will
continued Bank and other partner assistance. The US$59.8 million Education Quality Improvement Project
(P179363), approved on May 31, 2023, and scheduled to close in 2029, aims to improve the learning
environment in participating institutions, with an emphasis on supporting disadvantaged students, and
strengthen the capacity of MoER for sector management and refugee response.




                                                                                                    Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EDUCATION REFORM (P127388)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was designed as the first results-based financing operation in the education sector in the
  Europe and Central Asia region, a precursor to the Program for Results (PforR) instrument. Some
  elements of its objectives and design were well grounded in analytical work, including a 2011 Public
  Expenditure Review of the education sector. Lessons learned from prior Bank engagement in the
  education sector included the need for strong political commitment to and ownership of the reform
  program; the value of complementary analytic work and technical assistance; the dependence of results-
  based approaches on establishment and monitoring of performance outcomes; and the importance of
  quality data (PAD, p. 9). The project's overall implementation risk was rated high at appraisal due to
  linking of disbursements to a "contentious and often difficult to implement reform program" (PAD, p. 11).
  With school consolidations and closures affecting large numbers of people and communities, careful risk
  mitigation—including continued dialogue with stakeholders at all levels, a strong public relations
  campaign, establishment of clear and transparent rules and procedures for all aspects of the reform, and
  development of new remuneration systems for teachers and school directors so that they see themselves
  as "winners" in the reform program—was included (PAD, p. 11). Limited MoER implementation capacity,
  identified as a moderate risk, was mitigated through strategically planned TA as part of the project's third
  component. Inadequate incentives for MoER to implement the project, due to credit proceeds being
  disbursed directly to the Treasury, was rated as a substantial risk, mitigated by Bank support to ensure
  that the costing of the reform and associated activities was reflected in the Medium-Term Budgetary
  Framework and annual budgets.

  However, there were key design elements that were not yet in place at the time of project launch. The
  definition and adoption of the set of school quality standards that was to be applied to receiving schools
  was not in place until almost two years into implementation, meaning that assessment of the baseline
  condition of schools according to those standards was not completed until late 2015. When the
  assessment showed that the need for facility upgrades was much more significant than initially
  envisioned, far beyond the project's scope or resources, activities and targets had to be significantly
  reduced. The ICR (p. 29) also notes that the MoER lacked the managerial and technical expertise to
  carry out such extensive rehabilitation work, necessitating a change in implementation responsibility for
  school rehabilitation from MoER to MSIF. The ICR (p. 30) also points out moderate shortcomings in M&E
  design (see Section 9a). Finally, there were challenges related to national procurement procedures, with
  several processes having to be relaunched due to an insufficient number of bidders. Adequate
  preparatory work prior to project launch should have anticipated each of these issues and adjusted the
  project's initial arrangements, scope, and timelines accordingly.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank's supervision effort was proactive and results-focused (ICR, p. 34). There were two Task
 Managers across the project's entire lifetime. The team restructured the project in a timely manner
 following the 2016 Performance and Learning Review (PLR) of the Moldova Country Partnership Strategy,

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EDUCATION REFORM (P127388)



 adjusting the project's objectives and indicators in line with the PLR's recommendations for flexibility in
 response to current realities. At the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the MoER realized that about 30,000
 students and 3,000 teachers did not have access to laptops or other technology necessary to engage in
 distance learning. The project pivoted quickly to provision of computers to ensure access to online
 education and capacity for learning assessment for disadvantaged students. Overall, this Review concurs
 with the ICR's assessment that "strong, consistent, and timely" implementation support facilitated
 achievement of results despite a complex operating environment (ICR, p. 35).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PAD (pp. 42-43) included a robust theory of change linking the project's areas of support to
 intermediate outcomes and achievement of objectives. M&E was to rely on existing government systems,
 strengthened "as needed" with project support, with disbursements requiring "unequivocal evidence" of
 compliance with DLIs (PAD, p. 10). The project coordinator was to be in charge of overall M&E activities.
 The PAD's Annex 1 contained detailed information on project indicators and DLIs, and Annex 2 described
 the protocols to be used to evaluate compliance for each DLI. PDO-level indicators included the
 percentage of schools meeting quality assurance standards (quality), average scores on Romanian and
 math exams in grades four and nine (quality), and student-teacher ratios (efficiency). There were no
 baselines for the indicators to improve exam scores. Furthermore, the target for schools meeting quality
 assurance standards was set before an inventory was conducted of the actual physical condition of
 receiving schools; that stock-taking did not take place until two years after the project was approved. When
 it became clear that school infrastructure needs far exceeded the allocation for the corresponding DLIs, it
 was decided to benefit a smaller number of larger schools, requiring a change in the outcome indicators
 and targets at the 2017 restructuring and a shift of school rehabilitation activities away from DLIs to
 conventional investment project financing.

 Data related to DLIs and project M&E were to be stored in a consolidated EIMS of the MoER, which did not
 yet exist at project launch. As part of the technical assistance provided by the Bank to MoER during project
 preparation, an assessment of Moldova's three EMISs recommended their consolidation into a single
 system.



b. M&E Implementation
  At the February 2017 restructuring, the outcome indicators for grade four and nine test scores were
  dropped, as it was realized that in the short term, test scores might fall due to the disruption of receiving
  schools enrolling students and employing teachers from smaller schools that were closing. MoER

                                                                                                      Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EDUCATION REFORM (P127388)



  regularly reported on results framework indicators, tracked through the EMIS that was consolidated as
  planned. With the exception of school construction activities, disbursements were linked to the attainment
  of DLI targets as planned.



c. M&E Utilization
  Routine monitoring fed into verification of compliance with DLIs and project restructurings. Assessment
  of teacher training and surveys were used throughout implementation to measure the impact of project-
  supported activities and course-correct where needed. In 2017, the project financed a study of the
  existing school network and identified options for closing or merging schools, assisting MoER in
  adjusting the decision process for school network reorganization. After the AF, the project financed a
  survey for school users (parents and older students) and service providers (school managers and staff)
  to gauge whether these stakeholders felt that their input had been adequately incorporated into the
  school rehabilitation process, and a survey of parents with children in beneficiary schools to determine
  whether there had been progress in information sharing, community engagement, and school
  responsiveness to their concerns. These findings were shared with MoER and MSIF staff,
  representatives of local education departments, and other stakeholders (ICR, p. 32), and were used to
  design the project's public communications campaign activities and local-level consultations (ICR, p. 33).

  Overall, project M&E is rated Substantial. There were moderate shortcomings in design, but adjustments
  during implementation were adequate, and important assessments and surveys were used to inform
  course correction.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was initially rated environmental assessment category C, and no safeguard policies were
   triggered. As implementation proceeded, it became apparent that some of the required works might include
   activities that could have environmental impacts if not properly managed (construction of new boilers, water
   and sanitation works, connecting schools to water networks, replacement of electricity systems, etc.). A
   June 2015 restructuring therefore reclassified the project as environmental assessment category B and
   triggered OP/BP 4.01, Environmental Assessment. MoER prepared and disclosed an Environmental
   Management Framework (EMF) that disqualified any school rehabilitation requiring a full Environmental
   Impact Assessment from eligibility for project financing. The EMF specified procedures for preparing
   Environmental Management Plans, environmental guidelines for different kinds of works, and a monitoring
   plan format. During implementation, works were monitored by local state inspectors and environmental
   experts for both environmental impacts and application of appropriate mitigation measures. These
   monitoring and supervision activities were described in regular monitoring reports. The project's
   environmental rating was Moderately Satisfactory throughout implementation. There was full compliance
   with the Bank's safeguard policies.


                                                                                                  Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EDUCATION REFORM (P127388)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The project used the government's financial management (FM) architecture, including budget classification
   and program structure, reporting and expenditure monitoring systems, and Treasury reports. Government
   reports were used as the basis for disbursement against DLIs. FM ratings in Implementation Status and
   Results Reports (ISRs) were Satisfactory, with one exception, when US$79,000 in unjustifiable
   expenditures were identified. This amount was refunded to the Bank. Project audit reports by the Court of
   Accounts were delivered mostly on time, with unmodified opinions. The ICR (p. 33) reports that MoER FM
   performance was consistently high across the project's lifetime, but that of MSIF sometimes deteriorated
   due to frequent changes in FM staff, particularly during the project's final two years.

   Procurement ratings in ISRs were mostly Satisfactory, with occasional downgrades to Moderately
   Satisfactory due to contract management issues (delays or non-performance of contractors) under MSIF-
   managed contracts, disagreement between MoER and MSIF on funding issues that resulted in suspension
   of several planned contracts (see Section 5), and occasional delays in internal approvals within MoER that
   "significantly impacted the timeline of ongoing contracts and planned procurements" (ICR, p. 34). These
   issues were addressed during implementation, such that periodic reviews found the project's procurement
   arrangements to be adequate, with procurement plans submitted regularly and found acceptable.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory         Satisfactory
                                                                              Shortcomings in project design
Bank Performance               Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory   that necessitated significant
                                                                              project restructurings.
Quality of M&E                 Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                  High


12. Lessons


                                                                                                Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EDUCATION REFORM (P127388)



The ICR (pp. 36-37) offers multiple insightful lessons, reframed here by IEG:

Caution should be exercised when using learning outcomes as outcome-level indicators.
Project timelines are subject to unexpected interruptions and delays, and even with an
implementation period where all interventions run "like clockwork" (ICR, p. 36), it may not be realistic
to expect tangible evidence of improved learning outcomes over a single project's lifespan. In
addition, reliance on formal assessments—which may be conducted with infrequent and variable
timing—can produce lags in identifying where and when a project has fallen off track in progressing
toward learning targets. It is unlikely that countries without established assessment systems can
both create and implement them in time to show results under a single project. Moreover, national
assessments are frequently updated or otherwise adjusted, possibly as a part of a project's
interventions, making comparability over time an issue.

Projects that do not thoroughly analyze the extent and nature of issues to be addressed
during the design phase are likely to encounter delays and require restructuring. In this case,
school quality standards were not well defined prior to project launch, and an inventory of the
physical condition of schools had not been carried out. As a result, the extent of required
rehabilitation works was not well understood, in terms of both the number of schools that required
upgrading and the extent of works that were needed in each. Once this preparatory work was
completed, almost two years into the project's lifetime, significant restructuring and adjustment of
ambition were required.

Consolidation of school networks is politically and social challenging, requiring strong and
sustained political will, comprehensive planning, measures to monitor and mitigate risks,
engagement with stakeholders, transparent communication, continuous evaluation, and
proper allocation of resources to compensate those impacted by the reforms. In this case, the
project made substantial progress due to the establishment of clear rules and procedures for all
aspects of the reform, effective communication campaigns, and capacity building in support of
reform implementation. Even with this progress, however, some aspects of planned reform—in this
case, teacher career and remuneration reform—proved too challenging to implement.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  This project successfully supported complex and politically controversial efficiency reforms in the education
  sector. Deeper analysis of the factors contributing to this achievement could inform the design and
  implementation of other projects where the political economy environment plays a key role.




                                                                                                    Page 17 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EDUCATION REFORM (P127388)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was candid, explaining clearly how the project supported the Moldovan government through a
challenging and potentially contentious education reform process. It harnessed data effectively, with strong and
well-detailed analysis. Its presentation of the project's theory of change (Annex 7) was concise yet
comprehensive. The ICR was internally consistent and compliant with established guidelines. Its lessons were
insightful and should prove useful for projects facing analogous challenges and contexts. The efficiency
analysis (Annex 4) was unusually clear and detailed, explaining thoroughly the analytic underpinnings driving its
assumptions and calculations. The main text was lengthy, at 37 pages, but that shortcoming is minor when
compared with the report's overall clarity and high-quality analysis.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                                   Page 18 of 18
