     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Inclusive and Sustainable Growth (P169822)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023728

1. Program Information



 Country                                     Practice Area (Lead)
 Ecuador                                     Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                           Approved Operations
 0                                            3

 Operation ID                                 Operation Name
 P169822                                      First Inclusive and Sustainable Growth




 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-89780                                  31-Dec-2019                                       500,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 11-Jun-2019                                 31-Dec-2019
                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                              500,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                               500,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                           500,000,000.00                                            0.00




P171190_TBL
 Country                                     Practice Area (Lead)
 Ecuador                                     Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                                Operation Name
 P171190                                     Second Inclusive and Sustainable Growth ( P171190 )




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Inclusive and Sustainable Growth (P169822)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-89780,IBRD-91140,TF-B2849              31-Dec-2020                                          506000000.00

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 07-May-2020                                 31-Dec-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                              500,000,000.00                                   6,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                               500,000,000.00                                   6,000,000.00

 Actual                                           500,000,000.00                                   6,000,000.00



 P174115_TBL
 Country                                     Practice Area (Lead)
 Ecuador                                     Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                                Operation Name
 P174115                                     Third Inclusive and Sustainable Growth ( P174115 )


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-91140,IBRD-91800,TF-B2849,TF- 31-Dec-2021                                                   514100000.00
 B4618

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Nov-2020                                 31-Dec-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                              500,000,000.00                                  14,100,000.00

 Revised Commitment                               500,000,000.00                                  14,100,000.00

 Actual                                           500,000,000.00                                  14,100,000.00



 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 William F. Steel            Jennifer L. Keller            Gabriela Chamartin Escobar     IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      First Inclusive and Sustainable Growth (P169822)



EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Program Document (PD3: Report PGD247) for the Third Inclusive and Sustainable Growth Development
Policy Loan (DPL) implicitly retained the program development objectives (PDOs) put forward in the second
operation, through three Pillars “supporting measures aimed at: (i) responding to the COVID-19 pandemic to
protect the vulnerable, (ii) removing barriers to private sector development and supporting the economic recovery,
and (iii) promoting public sector efficiency and fiscal sustainability post-crisis” (PD2 [Report PGD118], para. 35).

The PDOs shifted somewhat from the originally planned series of two operations as a consequence of the shocks
in 2020 of the COVID-19 pandemic and the collapse of international oil prices (affecting Ecuador’s main export),
and the series was extended to three operations. The original PDOs, as articulated through three Pillars, were
(ICR, para. 5): (i) promote a more efficient mobilization and allocation of government resources; (ii) remove
barriers to private sector development; (iii) protect vulnerable segments of the population through well-targeted
social programs and include them in formal economic activities. DPL2 dropped resource mobilization (through
taxation reforms), as well as auditing the outreach of a public bank, and prioritized the COVID-19 response and
protecting the vulnerable.

For the purpose of this ICRR, the PDOs are adopted from the PD 2:

      PDO 1: Responding to the COVID-19 pandemic to protect the vulnerable;
      PDO 2: Removing barriers to private sector development and supporting the economic
       recovery; and
      PDO 3: Promoting public sector efficiency and fiscal sustainability post-crisis.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
For the purpose of this ICRR, the PDOs are disaggregated into the following sub-objectives and policy areas (as
articulated in the ICR, Section II.A, Tables 1-3):

Pillar 1: Responding to the COVID-19 pandemic to protect the vulnerable:

      1.1: Design well-targeted responses to shocks such as COVID-19

              a. Design response programs to shocks

              b. Reform labor markets for COVID-19

              c. Create fiscal space for crisis response

      1.2: Protect migrants

Pillar 2: Removing barriers to private sector development and supporting the economic recovery:

      2.1: Create conditions for a more dynamic private sector
      2.2: Reduce distortions in labor markets


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Inclusive and Sustainable Growth (P169822)



      2.3: Improve financial sector governance and inclusion

Pillar 3: Promoting public sector efficiency and fiscal sustainability post-crisis:

      3.1: Promote public sector efficiency
      3.2: Promote public sector fiscal sustainability

          a. Strengthen budgetary processes and align with fiscal sustainability objective

          b. Reform energy pricing policies to rationalize subsidies and reduce fiscal costs


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Total program cost of US$ 1,520.1 million was financed through three IBRD loans of US$ 500 million each and
three grants from the Global Concessional Finance Facility totaling US$ 20.1 million (to support middle-income
countries hosting large numbers of refugees). The three successive DPLs were approved on 11 June, 2019, 7
March, 2020, and 24 November, 2021, respectively. Each operation closed as planned on 31st December of
2019, 2020 and 2021, with funds fully disbursed.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 The first Inclusive and Sustainable Growth Development Policy Loan (DPL 1) was prepared to support a
 major transition from a state-led, populist approach that prioritized public spending to address inequality
 (2007-17) to a more market-oriented and private sector-led approach to development. The previous
 government strategy, which explicitly excluded international financial institutions (IFIs), had resulted in limited
 access to external financing (due to unsustainable debt), few macroeconomic buffers, and a suppressed
 private sector (ICR, para. 2). But in the context of the end of the oil price boom, a fully dollarized economy,
 and political resistance to ending subsidies, efforts to rebalance the economy had proven inadequate. These
 challenges were exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic, which “plunged the economy into a deep
 recession and increased the fiscal deficit considerably” (ICR, para. 4), leading the second DPL to reorient
 toward addressing the key challenges of rebalancing the economy, fostering fiscal sustainability, and laying
 the foundation for medium-term growth, while managing the COVID-19 crisis.

 The Government’s Plan de Prosperidad and the 2018 Ecuador Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD)
 addressed these challenges through three strategic priorities (PD 1, para. 83): (i) supporting fundamentals for
 inclusive growth; (ii) building human capital and protecting the poor, and (iii) enhancing institutional and
 environmental sustainability. The Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY19-FY23, prepared in parallel
 with the first DPL, reaffirmed these key objectives.In particular, PDO1/Pillar 1 responded to Objective 5 of the
 CPF (Strengthen efficiency and effectiveness of social programs); PDO2 to Objectives 2 (Improve conditions
 for private sector development) and 3 (Improve financial sector inclusion and intermediations); and PDO3 to
 Objective 1 (Enhance efficiency of public spending). (Performance and Learning Review for the Republic of
 Ecuador for the Period FY19-FY23 [PLR]; IBRD, IFC and MIGA, 2023; paras. 21-27).


                                                                                                        Page 4 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    First Inclusive and Sustainable Growth (P169822)



The DPL series was a lead vehicle for addressing the first two of these strategic objectives, enabling the
World Bank to play an important role in mobilizing additional international support for Ecuador’s economic
recovery and transition. PDO 1 used the urgency of the COVID-19 crisis to improve the Social Registry and
(re)design other programs to protect the poor, including migrants, for long-term as well as immediate relief.
PDOs 2 and 3 supported fundamentals for long-term growth in the critical areas of private sector
development, labor markets, financial sector, and public sector budget efficiency and sustainability. Some
measures regarding energy pricing and regulation under PDO 3 were also relevant to enhancing institutional
and environmental sustainability. Thus the objectives were highly relevant to addressing immediate as well as
longer-term challenges to the country and in implementing both Government and World Bank priorities, and
supported the parallel IMF Extended Fund Facility as well as the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework.

Table 1: Objectives and Prior Actions (PAs) for Ecuador Sustainable Growth DPL Series

         PAs under DPL1                        PAs under DPL2                      PAs under DPL3
Objective 1: Responding to the COVID-19 pandemic to protect the vulnerable:
1.1: Design well-targeted responses to shocks such as COVID-19
           a. Design response programs
                                                                       PA 3: The Borrower has: (i)
                                                                       expanded the coverage of social
                                                                       safety nets to poor and vulnerable
                                                                       households by including them into the
                                                                       social registry and making them
                                                                       eligible to receive regular cash
                                                                       transfers; (ii) achieved the increased
                                                                       coverage through emergency
PA 1: The Borrower has: (i)                                            transfers using the 2018 Social
expanded the objectives of the     PA 2: In the context of the COVID- Registry Index (Indice de Registro
Social Registry, and (ii) approved 19 crisis, the Borrower has created Social 2018) to reach poor and
the creation of a unit within MEF an emergency cash transfer           vulnerable households not previously
dedicated to the design of         scheme for vulnerable households covered by social assistance
compensation mechanisms to         that are not covered by social      programs during May and June 2020;
mitigate the impact of subsidy     assistance programs. [PA 1]         (iii) improved access to those
reforms. [PA 8]                                                        transfers by expanding the availability
                                                                       of retail banking agents and adjusting
                                                                       the calendar of payments to
                                                                       encourage social distancing; and (iv)
                                                                       approved a new social protection
                                                                       program to protect poor and
                                                                       vulnerable households against the
                                                                       impact of the economic contraction.
                                                                       [PA 1]
            b. Reform labor markets
                                   PA 4: The Borrower has increased PA 5: The Borrower has temporarily
                                   flexibility in work arrangements in (for the months of April-July 2020)
                                   the context of the COVID-19 crisis reduced the time it takes to access
                                   by regulating telework and allowing unemployment benefits. [PA 2]



                                                                                                  Page 5 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    First Inclusive and Sustainable Growth (P169822)



                                     for emergency adjustments or
                                     suspension of work shifts. [PA 2]
            c. Create fiscal space
                                     PA 6: The Borrower has created
                                     fiscal space for crisis response by:
                                     (i) increasing the withholding of
                                     income taxes for large corporations
                                     in resilient segments while deferring
                                     payments from firms in the most
                                     affected segments; and (ii) reducing
                                     the costs associated with
                                     purchased medical equipment by
                                     eliminating import tariffs and
                                     restrictions applied to these goods
                                     in response to the COVID-19
                                     emergency. [PA 3]
1.2: Protect migrants
                                     PA 7: The Borrower has: (i) created
                                     a Migratory Registry based on the
                                     information of the Migratory Census
                                     to ensure the effective provision of
                                                                            PA 8: The Borrower has facilitated
                                     public services to Venezuelan
                                                                            the economic integration of migrants
                                     migrants and refugees; and (ii)
                                                                            by: (i) improving the efficiency of the
                                     extended by 60 days the amnesty
                                                                            process to apply for migratory status;
                                     to irregular Venezuelan migrants,
                                                                            and (ii) processing 13,500 pending
                                     thus allowing them to remain in the
                                                                            humanitarian visa applications. [PA 3]
                                     country, and ratified the validity of
                                     Venezuelan passports expired for
                                     less than 5 years, in the context of
                                     the COVID-19 crisis. [PA 4]
Objective 2: Removing barriers to private sector development and supporting the economic recovery
2.1: Create conditions for a more dynamic private sector
PA 9: The Borrower has adopted
provisions to require the inclusion
of international arbitration clauses
in large contracts. [PA 5]
PA 10: The Borrower has              PA 11: The Borrower has included PA 12: The Borrower has facilitated
adopted measures to facilitate       provisions in the Entrepreneurship business entry by enacting the
firm entry, by: (i) including        and Innovation Law to facilitate firm executive regulation that implements
provisions in the Productive Law entry and growth of small young            a simplified regime for corporations
to strengthen the Limited Liability firms, including: (i) the creation of a and reduces business formalization
Modality for firms, and (ii)         simplified regime for registering a cost. [PA 6]
eliminating the obligation for       corporation; and (ii) the creation of
importers to prove compliance        entrepreneurship-enhancing
with national technical              programs in the education system.
requirements prior to arrival,       [PA 5]


                                                                                                       Page 6 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Inclusive and Sustainable Growth (P169822)



replacing it with a posteriori risk-
based control. [PA 6]
                                                                           PA 13: The Borrower approved
                                                                           regulations to facilitate trade and
                                                                           foreign investment by reducing or
                                                                           eliminating import tariffs on a range of
                                                                           agricultural inputs and equipment,
                                                                           computers, and cellphones. [PA 7]
2.2: Reduce distortions in labor markets
PA 14: The Borrower has enacted
a new law and regulatory
framework aiming at preventing
and eradicating violence against
women to, inter alia, improve their
economic opportunities. [PA 9]
                                                                              PA 16: The Borrower has approved
                                                                              and adopted regulations that provide
                                                                              an objective, pre-defined formula to
                                        PA 15: The Borrower has adopted
                                                                              make changes to the minimum wage;
                                        measures to reduce the number of
                                                                              such formula will be used to adjust
                                        sectoral and occupational minimum
                                                                              the minimum wages in case the
                                        wages that are fixed and improve
                                                                              tripartite negotiations between
                                        the timeline for setting minimum
                                                                              workers, employers, and the
                                        wages. [PA 6]
                                                                              government, do not achieve an
                                                                              agreement on minimum wage
                                                                              adjustment. [PA 5]
2.3: Improve financial sector governance and inclusion
PA 17: The Borrower has
reduced distortions on the
banking sector by issuing
regulations to: (i) eliminate new
Central Bank investments in
public financial institutions, and (ii)
increase bank liquidity by
considering allocations to the
Liquidity Fund as part of the
amount required by the Domestic
Liquidity Requirement. [PA 7]
                                        PA 18: The Borrower has helped PA 19: The Borrower has reduced
                                        expand the reach of the financial     financial distortions by consolidating
                                        system by: (i) reducing barriers to credit segments and adopting flexible
                                        digital financial services for        interest rate ceilings. [PA 4]
                                        underserved populations, including
                                        by allowing for remote uptake of
                                        basic accounts via mobile phones;
                                        and (ii) reducing the cost of getting
                                        financing from abroad by expanding

                                                                                                        Page 7 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    First Inclusive and Sustainable Growth (P169822)



                                    the criteria for exemption of the
                                    outward foreign exchange tax
                                    (Impuesto a la Salida de Divisas-
                                    ISD) associated with financial
                                    transactions. [PA 7]
Objective 3: Promoting public sector efficiency and fiscal sustainability post-crisis
3.1: Promote public sector efficiency
PA 20: The Borrower has
improved spending in goods and
services by issuing a resolution
that introduces a strategic
approach to procurement, through
expanding the use of framework
agreements and competitive
processes. [PA 2]
                                    PA 21: The Borrower has
                                    eliminated redundancies in staff by
                                    adopting and implementing an inter-
                                    ministerial agreement to cut
                                    duplicative posts in deconcentrated
                                    offices. [PA 9]
                                                                         PA 22: To improve transparency in
                                                                         the extractive industries, the Borrower
                                                                         has: (i) applied to become a full EITI
                                                                         implementing member country; and
                                                                         (ii) approved regulations and the
                                                                         Work Plan for EITI implementation.
                                                                         [PA 8]
3.2: Promote public sector fiscal sustainability
            a. Strengthen budgetary processes and align with fiscal sustainability objective
PA 23: The Borrower has             PA 24: The Borrower has: (i)         PA 25: The Borrower, through the
adopted measures to strengthen submitted to the National Assembly, National Assembly, has amended the
its budget preparation process by: for approval thereof, amendments Organic Code of Planning and Public
(i) establishing budget processes to the Organic Code of Planning        Finance to: (i) introduce a medium-
and milestones, including the       and Public Finance to: (a) introduce term fiscal framework and a fiscal risk
preparation and sharing of fiscally a four-year medium-term fiscal       management framework, (ii) revise
consistent ceilings for all public  framework and a fiscal risk          downwards to 5 percent the current
institutions covered by the budget; management framework; (b) reduce margin of 15 percent for changes in
(ii) strengthening MEF’s role on from 15 percent to 5 percent the        the budget without consulting the
budget forecasting and              margin for changes to the central National Assembly, and (iii) create an
programming, and (iii) endorsing government budget without prior         integrated national and subnational
the Principles of the Coalition of approval from the National            public investment system. [PA 9]
Finance Ministers for Climate       Assembly; and (c) integrate the
Action. [PA 1]                      forward-looking cost implications
                                    from public investment decisions
                                    into annual budgets; and (ii)
                                    established a Committee of Public

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Inclusive and Sustainable Growth (P169822)



                                    Finance to oversee fiscal risk
                                    assessment and mitigation. [PA 8]
           b. Reform energy pricing policies to rationalize subsidies and reduce fiscal costs
                                    PA 27: The Borrower has: (i)
                                    appointed a commission within the
 PA 26: The Borrower has issued
                                    Regulatory Agency for Hydrocarbon
 decrees and regulations to: (i)
                                    (ARCH) to set fuel prices and
 eliminate subsidies for premium
                                    increase transparency in price
 gasoline, industrial diesel, and
                                    setting by making final prices and PA 28: The Borrower has issued a
 natural gas for commercial and
                                    reference prices publicly available; decree introducing a gradual removal
 industrial use and reduce
                                    and (ii) launched the competitive      of gasoline and diesel subsidies and
 subsides for other fuels, and (ii)
                                    auction for renewable energy           established a price smoothing formula
 strengthen the Regulatory Agency
                                    opening the market to the private to protect consumers from excessive
 for Hydrocarbon’s
                                    sector while reducing the fiscal       price volatility. [PA 10]
 mandate/governance by granting
                                    impacts of electricity by adopting a
 this Agency the responsibility of
                                    least cost expansion plan for
 setting final prices of fuel
                                    generation and by allowing the
 products. [PA 3]
                                    pass-through of all costs to end
                                    user prices. [PA 10]
 Actions that were dropped*
 Improving mobilization of
 government resources:

 The Borrower has reformed its tax
 structure to increase revenue
 collection and reduce distortions.

 [PA 4]
 Promoting financial inclusion
 responsibly:

 The Borrower has mandated the
 auditing of CONAFIPS in terms of
 its capacity to reach vulnerable
 sectors of the population. [PA 10]

Source: ICR, Table 1, 2 and 3; PD1, PD2, PD3.

Each operation had 10 actions, with a total of 50 sub-actions (16 in DPL1, 18 in DPL2, 16 in DPL3), in 16
distinct policy sub-areas.

*These two actions in DPL1 were subsequently dropped and are not included in the ICR or this evaluation.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    First Inclusive and Sustainable Growth (P169822)




Each DPL had 10 Prior Actions (PAs), with a total of 50 actions/subactions in 16 distinguishable policy
areas/subareas (see Table 1). DPLs 2 and 3 followed up in four of the policy subareas initiated in DPL1,
while DPL 3 followed up in four of the six new policy subareas introduced in DPL2. Although the decade-long
hiatus in Ecuador’s relationship with international financial institutions forestalled drawing on recent lessons
from policy-based loans in Ecuador, the design teams were able to draw on adequate analytical and strategic
work and adapt the series to the unprecedented COVID-19 crisis. Some initial policy subareas were not
followed up in subsequent DPLs due to changing circumstances or priorities or a shift to support under a
separate operation (e.g., financial sector). The PDs clearly explained the rationale for and expected results
for most PAs and, where appropriate, the sequencing across operations (although the results chains were not
explicitly stated as such).

Objective 1: Responding to the COVID-19 pandemic to protect the vulnerable

By expanding the Social Registry’s objectives and facilitating new compensation mechanisms, PA 1 was
designed to implement the original (longer-term) objective of “protecting vulnerable segments of the
population through well-targeted social programs” through policy and institutional changes to address the
weaknesses and low coverage of the existing system. It provided an essential base for PA 2 and PA 3 to both
expand coverage of social safety nets and introduce emergency programs to offset the devastating economic
effects of COVID-19 containment measures on poor and vulnerable informal workers, especially women and
migrants, and thereby minimize erosion of previous gains in poverty reduction. These actions were also
essential to establish the means to mitigate social impacts of energy subsidy reforms. The causal chain was
clear and explicit, based on strategic and analytical work (SCD 2018, ESMAP study, draft Technical Report
on the triplet crises [S. Olivieri, 2020]). Ratings: PA 1: Highly Satisfactory; PA 2: Highly Satisfactory; PA
3: Highly Satisfactory.

By increasing flexibility in work arrangements and access to unemployment benefits, PA 4 and PA 5
addressed the well-documented rigidities of Ecuador’s labor market, due to “rigid labor regulations [that]
make formal working arrangement incompatible with the COVID-19 containment measures” (PD2, para. 45).
These measures directly addressed the need for quick responses to COVID-19 containment measures for
formally employed workers. Nevertheless, these actions made only a modest contribution to the objective “to
protect the vulnerable,” who predominantly work informally, and would therefore have to rely on direct cash
payments to offset the impact of COVID-19 measures. Ratings: PA 4: Moderately Satisfactory; PA 5:
Moderately Satisfactory.

PA 6 attempted to address the severe impact of COVID-19 containment measures on key sectors by
deferring tax payments by micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) and eliminating import tariffs and
restrictions on imported medical equipment, offset on the fiscal side by increasing the withholding of income
taxes for large corporations. These measures were consistent with the objective (in DPL2) of protecting the
vulnerable and responding to the COVID-19 crisis; no long-term results were indicated, and there was no
follow-up in DPL3. Although the associated Indicative Trigger consisted of establishing a Solidarity Fund,
purportedly “to be financed through a temporary progressive income tax on firms and formal employees” (PD
2, para. 49), this was dropped due to non-approval by the National Assembly (PD 3, Annex 2). Rating: PA 6:
Satisfactory.

PA 7 and PA 8 addressed the long-term as well as immediate COVID-19-related issues of a large migrant
population (nearly 400,000 Venezuelans took up residence since 2015), in the context of an exceptionally
welcoming policy toward migrants, including access to health and education services (PD 2, para. 51).


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    First Inclusive and Sustainable Growth (P169822)



Drawing on the Ecuador Venezuelan Migration Report (2020), creating a Migratory Registry was essential to
ensuring effective provision of services and short-term relief. Extending amnesty, improving the application
process and processing humanitarian visas were clearly major contributions to achieving the objective of
protecting the vulnerable migrant population and facilitating their integration. Ratings: PA 7: Satisfactory;
PA 8: Satisfactory.

Objective 2: Removing barriers to private sector development and supporting the economic recovery

As part of its economic policy transition, Ecuador was seeking to improve the framework for public-private
partnerships (PPP) for investment in infrastructure and the oil sector (PD 2, para. 55). But Ecuador’s
constitutional and legal restrictions on arbitration and its withdrawal in 2006 from the International Center for
Settlement of Investment Disputes posed significant deterrents to international private investment, which had
subsequently fallen (SCD 2019 and Country Private Sector Diagnostic, 2020). PA 9 was considered an
essential condition to relieve this barrier to private participation in the economic recovery by requiring the
inclusion of arbitration clauses in large contracts. Rating: PA 9: Satisfactory.

Measures to facilitate firm entry under PAs 10-12 were designed to encourage creation and growth of new,
small formal firms, responding to the high degree of informality in Ecuador, absence of limited liability, and a
relatively restrictive regulatory (and tariff) regime (empirically correlated with low firm entry and productivity)
(PD1, para. 60; PD3, paras. 25-26). The actions were appropriately designed and sequenced to remove
important barriers to the objective of private sector development (based on the 2018 SCD and 2019 CPSD).
PA10 facilitated limited liability as a registration modality; PA11 simplified registration and introduced
entrepreneurship into the education system; and PA12 further reduced the costs of business formalization.
(However, PD3, para. 27, recognized that the impact of reducing the cost of entry may be limited by
perceived lack of benefits to formalization). Ratings: PA 10: Satisfactory; PA 11: Satisfactory; PA 12:
Satisfactory.

PA 13 reduced the relatively high tariffs (including compound tariffs, with both ad valorem and specific
components) on a range of inputs and equipment that had been found to adversely affect “the country’s
export competitiveness…value-added and total factor productivity growth” (Ecuador Trade, Investment and
Competitiveness Report, 2019; PD 3, para. 55). Eliminating tariffs on computers and cellphones was
expected to facilitate teleworking and “substantially reduce the cost of the ICT consumption basket for
households, benefitting relatively more the lower end of the income distribution” (PD 3, para. 56). These
measures offered a direct and important approach to redressing an identified constraint on the objectives of
private sector development and economic recovery. Rating: PA 13: Satisfactory.

By introducing a new law and regulatory framework aimed at preventing violence against women, PA 14 was
intended to facilitate “women’s participation in education, employment and civic life” (PD1, para. 74) and
thereby enable them to better take advantage of employment opportunities. While improving the
legal/regulatory framework was an important first step, the link to enhancing economic recovery was tenuous,
while many other factors affected women’s employment. In any case, DPL1’s focus on violence toward
women was dropped in DPL2 and DPL3 (ICR, footnote 21), in favor of a focus on minimum wages. Rating:
PA 14: Moderately Unsatisfactory.

PA 15 and PA 16 were intended to reduce labor market distortions by reducing the number of sectorial and
occupational minimum wages (from over 2000) and providing a formula for setting minimum wages when
tripartite negotiations fail. PD2 (para. 19) noted that “the minimum wage structure in the economy does not
reflect differences in productivity within and across firms” (based on a study of Ecuador labor market


                                                                                                       Page 11 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    First Inclusive and Sustainable Growth (P169822)



regulations). And the ICR (para. 38; though not the PDs) stated that “the gap between wages and productivity
in the economy continues to increase.” While desirable to reduce the variability, complexity and uncertainty in
the minimum wage-setting process (based on the 2020 Ecuador Jobs Diagnostic), at best these measures
were expected to have only an indirect positive effect on formal employment (consistent with the objective of
removing barriers to private sector development) in the medium-to-long run, with neutral short-term effects
(PD2, para. 17). However, the actions only initiated the process of reforming the setting of minimum wages,
and lacked the training and communication on the formula necessary to facilitate its application, and, more
importantly, the further steps needed to ensure implementation and guardrails against reversal, Ratings: PA
15: Moderately Unsatisfactory; PA 16: Moderately Unsatisfactory.

PA 17 was intended to reduce financial sector distortions and improve the competitiveness of private banks
by removing Central Bank subsidized funding of public banks to level the playing field and by increasing
liquidity available for lending (PD1, para. 66). While these were appropriate financial sector reforms, the link
of the anticipated reversal of “the ongoing slowdown in credit growth” to the objective of expanding private
sector investment and growth was indirect, moderate and not explicitly stated. Rating: PA 17: Moderately
Satisfactory.

PD 2 (para. 65) extended the original objective of private sector development to include economic recovery
and added “expanding the reach of the financial sector” as a means toward the end of addressing Ecuador’s
relatively shallow financial sector and low financial inclusion. Drawing on the Financial Stability and Inclusion
ASA (2019), PA 18 took an important step toward greater financial inclusion by enabling remote opening of
basic accounts (including via mobile phones). It also mitigated a barrier to foreign exchange flows for
investment, housing and microcredit. PA 19 represented a modest step toward addressing the financial
repression from rigid interest rate ceilings by consolidating the number of credit segments and introducing a
more flexible methodology for determining interest rate ceilings, but it did not actually remove interest rate
ceilings nor clearly promote financial inclusion (PD 3, para. 47). The rationale and expected results were
clearly stated. Ratings: PA 18: Satisfactory; PA 19: Moderately Satisfactory.

Objective 3: Promoting public sector efficiency and fiscal sustainability post-crisis

The Ecuador Public Finance Review (2018) highlighted opportunities to address the growing negative impact
of over-spending on goods and services on the fiscal imbalance (PD 1, para. 40, Figure 3). PA 20 was a
weak action with unclear significance, intended to increase the use of competitive bidding and framework
agreements in order to lower the costs and delays in purchases of goods and services. While the rationale
was clear, the impact of the action and the path to implementation and achievement of results was
unconvincing. The indicative trigger (IT) in DPL1 to reform the Public Procurement Law was pushed forward
into DPL2 and then dropped in DPL3 (in favor of focusing on the extractive industries; see PA 22). Rating:
PA 20: Moderately Unsatisfactory.

PA 21 (PA 9 in DPL2) addressed the public sector wage bill, which was substantially larger than the cost of
goods and services purchased (PD1, para. 44), by moving to eliminate redundancies in deconcentrated
(zonal and district) offices that had arisen during a period of rapid hiring (PD 2, para. 75, drawing on the
Ecuador Public Finance Review). Eliminating such redundancies was an appropriate and important way to
restrain the public sector wage bill without adversely affecting service delivery. While implementation was
specified in the PA, the means for carrying out and monitoring implementation were not entirely clear.
Rating: PA 21: Moderately Satisfactory.




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Inclusive and Sustainable Growth (P169822)



 Rather than following through on previous measures to reduce redundancies and spending on goods and
 services, DPL3 refocused the efforts to promote public sector efficiency on the extractive industry. However,
 PD3 and PD2 provided no explicit discussion of the underlying rationale and relative budgetary importance
 (PD2 mentioned joining the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) only as a secondary part of
 IT10). PA 22 approached improving transparency in the extractive industries by mandating membership in
 the EITI along with approved regulations and a work plan for implementation. EITI membership requires
 adhering to good governance standards, disclosure requirements and periodic validation, thus subjecting the
 sector to international standards beyond domestic politics. Nevertheless, joining the EITI was not expected to
 have any short-term impact, but rather “strengthen the strategy for gradual elimination of fossil fuels
 subsidies” (PD3, para. 33). Thus it offered a modest, albeit important contribution to the objective of public
 sector efficiency and fiscal sustainability. Rating: PA 22: Moderately Satisfactory.

 PAs 23-25 constituted a package of reforms to strengthen the budget preparation process (PA23), provide a
 framework and oversight for fiscal risk assessment and mitigation (PA24), and introduce a medium-term
 fiscal framework by amending the Organic Code of Planning and Public Finance (PA25, repeating what was
 originally the first part of PA24). Drawing on the Ecuador Public Finance Review (2018), PD1 (para. 36)
 identified the major budgetary challenges as: the absence of “budget preparation procedures and milestones
 that ensure consistency between the macro-fiscal programming exercise and the annual budget
 programming” (with a more than 20 percent deviation between approved and executed budgets); weak multi-
 year planning; and “a bottom up approach with no aggregate, sectoral, or institutional ceilings.” PAs 23-25
 addressed these constraints through an appropriately sequenced series of measures, beginning with
 “regulatory changes that can be introduced by the Executive” (PD1, para. 37) before moving to institutional
 and legislative reforms. Although the expected results were minimal in the short term, these measures were
 expected to improve budget control, fiscal discipline and assessment of fiscal risks to exogenous shocks over
 the medium term, as well as to help ensure the availability of resources for countercyclical social policy (PD3,
 para. 34). Ratings: PA 23: Satisfactory; PA 24: Satisfactory; PA 25: Satisfactory.

 PD1 (para. 45) and the study on Sustainable and Equitable Energy Subsidy Reforms in Ecuador (ESMAP,
 2018-2020) identified energy subsidies as a major drain on the fiscal budget (2.3 percent of GDP for liquid
 fuel subsidies in 2017), with over 80 percent of the subsidies benefiting the top 60 percent of the income
 distribution. PAs 26-29 provided an appropriately sequenced series of measures to reduce or eliminate fuel
 subsidies, strengthen the regulatory agency and its processes, and open up renewable energy to private
 investment. The measures were clearly justified and based on a sound analytical framework and policy
 dialogue (PD1, para. 8). However, although PD1 (para. 28) recognized the “complex political context that
 could impede or delay the implementation of reforms,” no explicit measures were included to assess or
 mitigate those risks in order to improve the chances of successful implementation. Ratings: PA 26
 Satisfactory; PA 27 Satisfactory; PA 28 Satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      First Inclusive and Sustainable Growth (P169822)



The three operations used ten results indicators (RIs) to measure the results of 28 PAs in 16 identifiable policy
areas. While six of the RIs corresponded to two or three appropriately-sequenced PAs, eight of the 28 PAs had
no RI that directly tracked the results of the stated actions (four PAs in DPL1, four in DPL2). The ICR (para. 13)
noted that “certain initial agendas had to be shrunk or dropped in response to more challenging political and
economic environments,” in particular the COVID-19 shock and increasing focus on fiscal policy (ICR, para. 13).
But the absence of relevant RIs inhibits evaluation of some of the measures to respond to COVID-19 (PA4
regarding work arrangements; PA5 on taxation) and to establish conditions for longer-term objectives (PA18 to
reduce barriers to financial inclusion and financing from abroad; PA21 to eliminate the fiscal cost of staff
redundancies). Although the RIs were generally relevant to the objectives and PAs, as a whole they were
insufficient to capture some of the “additional and lasting institutional gains” and drivers of progress resulting
from the actions and dialogue under the DPL series (ICR, para. 38). In particular, there were no RIs for the
following objective areas identified in the ICR: creating fiscal space for crisis response (ICR Table 1, column C);
expanding the reach of the financial sector (ICR Table 2, column C); and increasing the efficiency of spending
on goods and services and personnel (ICR Table 3, column B).

The definition, baseline and availability of data were generally satisfactory (except for unemployment benefits).

Objective 1: Responding to the COVID-19 pandemic to protect the vulnerable

RI 1 directly measured progress of actions to expand the social registry, increase coverage of poor and
vulnerable households, and create an emergency cash transfer scheme for those not covered. Although the PAs
did not specifically address women, the RI included a component to track the participation of this vulnerable
group (although the number of female beneficiaries might have been more suitable than the percentage). The
baselines and targets were clear, measurable, and attributable to the actions. Rating: Satisfactory.

RI 2 was directly relevant to PA5 as a temporary measure to offset the impact of COVID-19 on employment, but
it suffered from “measurement challenges” that prevented monitoring progress over the baseline (ICR, para. 39).
Rating: Unsatisfactory.

RI 3 was directly relevant to the objective of protecting migrants as a particularly vulnerable group and fully
adequate to measure the outcome of the associated actions (PA7 and PA8). The baseline was nil, and the
targets were clear and measurable. Rating: Satisfactory.

Objective 2: Removing barriers to private sector development and supporting the economic recovery

RI 4 was relevant to the intermediate outcome of addressing “rigidities linked to binding interest rate ceilings”
(PD3, para. 46), but not a direct measure of the objective of “increased available liquidity for the financial sector
to extend credit” (ICR, para. 50). Although not a standard indicator, the methodology was developed with the
support of the Bank (ICR, footnote 25) and explained in PD3 (footnote 25). How the target was determined
was unclear. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

RI 5 was directly relevant to the actions (PA15 and PA16) to reduce and regularize the number of minimum
wages (over 2300) set at the national, sectoral and occupational levels, toward the objective of reducing labor
market distortions that constrain private sector development. While readily measurable and targeted, it did not
capture the intended result of reducing the divergence between wages and productivity – “the main driver of
progress” (ICR, para. 38). Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

RI 6 directly measured the results of actions to provide a simplified, lower-cost modality for firm registration in
order to lower barriers to regularizing the micro and small firms that dominate Ecuador’s enterprises. Although it

                                                                                                       Page 14 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      First Inclusive and Sustainable Growth (P169822)



could not capture the expected growth in output and employment resulting from new companies, it adequately
tracked progress toward the objective of a more dynamic private sector. The indicator was readily measured and
the baseline and targets were clear. Rating: Satisfactory.

RI 7 directly measured the impact of PA 13 on lowering the cost of imported capital and inputs for key sectors
(including agriculture and technology). Although this indicator could not capture the intended outcome of
improved competitiveness, PD3 (para. 55) explained why this action was needed to achieve that result. The
“coverage ratio” was readily measured and targeted. Rating: Satisfactory.

Objective 3: Promoting public sector efficiency and fiscal sustainability post-crisis

RI 8 was an indirect measure of progress toward increasing transparency in the extractive industries. PD3 (para.
59) explained that adhering to EITI standards regarding transparency in financial flows to public natural resource
companies would “ultimately… make clear the true cost of energy subsidies, leading to a reduction that frees
resources for other development objectives.” This RI was simple to measure and appropriate to indicate
institutional progress, in combination with RI 10 to capture the intended outcome of reduced subsidies in
furtherance of the objective of fiscal sustainability. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

RI 9 was a reasonable overarching indicator of the key result of PAs 23-25, though it could not capture detailed
progress toward implementing each of the nine sub-actions under these PAs. It was relevant to the objective of
improving fiscal sustainability by measuring the outcome of various actions to overcome the lack of planning and
accountability that had allowed executed budgets to exceed approvals by an average of 17 percent (PD3, para.
62). It was clearly measurable, available and targeted. Rating: Satisfactory.

RI 10 directly measured the impact of PAs 26-28 on rationalizing and reducing fossil fuel subsidies, thereby
offsetting their negative impact on the objective of fiscal sustainability. These subsidies were set in an ad hoc
manner that disproportionately benefited the upper tiers of the income distribution, and they were a significant
drain on public resources (over 2 percent of GDP in 2017; PD3, paras. 65 and 67). While the indicator readily
measured the fiscal impact, it did not capture the distortionary effect in terms of the gap between domestic and
international prices (ICR, para. 38). Rating: Satisfactory.

Although 6 of 10 RIs were rated Satisfactory, an overall MS rating reflects deficiencies in capturing progress on
a number of PAs and failure to track institutional and other gains with longer-term impact on objectives, as well
as one indicator that could not be tracked.

Table 2: Results indicators by Objective; baseline and target values; status and achievement

                                        RI     Baseline   Target      Actual as % of
                                                                     Actual
                         Associated                                                   RI Achievement
Results indicator (RI)                                                   targeted
                            PAs                                                            rating
                               Relevance (2019)    (2021)   (2021)        change
               Objective 1: Responding to the COVID-19 pandemic to protect the vulnerable
         RI 1:           PA1       S         0                                              High

    (i) Number of                                         822,000   952,516         116%           (The excess
   beneficiaries of                                                  (2020)                      number of total
  emergency cash            PA2                   38%                               170%        beneficiaries more
       transfers                                                    1,400,000                     than offset the
                                                                                                  shortfall in the

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Inclusive and Sustainable Growth (P169822)



                                                                        (2022)                          percentage of
                                                                                                        women, so the
  (ii) Share of poor      PA3                    n.a.       80%                         139%         number of women
households included                                                                                  reached exceeded
      in the social                                                     90.7%                         the implicit target.
 assistance registry
                                                            90%                         143%

                                                                        98.1%           91%
     (iii)Share of                                                      (2022)
 beneficiaries of the                                     [847,264]                    [135%]
  emergency cash                                                        81.5%
  transfer that are                                                     (2020)
         women
                                                                      [1,141,000]
 [implied number of
women beneficiaries]
                                                                                       Access to
                                                                                    unemployment
RI 2: Average time to                                                                benefits rose
       access                                             10 days                   to 9400-13500
                          PA5          U       60 days                   n.a.                              Modest
   unemployment                                            (2020)                     during peak
  benefits reduced                                                                    COVID vs.
                                                                                      2400-3800
                                                                                      rest of year
        RI 3:

   (i) Numbers of                                                      165,761
                                                                                        72%
migrants covered by
                          PA7                  0 (2017) 230,000
   the registry to                                                      56,062
                                       S                                                133%             Substantial
       increase
                          PA8                  0 (2018)    42,000
                                                                58,669
                                                                           140%
      (ii) Number of                                             (2022)
  Humanitarian Visas
   issued to increase
   Objective 2: Removing barriers to private sector development and supporting the economic recovery
 RI 4: Co-movement
 between interest rate
 ceilings and nominal
interest rates charged PA19        MS          0   0.2 (2022) 0.33 (2022)  165%            High
       by banks for
     productive and
 corporate segments
     RI 5: Number of   PA15                > 2300                 2279
  referential minimum              MS                < 2000                < 7%         Negligible
         wages set     PA16                 (2017)               (2023)
 RI 6: Number of new   PA10         S        8200    10,800     15,431     278%            High
        commercial                          (2017)

                                                                                                         Page 16 of 25
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  First Inclusive and Sustainable Growth (P169822)



      companies registered            PA11                                     22,000        531%
                                                                               (2022)
                             PA12
    RI 7: The share of
         capital and
                                                 12%        18%
    intermediate inputs
                             PA13        S                            24%           200%              High
     subject to reduced
                                                (2019)     (2022)
  tariff rates (“coverage
            ratio”)
                 Objective 3: Promoting public sector efficiency and fiscal sustainability post-crisis
             RI 8:
                                                             Yes       Yes      50% (2022)
  (i) Ecuador is an EITI                          No       (2020)
   member country by         PA22       MS                         No (2022)        100%          Substantial
     2021. (ii) Ecuador                           n.a.       Yes
  has published its first                                  (2022) Yes (2023)       (2023)
          EITI report
   RI 9: The difference      PA23
        between the                             16.3%        8%
     approved and the        PA24        S                            2.7%          149%              High
   executed budgets to                          (2017)     (2022)
           decline           PA25
                                                                                   -215%
                             PA26
     RI 10: Fossil fuel                          2.1%       0.8%      3.9%
                                                                                 [but saved
  Subsidies as a share       PA27        S                                                           Modest
                                                                                 $488m vs.
   of GDP to decrease                           (2017)     (2022)    (2022)
                                                                               counterfactual
                             PA28
                                                                                      ]
  Source: ICR, Table 4 and Para 42.




  Rating

  Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Responding to the COVID-19 pandemic to protect the vulnerable



                                                                                                            Page 17 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   First Inclusive and Sustainable Growth (P169822)




Rationale
One RI was rated as high achievement, with two out of three sub-indicators exceeded. One was substantially
achieved, with one sub-indicator exceeded. One indicator could not be measured, although some evidence
was provided that the associated action was implemented and some progress was made toward the
objective.

The objective of expanding social assistance programs to protect the vulnerable was implemented through
actions to extend the scope of the Social Registry beyond the top income quintiles, improve the accuracy
through a Poverty Targeting Index, and extend emergency cash transfers to the poor who were not included
in the Registry (ICR, para. 42). The number of cash transfer beneficiaries (RI 1.i) exceeded the target even
before the 2021 target date and reached 170 percent in 2022. The share of poor households in the Registry
(RI 1.ii) likewise exceeded the initial target and reached 143 percent in 2022. Although the female share of
cash transfer beneficiaries (RI 1.iii) fell short of the 90 percent target, reaching 81.5 percent in 2020 (2022
data not provided), the actual number of women benefiting actually exceeded the number implied by the
targets for total beneficiaries and female percentage. These gains continue to be supported through the
Social Safety Net investment project (P167416). Thus the objective can be considered as fully achieved.
Rating RI 1: High.

The data on time required to access unemployment benefits (RI 2) were not available, and this indicator was
rated Unsatisfactory to monitor progress toward the objective of improving access to unemployment benefits.
Nonetheless, the ICR (para. 44) reported that actions to facilitate telework and ease eligibility for and
accessibility of unemployment benefits were implemented. Parallel evidence of impact was the surge in the
number of individuals accessing unemployment benefits in the peak COVID-19 months of June through
August 2020 compared to the rest of the year. Despite the absence of data on the indicator as formulated,
other evidence indicates modest progress toward the objective of improving access to unemployment benefit.
Rating RI 2: Modest.

The number of migrants in the newly-established Migrant Registry (RI 3) was targeted as a key milestone in
implementing the Government’s 2020 National Strategy for Equality and Human Mobility (ICR, para. 45). The
target was substantially achieved (72 percent). A second indicator, the number of humanitarian visas issued,
exceeded the target as of 2021 and reached 140 percent of the target by 2022. Another relevant action,
extending the migratory amnesty, “fell slightly short of expectations” (ICR, para. 45), but was not included as
a sub-indicator. Overall, achievement of objectives with respect to migrants was substantial. Rating RI 3:
Substantial.



Rating
Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Removing barriers to private sector development and supporting the economic recovery



                                                                                                  Page 18 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   First Inclusive and Sustainable Growth (P169822)




Rationale
Results exceeded the targets for three indicators, but progress toward the objective of rationalizing the setting
of minimum wages was negligible. PAs supporting financial inclusion were not monitored by an RI in this
series, but shifted to a separate operation.

Co-movement between changes in interest rate ceilings and rates charged by banks to productive and
corporate segments (RI 4) substantially improved, exceeding the target. This reduction in regulatory distortion
meant that Central Bank interest rate policy would be better able to affect credit markets. The ICR (para. 52)
provided supplementary evidence that the objective of expanding credit to the private sector was achieved,
with credit to the private sector as a share of GDP increasing from 34.3 percent in 2017 to 48.8 percent in
2022 (although it is unclear to what extent this can be attributed to the specific actions, in the context of wider
market-oriented reforms). While the objective of extending financial inclusion (in support of economic
recovery and private sector development) had no indicator, the ICR (para. 52) provided evidence that that
share of the population over 15 with a bank account had risen from 51.3 percent in 2017 to 64.2 percent in
2021 (from 42.6 percent to 58.0 percent for women). The data indicate high achievement with respect to
financial sector objectives, which continue to be supported through the investment project on Promoting
Access to Finance for Productive Purposes (P172899). Rating RI 4: High.

The DPL series initiated a process of reforming the setting of minimum wages to reduce labor market
distortions that were widening the gap between wages and productivity and adversely affecting private sector
development (ICR, section 7, para. 48). However, negligible progress was made in reducing the number of
referential minimum wages set (RI 5), and initial progress in stalling increases in the minimum wage in 2021
was reversed in a major increase in 2022 that “was not aligned with relevant economic variables” and
exacerbated the gap between the minimum wage and productivity (ICR, para. 49). Political constraints and
the unwillingness of sectorial commissions to relinquish control suggest little prospect for reversing the lack of
progress toward labor market reforms. Rating RI 5: Negligible.

Actions to introduce a simplified corporate form and facilitate registration were highly successful in achieving
the objective of removing barriers to private sector development and increasing the number of formal
commercial companies (RI 6). Positive results included increased tax revenues from these businesses and
increased participation of women as owners and employees (ICR, para. 47). Rating RI 6: High.

Actions to remove trade barriers to private sector development were highly successful in increasing the share
of capital and intermediate inputs subject to reduced tariffs (RI 7), thereby enhancing competitiveness. The
coverage ratio doubled – also double the targeted increase. These measures were carried forward in a
subsequent DPL series (ICR, para. 48). Rating RI 7: High.



Rating
Moderately Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 3
Objective


                                                                                                    Page 19 of 25
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      First Inclusive and Sustainable Growth (P169822)



                  Promoting public sector efficiency and fiscal sustainability post-crisis

                  Rationale
                  The actions to join the EITI and publish the required reports (RI 8) were intended to promote the objective of
                  fiscal sustainability through transparency that would reveal the magnitude of energy subsidies and generate
                  momentum for reform. While the target of being accepted for EITI membership was met, publication of
                  Ecuador’s first EITI report was delayed, and the contract for auditing financial statements has yet to be issued
                  (ICR, para. 55 and footnote 29). Nevertheless, substantial progress was made toward establishing the
                  conditions for greater transparency and sustainability. Progress toward public sector efficiency (PAs 20-21)
                  other than in extractive industries was not monitored. Rating RI 8: Substantial.

                  The target for reducing the gap between executed and approved budgets (RI 9) was exceeded. Furthermore,
                  the ICR (para. 56) reported substantial progress in implementing some other relevant actions regarding the
                  budget and Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, as well as recovery of Ecuador’s Fitch rating for public
                  debt from default level in 2020 back to B- in 2021. Thus, achievement of the objective of promoting public
                  sector efficiency was high. Rating RI 9: High.

                  Although the target for the indicator (RI 10) of reducing fossil fuel subsidies as a share of GDP was not
                  achieved, this was attributable to unexpected surge in global oil prices and the consequent rise in subsidies.
                  Nevertheless, the ICR (para. 58) noted that measures to rationalize subsidies via a price-smoothing formula
                  succeeded in reducing the gap between international and domestic prices of gasoline and diesel, and it
                  observed that measures in other budget areas such as wages and general expenditures helped to maintain
                  fiscal consolidation (ICR, para. 60). Furthermore, the RI as formulated was not suitable under the changed
                  conditions to indicate the impact of the DPL actions on the objective of improving fiscal sustainability. The ICR
                  (para. 58) reported that subsidies as a share of GDP would have risen far more without the policy measures
                  put in place – which were estimated to have saved $488 m in 2021 alone compared to the counterfactual
                  under high international oil prices. Additional information that the ratio of fossil fuel subsidies declined from
                  3.9% in 2022 to 3.0% in 2023 provides supporting evidence that the reforms have supported the objective of
                  moderating the fiscal costs of the subsidies, even if not to the level targeted. Rating RI 10: Modest.



                  Rating
                  Satisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Half of the targets indicated high achievement of objectives, and two PDO are rated as Satisfactory, with one
Moderately Satisfactory, yielding an overall Efficacy rating of Satisfactory.



                                                                                                                    Page 20 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      First Inclusive and Sustainable Growth (P169822)




Overall Efficacy Rating

Satisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

The relevance of prior actions and Efficacy are both rated as Satisfactory.


a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

The political risks of “Ecuador’s complex political context” (PD1, para. 10) were recognized at the time the
series was designed, but mitigation measures already have already proved insufficient to prevent setbacks in
the areas of minimum wage and oil subsidy reforms (ICR, paras. 72 and 75). The government failed to “engage
in communication strategies as advised” (ICR, para. 69), and large oil price increases following the
announcement of removal of subsidies in 2019 triggered violent protests that led to reversal. Protests in 2021
and 2022 likewise led to reversals (ICR, para. 59). Although PD3 (para. 65) stated that the Government
“redesigned its implementation through a consultative process,” electoral politics have forestalled progress – and
are likely to continue to do so, given that another presidential election will be held in 2025. While the follow-on
Green and Resilient Recovery DPF series plans to carry on addressing “the rigidities of labor regulation” (ICR,
para. 83), it appears to shift the focus of fiscal sustainability toward tax collection (perhaps in recognition of the
political challenges of reducing oil subsidies).

Limited institutional capacity remains an ongoing risk to successful implementation and maintenance of fiscal
and labor market reforms, especially in the face of political resistance (PLR FY19-FY23, para. 31). Political
factors appear likely to dominate limited institutional capacity to implement reforms with respect to oil subsidies
and labor markets. Nevertheless, some important institutional gains were made in the areas of social protection,
especially for migrants and the poor, and of financial sector governance (ICR, para. 42 and 50), which can be
strengthened in subsequent operations.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


                                                                                                      Page 21 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      First Inclusive and Sustainable Growth (P169822)



The design was based on extensive analytical work to offset a decade of Ecuador not borrowing from IBRD, with
clearly stated rationales for the actions. The high overall risk was identified, although the social and political risks
of reforms to fuel subsidies and minimum wages were not adequately anticipated or mitigated. The DPL series
provided an important framework for cooperation with development partners, including in response to shocks.

Analytical Underpinnings and Prior Experience

Given a ten-year hiatus in World Bank lending to Ecuador (2007-17), this DPL series and the accompanying
CPF (FY 19-23) had to draw on analytical work rather than recent country experience with lending operations.
The World Bank Group undertook 14 analytical activities and 8 advisory tasks in connection with the CPF (PLR
FY19-23, para. 18), underpinning the Systemic Country Diagnostic (SCD 2018) and the DPL series by setting
forth the priorities and challenges of transitioning from a state-led to a more market-oriented development
strategy. Design of the series also drew on the Public Finance Review (2018 and 2019), the Trade, Investment
and Competitiveness Diagnostic (2019), and the ESMAP study on Sustainable and Equitable Energy Subsidy
Reforms in Ecuador (2018-2020) (PD1, para. 82).

Results Chain

Although the program documents did not explicitly set forth results chains, they did thoroughly explain the
rationale for each action and the expected results. When the desired outcome was beyond the scope of the DPL
series, the PDs generally attempted to indicate the chain to achieve that result; e.g., interest rate reforms were
expected to “lead to ceilings that are more responsive to structural and cyclical developments in credit markets,
paving the way for a gradual convergence of interest rates toward market clearing rates across credit segments”
(PD3, para. 47).

Risk Identification and Mitigation

PD1 (para. 110) appropriately rated the operational risk as high – though this focused mainly on the
macroeconomic and institutional risks. It assessed political and governance risks only as substantial, arising
from the “complex political context,” pre-election politics and the lack of a parliamentary majority by the
President’s party (para. 111). The hope was that the “short-term economic impact would yield popular support
for continued implementation” (ICR, para. 69). By DPL2, however, the risk of social and political blowback in
response to elimination of subsidies was evident when “protracted civil protests and social unrest… forced [the
authorities] to retract a presidential decree mandating gasoline and diesel subsidy removal”...along with key
reforms to the Tax, Monetary, and Organic Budget Codes (PD2, para. 8). Mitigation measures consisted of “a
more gradual implementation of this agenda, including additional consultation and consensus-building with
lawmakers and citizens…[and] prioritizing reforms to support individuals and firms during the crisis.” But it was
not clear how adverse public reactions to reforms would be mitigated.

While PD2 and PD3 clearly stated the rationale for reforming minimum wage policies, they did not address the
institutional and political risks that in practice prevented achievement of the target. The ICR (paras. 48b-49)
indicated that, while some progress in introducing a formula was made, the reforms were “politically difficult to
implement,” which made the more effective approach of embedding it into the labor code politically infeasible.

Stakeholder Consultations

The CPF (FY 19-23) and DPL series involved substantial international cooperation among development partners
to support Ecuador’s transition from a state-led to market-based development strategy. Coordination with the
IMF was particularly close, “to ensure the consistency and complementarity of the policy measures” (ICR, para.

                                                                                                        Page 22 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      First Inclusive and Sustainable Growth (P169822)



68). Other key international organizations involved included the European Union, Inter-American Development
Bank, Development Bank of Latin America, United Nations, and bilateral organizations (PLR FY 19-23, para.20).

The COVID-19 crisis enhanced this international cooperation to support Ecuador, with the planned second DPL
split into two and additional funding from the Latin American Fund of Reserves (PD2, para. 4).

While the PDs and ICR give no indication of direct consultations at the national level other than with the Ministry
of the Economy, they state that the Government had undertaken “extensive consultations” with the National
Assembly and other key stakeholders regarding the fiscal reform package (PD2, para. 72).



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The Team substantially revised the DPL series and actions to respond to the COVID-19 crisis in a timely
manner.

Monitoring

DPL3 (paras. 36, 52, 55 and 61) noted that the series was designed to build on achievements, particularly in the
areas of cash transfers to the poor, business registration, trade barriers and public finance (although
achievements to date were not quantified). The ICR reported data as of the target date for all indicators but one,
and 2022 or 2023 data for six out of fourteen specific indicators.

Adaptation

The COVID-19 crisis precipitated major redesign of the series, with the planned second operation split into two
and the addition of specific areas to respond to the crisis. These significant changes were undertaken
expeditiously and strengthened the series’ overall design in pursuit of the objectives.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Both design and implementation were satisfactory, with an appropriate response to the COVID-19 crisis.


                                                                                                    Page 23 of 25
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       First Inclusive and Sustainable Growth (P169822)




Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

It is too early for evidence to be available on possible social and poverty impacts.



b. Environmental

It is too early for evidence to be available on possible environmental impacts. Nonetheless, improvements in the
institutional infrastructure for social protection and introduction of cash transfers in response to the COVID-19
crisis have improved resilience to shocks, including from the effects of climate change.



c. Gender

Measures to simplify and facilitate business registration have positively affected the participation of women in
formal businesses and employment, providing a basis for continued improvement in women’s participation in
economic growth.



d. Other

n.a.



10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR provides a coherent discussion of the context, rationale, design and adaptation of the DPL series. It
reviews the revisions to program objectives in order to respond to the COVID-19 crisis, and it organizes the PAs
into a coherent tabular structure (though not quite an explicit results chain that demonstrates the sequence
toward achievement of ultimate objectives). It points out shortcomings in results indicators and in mitigation of
political risks. It provides adequate data to support the conclusions and notes shortcomings of certain data. The
lessons learned are rooted in the experience of the DPL series.




                                                                                                    Page 24 of 25
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       First Inclusive and Sustainable Growth (P169822)



a. Rating

High

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                            ICR                    IEG
                                                                                    Disagreement/Comments
Outcome                            Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                   Satisfactory           Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                   ---                    Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                     ---                    High


12. Lessons

Political and social risks need to be fully assessed and mitigated to the extent feasible. Although the
rationale for reforming and reducing oil subsidies was clear, the impact of the likely social response to higher
prices associated with reduction of subsidies on the political will to maintain reforms was not explicitly
considered or adequately mitigated (apart from unheeded advice to the government to engage in a
communication strategy). The desirability of moving slowly to reduce subsidies was recognized only after the
reversal of that policy in the wake of violent protests.

Unanticipated shocks can be mitigated by adapting and extending a DPF series in a way that furthers
some longer-term objectives. Unexpected shocks of the magnitude of the COVID-19 crises cannot be
anticipated or mitigated in advance. Nonetheless, the DPL series provided a vehicle for rapidly responding to the
shock by modifying the objectives and actions, extending the series from two to three operations, and mobilizing
additional support from new as well as existing development partners. The DPL series used the opportunity to
deepen reforms in the social safety net for longer-term improvements in institutions and resilience to such
shocks, as well as to ongoing issues such as migration and vulnerable groups (ICR, para. 81).

Parallel operations and technical assistance are critical to successful implementation in an environment
of limited information and institutional capacity. Parallel operations and TA were especially important in the
design and implementation of actions in the financial sector, joining and complying with the EITI, and social
assistance for COVID-19, as well as development of formulas for reforms to minimum wages and energy
subsidies (ICR, para. 78). The Office of the Executive Director played an important role in providing current
information and strategic thinking to deal with the “fast-evolving country context.”


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                      Page 25 of 25
