     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN: Third Export Development Project (P132381)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023724

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P132381                                    TN: Third Export Development Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Tunisia                                    Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-83980                                 31-Dec-2020                                          21,788,377.33

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Jun-2014                                31-Dec-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            50,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             27,699,519.28                                               0.00

 Actual                                         21,788,377.33                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Burcin Pamuksuz             Ihsan Kaler Hurcan           Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (p.5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 9), the project
   development objective (PDO) was “to help increase and diversify exports by supported enterprises.”

   For assessing the project’s performance, the PDO is parsed as follows:

   Objective 1: To help increase exports by supported enterprises,


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN: Third Export Development Project (P132381)



   Objective 2: To help diversify exports by supported enterprises.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  13-Nov-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Third Export Development Project (EDP III) was to be implemented under the supervision of a high- level
   Steering Committee. This committee consisted of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry
   of Industry and Technology, the Ministry of Transport (MT), and the Association of Exporters from the
   Tunisian Union for Industry, Trade and Handicrafts. The project consisted of three components:

   1. Support to improve the business climate for export competitiveness and diffusion of technology
   and innovation (Estimated Cost at Appraisal: US$ 10.1 million; Estimated Cost at Third Restructuring: US$
   13.35 million; Estimated Cost at Fourth Restructuring: US$ 4.96 million; Actual Cost at Closing: US$
   5.57million)

   This component included three sub-components:

   1.1. Support for the restructuring and modernization of customs: This sub-component was to cover
   activities of upgrading the Customs Information System, introduction of a comprehensive computerized post
   review risk management system for customs, development of the authorized economic operator approach,
   support for the improvement of customs procedures manuals and guidelines and developing operating
   procedures and related computerizing system for logistic zones. The project was to finance technical
   assistance (TA), consultancy services, purchase of equipment, software, and licenses for the realization of
   these activities.

   1.2. Improvement of trade logistics: This sub-component was to support the government improve trade
   logistics to lower costs of exports for Tunisian enterprises. To achieve this, the following activities were to
   be implemented: Support for the MT to better define the needs for improvements in the Port of Radès (the
   main port of entry/exit in the country), development of a container’s management and tracking system for
   the Tunisian Company for Stevedoring and Handling (STAM), and support for the MT in implementing its
   Logistics Zones Development Strategy. For the implementation of these activities the project was to
   purchase hardware, software, cameras, and training activities for the MT, and consultancy services.

   1.3. Support innovation and dissemination: This sub-component was to support the National
   Standardization and Industrial Property Institute (INNORPI) to develop and disseminate activities on
   Intellectual Property to exporting firms, improve and expand quality assessments on industry and export

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  TN: Third Export Development Project (P132381)



compliance and ensure international recognition of Tunisian national labels and brands. In addition, the
project was to help the government to create new systems of management for traceability, certification, and
accreditation of goods and services destined for export.

2. Provision of financial and non-financial services to export enterprises (Estimated Cost at Appraisal:
US$ 35.8 million; Estimated Cost at Third Restructuring: US$ 32.55 million; Estimated Cost at Fourth
Restructuring: US$ 14.27 million; Actual Cost at Closing: US$ 14.85 million)

This component included three sub-components:

2.1. Competitiveness Support and Export Development Fund (CEDF-Tasdir+): A total of US$ 23.50
million of funds were allocated to a matching grant fund, which was to provide non-financial services in the
form of partial subsidies to enterprises/groups/associations involved in the industries/sectors identified and
supported by the EDP III. It was to provide non-reimbursable co-financing between 50 to 70 percent for
individuals and professional associations on a demand-driven basis. The program, which was called
Tasdir+, was to be an extension of the Export Market Access Funds (FAMEX I and II) established through
the two previous export development programs (EDP I approved in 1999 and EDP II in 2004). In addition,
this sub-component was to support the Tunisian Export Promotion Agency (CEPEX) to implement and
manage the Matching Grant scheme along with technical advisory services for monitoring and evaluation.

2.2. Pre-Shipment Export Finance Guarantee Facility (PEFGF-Dhamen Finance): This sub-component
was to scale up the Pre-Shipment Export Guarantee Facility, which was established under the EDP I and
called Dhamen Finance, by US$ 8 million. This was to raise the guarantee ceiling from Tunisian Dinar
(TND) 750,000 for goods and TND 200,000 for services to TND 1 million (goods and services) per operation
The facility was to be managed by the Tunisian Company for the Insurance of Export Credit (COTUNACE)
and supported by technical assistance to improve its governance and simplify the guarantee mechanism
and procedures. In addition, the project was to finance the creation of a Foreign Establishment Guarantee
product that would extend guarantee to exporting enterprises for securing eligible bonds from commercial
banks. Also, setting up regional representatives and marketing the Dhamen Finance in two regions outside
the country (covering costs for staffing operation and marketing campaigns) were to be implemented under
this sub-component.

2.3. Strengthening of the Tunisian Export Promotion Agency (CEPEX) to become a sustainable
export development services provider: The project was to develop and implement an institutional audit of
CEPEX to come up with an action plan and options for reforms for CEPEX and a Public Private Dialog. The
project was also to provide technical assistance to improve CEPEX functions, particularly market studies
and information systems.

3. Support to the selected ministries for the coordination and management of the project (Estimated
Cost at Appraisal: US$ 4.1 million; Estimated Cost at Fourth Restructuring: US$ 1.58 million; Actual Cost at
Closing: US$ 1.37 million)

This component was to finance activities to strengthen the capacity of the Project Coordination and
Monitoring Unit (PCMU) and focal points. It was also to provide support to the government, particularly the
ministries of trade and industry, in the implementation of export development studies and strategies through
the following activities: (i) Procurement of equipment to connect the Directorate of Quality and Consumer
Protection to Tunisia Trade Net; (ii) expert services for the Directorate General of Foreign Trade (DGCE) for
the drafting of texts governing e-trade in Tunisia; and (iii) technical assistance and software to the DGCE to


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    TN: Third Export Development Project (P132381)



  update its database on trade facilitation legislations and the preparation of a trade procedures
  manual/guide.

  Revised Components: At the first restructuring in November 2017, three activities under sub-components
  1.1, 1.2, and 1.3 were dropped because of the long delay between the project approval and effectiveness of
  about 15 months. These activities were no longer needed or had already been implemented by the
  government:

        Support for the improvement of customs procedures manuals and guidelines and developing
         operating procedures and related computerizing system for logistic zones (Sub-component 1.1),
        Support to the MT in implementing its logistics zones development strategy and its pilot logistic zone
         project in Radès (Sub-component 1.2),
        Improving and expanding quality assessments on industry and export compliance and ensuring
         recognition of Tunisia national labels and brands (Sub-component 1.3).

  At the fourth restructuring in June 2022, EUR 16.19 million was cancelled. Loan proceeds were reallocated
  among the categories and components in accordance with the implementation progress of the project and
  the needs of the government. More specifically, the contracts of two critical activities (development of a new
  Customs IT system and supporting digitization of the National Business Registry) which could not be
  completed during the implementation period (combined value of about EUR 7.5 million) were transferred to
  the World Bank-financed Digital Transformation for User- Centric Public Services Project (GovTech Project-
  P168425). Please see section on restructurings for details.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project cost estimated at appraisal was US$ 74.50 million. The actual project cost of
  US$ 30.99 million at project closing was lower than the estimate at appraisal because the project could not
  complete a significant portion of the project activities due to complex project design, high staff turnover in
  involved agencies, capacity issues, the onset of COVID-19, and adverse geopolitical developments.

  Financing: The IBRD loan amount estimated at appraisal was US$ 50 million (EUR 36.3 million
  equivalent). By the project closing, the project had disbursed US$ 21.79 million.

  Borrower Contribution: At appraisal, US$ 2.5 million of borrower contribution was foreseen to cover the
  operating costs of the PCMU, but the ICR does not report the actual borrower contribution at project closing.
  The local beneficiary contribution at closing was US$ 9.21 million against the estimated amount of US$ 22
  million at appraisal.

  Dates: The project was approved on 16 June 2014, and became effective on 1 September 2015. The
  effectiveness of the loan agreement delayed because the Tunisian parliament could not ratify the loan
  agreement following the formation of the new parliament in January 2015. The effectiveness deadline of the
  loan agreement was extended four times to allow time for the Tunisian parliament to ratify the loan
  agreement. The parliament approved the loan agreement on 10 June 2015, and other legal procedures
  were completed accordingly. The loan became effective on 1 September 2015 (Implementation Status and
  Result Report, 15 September 2015). The project’s original closing date was 31 December 2020. However,



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  TN: Third Export Development Project (P132381)



the implementation period was extended for two years at the third restructuring, and the project closed on
31 December 2022.

Restructurings: The project had four level 2 restructurings:

Restructuring No.1 (13 November 2017):

One of the PDO indicators (Total incremental exports by the beneficiary firms and associations in dollar
amount) was dropped and replaced by a new one (“% of additional annual export growth of beneficiary firms
compared to Tunisia’s total export growth for the same year) because of the uncertainty in economic growth
in Tunisia. The target of the indicator in the US dollar was not relevant, either, since Tunisia’s main export
market was the European Union. The two market diversification indicators (one for service companies and
the other for manufacturing firms) were merged. A new PDO indicator to assess the impact of the export
guarantee fund was introduced (Total value of exports that benefited from the export guarantee Dhamen
Finance). The PDO indicator of “Direct project beneficiaries (number) of which female” was dropped as
female beneficiaries were not considered to be direct targets for this project on export growth and
diversification. In addition, changes in the intermediate results indicators were introduced in line with
changes in the PDO indicators. Revisions were made in the category of expenditures, some of the loan
proceeds were reallocated, and some sub-activities were cancelled (see Revised Components).

Restructuring No.2 (29 January 2019):

Funds were reallocated among the budget sub-categories of Dhamen Finance, and the budget was revised
in line with needs. The amount of funds allocated to the budget for the Management of Tasdir+ was
increased. Funds were reallocated to an additional budget for training, communication, and impact
evaluation under Tasdir+.

Restructuring No.3 (17 December 2020):

The project closing date was extended by two years from 31 December 2020 to 31 December 2022. The
extension was to enable the completion of critical elements of the unfinished agenda, including the
modernization of the Customs IT system, fostering high value-added exports through the government Task
Force for the Development of Clusters and Value Chains and supporting the restructuring of CEPEX. The
loan proceeds were reallocated to retain key activities and discontinue delayed ones. It was also agreed
that no further disbursements were to be made under Dhamen Finance. In line with these changes, the
results framework was revised. The National Business Registry (RNE), as beneficiary of the project,
replaced INNORPI in charge of the central business registry. The targets for two PDO indicators (“% of
additional annual export growth of beneficiary firms compared to Tunisia’s total export growth for the same
year and total value of exports that benefited from the export guarantee Dhamen Finance) were decreased.
The intermediate indicators related to the activities of CEDF and Dhamen Finance, which were no longer
supported, were dropped.

Restructuring No. 4 (27 June 2022):

The project was restructured to focus on the activities that could be implemented and feasibly be completed
by the project’s closing date of 31 December 2022 and free up unused loan proceeds for urgent alternative
programs in Tunisia. The changes included the cancellation of EUR 16.19 million, reallocation of loan
proceeds between categories, and revision of component costs. The results framework was revised to
reflect the reduced scope of the project components. The intermediate indicators related to the cancelled

                                                                                                 Page 5 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN: Third Export Development Project (P132381)



   activities were dropped. The contracts for the development of a new Customs IT system and supporting
   digitization of the National Business Registry were transferred to GovTech Project-P168425.

   Reasons not to undertake a split assessment of the project outcome: Although the PDO indicators
   were revised at the first restructuring, the revisions aimed at improving the monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
   framework rather than introducing changes in the scope of the project. On the other hand, the revisions in
   the third project restructuring would require a split assessment of the project outcome, but these revisions
   did not have any impact on the project’s efficacy in achieving the project’s objectives because the project
   did not disburse any funds after the restructuring. Therefore, this review will not undertake a split
   assessment of the project outcome.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The World Bank Strategy: The project objectives were highly aligned with the World Bank strategy defined
in the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the Republic of Tunisia FY23–27. The PDO supports the
CPF’s first High-Level Outcome (reframing the role of the state in the economy to foster private sector led
growth) and addresses the country’s immediate needs to support post-pandemic reforms and create the
right environment for inclusive and job-creating growth (ICR, p. 14). To reach its economic growth and
development potential, Tunisia needed to promote exports and foster private investment. However, lack of
market and product diversification, low value added and little innovation in its sectors impeded the country
to achieve expected competitiveness and growth levels. In addition, access to finance, low logistics
competence, and supply chain issues posed challenges to the achievement of a competitive exporting
sector in Tunisia. The project was to improve logistics competence through the modernization of customs
and the improvement of technical infrastructure at the country’s main port. The project, through the
matching grants and export guarantee schemes, was to address business development capacities and
access to finance and address constraints to the diversification of exports.

Country Context: The ICR (p.18) reports that at the time of EDP III preparation, the new government had
not yet articulated its vision for development. However, the 2016-2020 Development Plan was subsequently
adopted and confirmed the relevance of the objectives and issues addressed by the project by highlighting
the lack of diversification and integration into global value chains and low value added as structural
weaknesses of Tunisian exports. The government’s medium-term socio-economic development strategy
outlined an ambitious program of economic and social reforms focusing on good governance and
improvements in the business environment, deepening economic integration and partnerships. The strategy
also focused on modernizing infrastructure to increase productivity and deepen integration into the global
economy. More specifically, the government developed a Logistics Zone Strategy and an action plan to
improve the Port of Radès. Lastly, the strategy promoted regional competitiveness. At project closing, the
project objectives remained relevant to the country context. The priorities of the next development plan for
2023-2025 aim to structurally direct the economy toward higher value-added sectors. The PDO is
particularly relevant for two of the three strategic axes of the development plan: Strategic Axis 2:
Knowledge and innovation driven growth and Strategic Axis 3: Competitiveness and private sector support.
These axes concentrate on strengthening the country’s human and institutional capacities, supporting
private initiatives, exports, and market diversification, improving logistics infrastructure and procedures, as


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      TN: Third Export Development Project (P132381)



               well as increasing access to finance for MSMEs. In this regard, the objective was outcome oriented and
               rightly pitched for development status and capacity in the country as described in the CPF.

               Previous Sector Experience: The World Bank provided a series of development policy loans that laid the
               ground for strengthening governance and introducing measures to improve competitiveness, promote
               exports, and create employment. The World Bank support in FY14 included this project to complement the
               budget support operation, the Second Governance, Opportunities and Jobs Development Policy Loan
               (Report No. 87849-TN) approved by the Board on April 29, 2014. The EDP III project was built upon the
               experience gained through the two previous export development projects implemented in Tunisia (EDP I
               and EDPII). Both programs aimed to simplify the export procedures and implemented matching grant
               mechanism known as FAMEX I and FAMEX II, pre-shipment export finance guarantee facilities and
               activities for improvement of trade logistics and modernization of customs. The EDP III, involved objective
               of diversification of exports and integration into global value chains along with targets set with previous
               programs. To achieve this, as mentioned in the ICR (p. 17) the matching grant component introduced
               innovative approaches (e.g., financing of implementation of offices abroad for a more sustainable impact on
               exports), rigorous impact evaluation methodologies (e.g., random selection, randomized control trial) and
               procedures (e.g., on-line applications). In addition, relying on the results of the impact evaluation of the
               matching grant scheme (FAMEX) under EDP II, implementation of the matching grant scheme was
               embedded in CEPEX in EDP III. As the implementation had relied exclusively on external consultants with
               little connection with any Government entity, the project did not build the long term sustainability of the
               export development services provision (PAD, p. 76). The EDP III concentrated more on sustainability and
               targeted a better balance between operational efficiency and long-term sustainability.

               The project objective was highly relevant to the bank strategy and was appropriately pitched for country
               context. Also, the objective was relatively more challenging compared to the previous export development
               programs implemented in the country. Based on these assessments, the relevance of objectives is rated
               High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Objective 1: To help increase exports by supported enterprises.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change for Objective 1:

                             Access to finance together with supply chain issues which involved import and export control procedures, low
                             logistics competence and matching new requirement of export markets such as traceability, are the main

                                                                                                                             Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TN: Third Export Development Project (P132381)



challenges for increasing exports in Tunisia. The theory of change suggests that if export business
environment is improved, capacities of public entities involved in export development are increased and if
these are complemented by an export finance guarantee scheme (PEFGF-Dhamen Finance), the exports by
the supported entities would increase. Also, if logistics weaknesses are addressed, Tunisia’s overall exports
would increase. These were to be achieved through the provision of technical assistance and consultancy
services for the public institutions involved in export development, purchase of equipment, hardware,
software, and certifications and granting finance for export guarantee program. The outputs expected from
these activities were upgraded and improved customs procedures and manuals, digitalized and modernized
customs systems, improved technical infrastructure of the port of Radès, improved technical capacities on
quality assessment and export compliance, and management of traceability, accreditation, and certification of
goods and services. The risk mitigation guarantees provided for pre-shipment loans through the up-scaled
facility of PEFGF-Dhamen Finance would increase the availability of finance to export companies. These
outputs would have been expected to lead to improved supply chain conditions and access to finance and
thus lead to increasing exports by the supported enterprises.

Overall, the casual pathways from project inputs and outputs to expected outcomes were valid and direct.
The achievement of the project outcomes and objectives could be attributed to the project’s intervention. The
critical assumptions were the following: (i) Improving the efficiency of customs procedures and firm level
logistics and policy support for SMEs help reduce transaction cost and create the favorable business
environment; (ii) direct firm assistance in the form of grants and improved access to finance though the
guarantee mechanism help firms access new export markets where the initial risks are perceived high; and
(iii) the sector institutional set-up for government of SME policies help improve coordination and streamlined
procedures.

The PDO indicator on annual export growth was relevant. The project team improved the original indicator at
the first restructuring. On the other hand, the PDO indicator on the export guarantee program was at the
output level. The indicator “Total value of exports that benefited from the export guarantee Dhamen Finance”
measured the level of the utilization of the export-guarantee mechanisms by the beneficiary firms, rather than
the impact of the guarantee-export mechanisms. Also, the results framework did not capture the outcomes
related to customs modernization or capacity building activities implemented within the scope of the project.

Outputs

Achievements as reported in the Results Framework:

      Terminal Operating System (TOS) and Smart Gate: The ICR (p.30) reports that these systems were
       not fully operational by project closing due to pending operational and maintenance contract, change
       of STAM organizational arrangements and capacity building for its staff.

      Number of firms that have become OEA (Opérateur Economique Agrée): This indicator was achieved
       with 122 Authorized Economic Operators compared to a target of 75.

      Total value of exports that benefited from the export guarantee Dhamen Finance (million US$): Target
       of US$ 745,000 could not be achieved. By project closing, the total guaranteed exports were US$100
       million for 78 beneficiary firms. The achievement rate was 17%. The ICR (p.16) reports that Dhamen
       Finance guarantees were hampered by legal and operational constraints. The necessary changes in
       the legal and institutional framework (adoption of a new law and the detailed specifications of the new
       product towards banks and beneficiaries, changes in government arrangements) required for rolling

                                                                                                 Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TN: Third Export Development Project (P132381)



       out of the pre-export financing guarantee scheme could not be completed timely. Therefore, these
       legal and operational constraints negatively affected Dhamen Finance. In 2022, there was no
       certificate granted due to the suspension of the activity pending the entry into force of new
       agreements with banks.

Additional outputs reported in the ICR:

     The modernization and digitization of Customs IT system: The project supported the acquisition of
      software modules and the provision of advisory services and training to customs officials for upgrading
      customs IT. Although, a contract for the purchase, installation, and deployment of a Customs IT
      system was signed on February 26, 2021, this activity could not be implemented before project
      closing. The ICR (p.16) reports that this activity will be implemented under the IBRD-funded GovTech
      Project - P168425. According to the ICR (p.21), the preparatory work to get this activity ready for
      implementation was not completed prior to appraisal. As a result of internal discussions, initial
      approach for modernization of existing IT system was reviewed leading to a change in the budget,
      requiring comprehensive additional work for preparation of the relevant Terms of Reference while
      delaying implementation significantly.
     Modernization of the CEPEX (this activity also supports the project’s second objective): The project
      provided technical assistance and IT capacity building to CEPEX to become a sustainable provider of
      export development services to Tunisian firms. CEPEX adopted a new organizational structure and a
      transition action plan in 2020. In addition, CEPEX Board adopted a new vision for CEPEX in the same
      year. However, due to the high turnover of staff and lack of political ownership of this reform, the
      implementation of the action plan was significantly delayed (ICR, p.17), and the target could not be
      achieved.

Outcomes:

     The modernization of logistics at the Port of Radès (the main merchandise port in Tunisia):
          o Average time to process and release containers in the Port of Radès (Time Release Study) (for
              domestic consumption customs regime (Nb. Of days): While the average time to process and
              release containers improved from a baseline of 5.10 hours to 3.78 hours, achievement fell
              short of the target of 2.5 hours.
            o Average waiting time per container to enter or exit the Port of Radès: Average waiting time
              declined from 4 hours to one hour showing significant progress but without meeting the target
              of twenty minutes.
            o Number of Containers Handled at the Port of Radès (TOS): At project closing the number of
              containers handled were 239,000. The ICR (p. 32) reports that the target of 435,000 containers
              handled per year at the Port of Radès corresponded to 2010 performance. The ICR (p.32) also
              mentions that while this indicator measures volume handled at the Port of Radès, it also
              depends on economic activity and volume of Tunisian imports and exports that suffered from
              Covid-19 pandemic and macro-situation in Tunisia.

     Spreading trade related technology and innovation improving business environment: The following
       achievements were expected to increase exports but also help Tunisian industries climb the value
       chain and penetrate new foreign markets (Project’s second objective) as well.
            o Average time to process export certification requests (saving from digitalization of export
              certification procedures, excluding test and audit delays): This indicator exceeded its target


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TN: Third Export Development Project (P132381)



              with a decrease on average processing time for export conformity certification request from 72
              hours to 19.31 hours compared to a target of 24 hours.
            o Time required to register at the RNE: Target of two hours required to register at the RNE was
              achieved. The baseline was 48 hours.

      Modernization of CEPEX was not complete by the project closing. If completed, the modernized
       CEPEX would help exporting SMEs in addressing their weaknesses through provision of services
       including the development of profitable export plans, diversification of export markets to reduce
       vulnerability and thus would contribute to increasing and diversification of exports as outcome.
      Additional annual export growth of beneficiary firms compared to Tunisia’s total export growth for the
       same year (percentage): Tasdir+ companies’ exports grew 39.3% more than the national export
       growth rate over the entire 2017-2021 period and almost reached the target of 50%. The ICR (p.16)
       reports that at the annual level the results were mixed, and the beneficiary companies performed
       above the targets in 2018 and 2019 (+32 percent then +30.5 percent better than the national level,
       respectively) and were less successful in 2020 and 2021 during the COVID-19 pandemic (+33.6
       percent and -48.6 percent, respectively).

The project’s beneficiaries achieved a better export growth rate compared to Tunisia’s total export growth
rate. In addition, some achievements were also reported regarding logistics competences (improvement of
conditions and modernization of the Port of Radès), and improvement of export procedures such as average
time to process export certification requests. However, some key activities like the modernization and
digitization of customs IT system could not be completed which would address low logistics competence, and
the implementation of Dharma Finance guarantee scheme, which was to address the constraint of access to
finance, remained significantly below the targeted level resulting in the under achievement of the expected
project outcomes. Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the first objective is rated Modest due to
underachievement.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Objective 2: To help diversify exports by supported enterprises.

Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 2:

As identified at the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p.2), Tunisia’s competitiveness was hampered by
(among other factors) the absence of market and products diversification. Its exports were concentrated on
the European market (70% of Tunisia’s exports), and France, Italy and Germany alone accounted for 56
percent of all exports in 2010 (PAD, p.2). The theory of change suggests that if financial and non-financial
services were provided through a matching grant scheme under the CEDF-Tasdir+ and value chain
development support provided exports of supported enterprises could be diversified. Different from previous
programs, the EPD III implemented the market diversification objective in the matching-grant mechanism
through selection criteria and enhanced support for companies committed in this direction. The activities for

                                                                                                Page 10 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TN: Third Export Development Project (P132381)



achieving diversification of exports were financing of CEDF- Tasdir+, support establishment of a task force to
coordinate the identification and promotion of promising value chains for export, organization of public-private
dialogue meetings to administer and promote exports. These activities were expected to result in identification
of high value chains, development of white papers on selected sectors, development of investment plans,
establishment of foreign offices (staffing and operating costs covered by CEDF-Tasdir+), development of
export plans, marketing plans and business plans for supported enterprises, In addition, provision of technical
assistance for the creation of new systems of management for traceability, certification, and accreditation of
goods, improving and expanding quality assessments were to lead to outputs of improved business
environment, export production, meeting new/existing requirements of potential/current markets. As a result,
these outputs were expected to result in increased and diversified exports as well as realization of
investments in selected value chains. Therefore, the causal chains from project activities and outputs to
expected outcomes were direct, and the achievement of the objective could be attributable to the project’s
intervention.

The results framework included one PDO indicator for diversification of exports; however, it was broad and
did not make a distinction between market and product diversification. There was also no additional
intermediate results indicator which could help assess achievements related to diversification of markets or
products.

Outputs:

Achievements as reported in the Results Framework:

      Value Chain Investment Plans developed (cumulative number): The project supported the setup of a
       Value Chain and Clusters Development Task Force (TFDCVC) within CEPEX to coordinate the
       identification and promotion of promising value chains for export in 2019. The TFDCVC developed
       three value chain investment plans for seafood, fashion, and medical tourism sectors. The public
       private dialogue meetings were held as planned.

Additional outputs reported in the ICR:

      The number of businesses benefiting from the financial support provided by the matching grant
       component (CEDF) reached 500 compared to 600 initially targeted (83 percent). The project facilitated
       the implementation of profitable export plans to help SMEs develop products, diversify their export
       markets to reduce vulnerability through the provision of marketing, and enterprise development
       services enabling them to capitalize on opportunities and respond to market needs under the
       Matching Grant scheme.

      One of the key objectives of the CEDF was to facilitate access to foreign markets for Tunisian
       companies, particularly through commercial establishment abroad for a more sustainable impact on
       exports. In this context, the CEDF supported 51 enterprises to open 63 representations abroad
       against an initial target of 75.

Outcomes:

      Percentage of beneficiary firms that expanded their markets (new countries) – existing and new
       products/Services: The project intended to realize the market diversification objective in the matching-
       grant mechanism through selection criteria and enhanced support for companies committed in this

                                                                                                 Page 11 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                TN: Third Export Development Project (P132381)



                                   direction (ICR, p.8). As a result, 71 percent of the beneficiary firms were able to expand their exports
                                   to new countries, against the target of 50 percent. The share of the European Union and the Maghreb
                                   countries in the exports of the supported companies decreased by nearly 8 points from 71 percent to
                                   63 percent. The data represents exports of 292 firms (241 industrial firms and 51 service firms) that
                                   constitute nearly 60 percent of the total number of Tasdir+ beneficiaries. About 45 percent of the
                                   diversification was in the new countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, North America, and Asia.
                                  As mentioned in the outputs section, although some private public dialogue meetings were conducted
                                   and some White Papers were developed, the necessary investments for the value chains could not be
                                   realized (Meeting with the project team on 9 November 2023). The factors which negatively affected
                                   project implementation as deteriorating macro-economic conditions and COVID-19 also affected
                                   realization of these investments.

                            The activities and the outputs addressed the main challenges of access to finance and export production and
                            business development weaknesses by the exporting SMEs. Although the target of the outcome indicator
                            measuring the diversification of exports under the matching grant scheme was achieved, the number of
                            beneficiaries for CEDF and the number of representations abroad remained below the targets. In addition, the
                            activity of the modernization of CEPEX which would provide business development services to Tunisian firms
                            could not be completed. Lastly, although three investment plans were developed under the activity of
                            fostering high value-added exports through TFDCVC, none of the investments could be implemented. As a
                            result, the project’s efficacy in achieving the second objective is rated Modest due to underachievement.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project’s efficacy in increasing exports by supported enterprises is rated Modest. The project’s efficacy in
                            diversifying exports by supported enterprises is also rated Modest due to underachievement. Therefore, the
                            overall efficacy is rated Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement


   5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis:

   At appraisal, an economic analysis was conducted to estimate the economic benefits of CEDF (i.e., Tasdir+)
   and PEFGF (i.e., Dahmen Finance) based on the expected additional exports generated by participants. At
   appraisal, the CEDF targeted 2000 beneficiary firms, and the evaluation was based on a total of US$ 40 million

                                                                                                                              Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TN: Third Export Development Project (P132381)



(PAD, p.80). It was estimated that the ratio of additional exports to one US dollar grant would be 6 for the first
year, 4 for the second year and 2 for the last two years. The CEDF was expected to yield additional benefits
through employment and workers’ income and taxes on additional exports. When these additional benefits are
translated into increased exports also, in total, it was estimated that US$ 40 million would generate US$ 536
million of additional total exports and yield a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$ 407.55 million (with a discount
rate of 8%). After managerial cost and grants and cost sharing disbursement, the expected NPV of CEDF flow
of funds was estimated at US$ 370.21 million. PEFGF was to make an additional investment of US$ 9.3 million
for six years (in addition to US$5 million of capital currently available from previous EDP), including US$ 1.3
million in TA and capacity building of COTUNACE for simplifying the guarantee procedures. The NPV of these
benefits was estimated to be US$ 123.5 million for the first six years while the NPV of net social benefits was
estimated at US$43 million over the same period (PAD, p. 23). For each US$1 of export the PEFGF was to
cover US$ 0.31, which was 90 percent loan share times 90 percent maximum guarantee share. The NPV of the
benefits amount expected to be US$ 123.5 million for the first six years, while the NPV of net social benefits
represents US$ 43 million over the same period. At appraisal an Economic Rate of Return (ERR) for either of
the programs was not calculated.

The ICR repeated the calculations for CEDF and PEFGF at project closing. The estimated NPVs over six years
at project closing for both programs were significantly lower than the ones estimated at appraisal. By project
closing, a total of 500 companies benefitted from CEDF. According to the ICR (p.40), a US$ 21 million
investment in CEDF (Grant and TA) generated US$ 26.22 million of additional total export over a six-year period
and yield an NPV of additional exports of US$ 28.9 million. After reducing managerial and grants cost and
considering incremental revenues (corporate and tax income, VAT, and social security benefits), economic NPV
of CEDF increases to US$ 35.3 million. The ICR kept the assumptions for the CEDF essentially the same but
changed the discount rate to 10%. A total of 78 enterprises benefited from PEFGF guarantee over the project
period. The NPV of the net flows including additional exports discounted at 10 percent is estimated at US$ 18.3
million for the first six years of the project; while the economic NPV, which includes net social benefits, is
estimated at US$ 23.3 million. The ICR kept the assumptions for PEFGF the same which originated from the
previous EDPs and the experience and the forecasts of COTUNACE. The ERRs calculated at project closing
were 55.75% for CDEF and 41.4% for PEFGF. The ICR (p.39) reports that making a comparison between NPVs
could be misleading due to the drastic change in the underlying assumptions with the deterioration of the macro-
economic situation during the implementation period and the systemic shock related to the Covid-19 pandemic.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency:

By project closing, only 43% of loan proceeds had been disbursed despite the project team’s efforts to extend
the implementation period to facilitate further disbursements and completion of activities. There had been a long
gap between the approval of the project and its effectiveness due to delayed ratification of the loan agreement
by the parliament of Tunisia and completion of the legal procedures following the ratification. When the project
became effective, some project activities were no longer needed or had already been implemented by the
government and were dropped at the first restructuring. The modernization of the Customs IT system, the
activity of fostering high value-added exports through the Task Force for the Development of Clusters and Value
Chains and the restructuring of the CEPEX could not be completed because of high staff turnover in almost all
involved entities, complex project design with high number of activities making monitoring and addressing
problems difficult and low procurement capacities in the implementing institutions. Also, conditions imposed by
COVID-19 pandemic, changes in the political context, and external political developments adversely affected the
implementation of the project. As a result, project implementation was significantly delayed. At project closing,
30 activities (i.e., one third of the activities not cancelled) could not be launched (ICR, p.24). As a result of
exceptionally high staff turnover, the Steering Committee which was established to address the major project

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TN: Third Export Development Project (P132381)



implementation issues and take measures needed to ensure effective project implementation could not assume
this role but operated as an intermittent monitoring of project progress. Consequently, the ICR (p.21) reports that
EDP III did not benefit from the same political support and follow-up as the previous programs.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The PDO was highly relevant to the country context and aligned with the World Bank strategy. The project’s
overall efficacy is rated Modest because of underachievement. The project’s efficiency is Modest due to
operational and administrative inefficiencies and lower actual NPVs. Based on these ratings, the Outcome is
rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government Ownership Risk: According to the ICR (p.17), the project implementation was delayed due to
very high staff turnover in almost all beneficiary institutions. This resulted in weak ownership. The weak
ownership poses a risk to the sustainability of achievements related to the activities of TFDCVC and public
private dialogue meetings. Also, the EDP III integrated the matching grant component into the CEPEX to
ensure long-term sustainability of the function of providing services to export companies coupled with
capacity building for CEPEX. Incomplete modernization activities for CEPEX as well as potential high staff
turnover pose a substantial risk to the sustainability and continuation of the matching grant scheme.




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN: Third Export Development Project (P132381)



Financial Risk: To continue implementation of matching grant scheme and export finance guarantee
program the government needs to secure financial resources. The ICR does not provide any information
about the plans of the Government of Tunisia on how to continue these programs in the country.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project had high strategic relevance as it supported the government of Tunisia’s medium-term social
  and economic development strategy. At appraisal, the implementation agency risk was rated High.
  During the implementation of EDP II, weaknesses in financial management and procurement capacities
  were experienced (PAD, p.21) and one of the major lessons learnt was that complexity of the program
  could make monitoring and identifying problems difficult. Despite these factors and lessons from previous
  programs, the project design was complex and involved a high number of activities and executing
  agencies. The mitigation measures (a high-level steering committee for supervision of the project,
  trainings on financial management and procurement) were insufficient. At the end of the project, 31
  activities (i.e., one third of the activities not cancelled) could not be launched (ICR, p.24). The governance
  risk was underestimated. The exceptionally high staff turnover in almost all relevant agencies had a
  negative impact on the implementation and ownership of the project. In addition, the ICR (p.18) reports
  that the preparatory work to get certain project components ready for implementation was not completed
  prior to appraisal and their technical complexity was underestimated. In the case of modernization of
  customs, initial budget modernizing the existing IT system had to change and a comprehensive Terms of
  References had to be prepared delaying the implementation and eventually as the activity could not be
  completed by project closing it was transferred to GovTech project. The overhaul of the legal and
  institutional framework of the guarantee financing mechanism (Dhamen Finance), delayed the roll out of
  the pre-export financing guarantee scheme and funds could not be fully utilized. The M&E framework had
  significant weaknesses with respect to the outcome and intermediate results indicators.

  The Bank's performance at entry is rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank project team provided TA and implementation support to the government of Tunisia to
 pursue its reform agenda and achieve progress and results under the EDP III (ICR, p.25). Through the
 Implementation Status Reports (ISRs), the Task Team addressed challenges and reported concerns on the
 implementation of the project to the authorities and the Bank management. The Task Team’s focus on
 development results was demonstrated by their effort to restructure the project to address the changing
 needs of the borrower and the changing economic context. The project was restructured to address

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN: Third Export Development Project (P132381)



 implementation and M&E shortcomings and extend the implementation period. Taking the complexity of the
 project activities into account, the Task Team mobilized important complementary technical assistance on
 areas such as impact evaluation of the CEDF matching grants, Dhamen Finance, and Customs IT reform
 (ICR, p.22). During the COVID-19 pandemic, the Task Team increased the frequency of implementation
 support and technical missions through regular calls with the Project Implementation Unit and relevant
 agencies. This included the introduction of the Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) to handle complaints
 from the Tasdir+ beneficiary firms. To ensure smooth project closing and enhance the quality of
 supervision in the challenging COVID-19 pandemic context, the Bank increased the frequency of
 implementation support and technical missions focusing on priority activities (e.g., Customs IT, CEPEX,
 Tasdir+).

 The Bank's performance at supervision is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.

 Based on the OPCS guidelines, the overall Bank performance is rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory in
 alignment with the outcome rating.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Overall, the theory of change was sound but there were some shortcomings in reflecting it in the results
 framework. The indicators were specific, measurable, relevant, and time bound. The indicators did not fully
 cover all project outcomes. The results framework did not capture the outcomes expected from the
 modernization and digitalization of customs IT, capacity building activities, or modernization of CEDEX.
 There was no indicator to capture the outcomes expected from the export guarantee program. The M&E
 design and arrangements were sufficiently embedded institutionally. Overall, the PCMU was responsible
 for consolidating and preparing all M&E reporting including impact and output indicators. The PCMU
 included an M&E Specialist who was responsible for coordination of monitoring of progress of outputs and
 outcomes with the technical focal points (Customs, Ministry of Transport, STAM and RNE) in each
 implementing entity.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project team addressed some of the shortcomings in the M&E design at the first project restructuring.
  A new outcome indicator was introduced to capture the impact of the export guarantee program, but it
  was at the output level. The indicator “Total value of exports that benefited from the export guarantee
  Dhamen Finance” measured the level of utilization of the export-guarantee mechanisms by beneficiary
  firms, rather than the impact of the export-guarantee-mechanisms. On the other hand, the remaining two

                                                                                                 Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN: Third Export Development Project (P132381)



  outcome indicators (one on diversification and the other on export growth) were improved to meet the
  changing economic conditions. The mid-term review was conducted in the second quarter of 2018 to
  assess the project implementation progress. During project implementation, the PCMU regularly collected
  necessary monitoring data while coordinating with focal points and beneficiaries taking part in the project.
  In addition, the Bank mobilized complementary technical assistance on areas such as impact evaluation
  of the CEDF matching grants, Dhamen Finance, and Customs IT reform (ICR, p.22).



c. M&E Utilization
  The project team and the implementing agencies used the M&E findings to make appropriate
  adjustments to the implementation plan, depending on the status of physical progress. In this regard,
  four restructurings were carried out based on issues identified in the progress reports and in line with the
  mid-term review.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was categorized as environmental and social assessment Category "C," and did not trigger any
   Bank environmental or social safeguard policy.

   A GRM was introduced during project implementation. Under the CEDF-Tasdir+ program managed by
   CEPEX, delays in beneficiary firms were experienced. The project received several complaints (about 20)
   related to these delayed payments. The GRM enabled the project to follow up on these complaints. All
   complaints were satisfactorily addressed (ICR, p. 23).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement: The project involved large number of activities and procurement packages associated with
   them. By project closing 31 activities could not be launched (only one third of the activities completed).
   Some of the key activities of the project namely Customs Information System and RNE were transferred to
   the GovTech project. The delays in procurement were as a result of weak coordination between the PCMU
   and the implementing agencies, administrative rigidity reflecting on decision making, low efficiency due to
   Bank’s and the government’s prior review of procurement activities and high turnover in project
   coordination and procurement specialist positions.

   Financial Management: The project experienced challenges in financial management through to project
   closing. The submission of financial reports and external audit reports were often delayed. Several
   qualified opinions on the audited financial statements with respect to the eligibility of certain resources
   allocated to the TASDIR+ component, due to non-compliance with the procedures for verifying eligibility

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN: Third Export Development Project (P132381)



   conditions were delivered. Also, the audit reports identified a number of questionable and non-eligible
   expenditures related to the matching grant component Tasdir+. The ICR reports that these difficulties could
   have been avoided if project implementation manual had been disseminated among the involved entities
   and effective internal audit function had been in place. In addition, scope of CGF audit could have covered
   CEPEX transactions and increased efficiency of the audits. Regarding the final audit, the Task Team
   commented that there were some open cases, and the examination of Controleur General de Finance
   (CGF) was ongoing. The CGF is expected to submit the final report to the government after the finalization
   of their examination (Meeting with the project team on 9 November 2023). According to the ICR (p.24), the
   overall FM performance of the project is deemed unsatisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                                Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance
                                Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following are lessons learned from the ICR with some paraphrasing:

      For complex projects with multi stakeholders, a performance-based finance model can
       help leverage beneficiaries’ commitment. The EDP III project involved high number of
       activities, many reform actions and many beneficiaries which created challenges to
       implement. To improve beneficiary commitment and achievement of project results, a
       performance-based financing mechanism with disbursement conditions (i.e., legal
       amendments related to Dhamen Finance; operationalization of the use of TOS and Smart
       Gate by STAM; implementation of developed investment plans by TFDCVC in the case of
       EDP III) can be included in the project design.

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       TN: Third Export Development Project (P132381)



        Extensive consultation and external expertise support to beneficiary institutions can
         help increase ownership of innovative approaches and can ensure their
         sustainability. While EDPI and II relied on consultants for the management of the matching
         grant component, EDP III targeted a better balance between operational efficiency and long-
         term sustainability and was designed to be implemented by government entities (CEPEX).
         Although this contributed to sustainability it was partially effective as a result of important
         implementation challenges related to the lack of stability in CEPEX management, the
         COVID-19 pandemic, insufficient staffing within the Tasdir+ team. In this regard, adequate
         consultation for ownership, sufficient assessment of implementation constraints of
         beneficiary entities as well as identification of mitigation measures and mobilization of
         specific expertise to compensate for capacity constraints can support ownership of
         innovative approaches by the beneficiary institutions and their sustainability.
        Alignment of export development support mechanism with the national export
         strategies and anchoring it in government institutions can produce additional benefits
         to existing and/or future national programs and mechanisms. Within the scope of EDP
         III, the matching grant program was integrated into CEPEX, and lessons learned from the
         implementation of this program can contribute to improvement of existing programs under
         CEPEX as well as development of new ones. For example, lessons of targeting beneficiaries
         in sector and market segments aligned with the country’s export development strategy;
         supporting medium-term development plans presented by companies; and improved reach of
         MSME firms to avoid capture by well-connected firms can feed Tunisia’s existing or new
         programs.
        In the context of political, institutional change and in the presence of capacity
         constraints, keeping the number of activities and stakeholders limited and focusing
         on the activities with the highest priority can help full achievement of the project’s
         objective. The EDP III addressed a wide range of reform agenda involving high number of
         stakeholders. The political instabilities and high turnover experienced in many of the
         beneficiary institutions resulted in implementation delays and even cancellation of significant
         number of activities. The project with fewer selected activities and beneficiaries would have
         been more suited to the political and institutional context and achieve its planned objective.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project. It is candid in explaining the issues encountered at
different phases of implementation. The report is concise and follows most of the guidelines. The report is
mostly internally consistent. There is a logical linking of the various parts of the report. The ICR provides
evidence based on the measurement of the indicators in the results framework. The quality of the ICR could be
further improved by enriching efficacy section (particularly for Objective 2) by providing additional evidence
outside the M&E framework. The discussion in the Lessons and Recommendations section are clear, useful,



                                                                                                    Page 19 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN: Third Export Development Project (P132381)



and mostly based on the evidence outlined in the ICR but they are more in the form of findings and
recommendations rather than lessons.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 20 of 20
