     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



                                                                         Report Number: ICRR0023492

1. Program Information



 Country                             Practice Area (Lead)
 Cameroon                            Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                   Approved Operations
 3                                    3

 Operation ID                         Operation Name
 P163657                              Cameroon DPO Series




 L/C/TF Number(s)                    Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-88190                          31-Dec-2018                                       206,170,573.50

 Bank Approval Date                  Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Dec-2017                         31-Dec-2018
                                     IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                      200,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Revised Commitment                       200,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Actual                                   206,170,573.50                                           0.00




P166694_TBL
 Country                             Practice Area (Lead)
 Cameroon                            Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                        Operation Name
 P166694                             Cameroon DPF2 ( P166694 )




                                                                                          Page 1 of 38
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-88190,IDA-64900                    31-Aug-2020                                           200402775.00

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Aug-2019                             31-Aug-2020

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           200,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                            200,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                        200,402,775.00                                            0.00



 P168332_TBL
 Country                                 Practice Area (Lead)
 Cameroon                                Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                            Operation Name
 P168332                                 Cameroon DPO3 ( P168332 )


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-64900,IDA-68660                     28-Feb-2022                                            98310520.00

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Apr-2021                             28-Feb-2022

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                            100,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                         98,310,520.00                                            0.00



 Prepared by              Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Antonio M. Ollero        Jennifer L. Keller            Gabriela Chamartin Escobar     IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL

                                                                                                Page 2 of 38
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



a. Objectives

The objective of the Cameroon First, Second, and Third Fiscal Consolidation and Inclusive Growth Development
Policy Financing operations was "to support the Government of Cameroon’s efforts to ensure fiscal sustainability
and improve public-sector management, enhance competitiveness, and enhance the provision of social services
and scale up social protection."

This ICR Review parses the objectives as:

PDO 1: To improve fiscal sustainability and public sector management;
PDO 2: To enhance competitiveness;
PDO 3: To enhance the provision of social services and scale-up social protection.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The programmatic series had three components.

Pillar 1: Improving Fiscal Sustainability and Public Sector Management supported reforms to: (a)
boost revenue mobilization by broadening the tax base, rationalizing tax expenditures, and strengthening tax
administration; (b) reduce delays in public procurement by adopting a more efficient governance framework for
public contracting (c) control the wage bill and improve government human resources management; (d)
strengthen the administration and oversight of state-owned enterprises (SOEs); (d) improve the management
and enhance the transparency of public debt in line with the Bank’s Sustainable Development Finance Policy
(which aims to help IDA countries manage public debt vulnerabilities and risks); and (f) following the outbreak
of the COVID-19 pandemic, ensure that funds allocated to the COVID-19 response were disbursed appropriately
and spent properly.

Pillar 2: Enhancing Competitiveness supported reforms to: (a) attain financial sustainability in the energy
sector; (b) improve road maintenance and strengthen the resilience of the road network to climate change; (c)
upgrade operational efficiency and improve trade facilitation at the Port of Douala to help enhance the
performance of logistics platforms and supply chains; and (d) foster competition in, and broaden access
to, telecommunications services.

Pillar 3: Enhancing the Provision of Social Services and Scaling Up Social Protection supported reforms
to: (a) improve the delivery of health services, by strengthening and scaling up the performance based funding
framework, which had produced positive results in a pilot phase; (b) improve the delivery of education by
addressing the critical issue of textbook policy reform which can yield substantial wins in terms of primary
completion rates and student learning; and (c) in response to the economic and social disruptions caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic, expand social safety net programs and digitalize cash transfers to beneficiaries in urban
areas.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Program Cost and Financing. The cost of the programmatic series was Euro (EUR) 434.1 million (US$500
million equivalent) – EUR 172 million (US$200 million equivalent) for the first operation, EUR 179.5 million
(US$200 million equivalent) for the second, and EUR 82.6 million (US$100 million equivalent) for the third. The

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 38
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



series was financed by three International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) loans to the
Republic of Cameroon, of which the final disbursed amount was EUR 434.1 million (US$504.9 million
equivalent).

Dates. The first operation was approved on December 20, 2017, became effective on December 22, 2017, and
closed as scheduled on December 31, 2018. The second operation was approved on August 28, 2019,
became effective on October 21, 2019, and closed as scheduled on August 31, 2020. The third operation was
approved on April 19, 2021, became effective on June 16, 2021, and closed as scheduled on February 28,
2022.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Binding Constraints to Development. The program objectives were relevant to the binding constraints to
 development articulated in the Republic of Cameroon Systematic Country Diagnostic 2016 – Priorities for
 Ending Poverty and Boosting Shared Prosperity (SCD) and related analyses.

       Fiscal and Public Sector Management. Fiscal adjustment and reform of public financial management
        remained unfinished: (a) revenues – despite recent improvements in the tax effort, the tax base
        remained narrow, with revenues at 2.5 percent below tax potential in 2015 (IMF, 2017, Cameroon -
        Request for a Three Year Arrangement under the Extended Credit Facility); (b) procurement –
        procurement was problematic , with 25 percent of total contract value in 2007 awarded on a sole-
        source basis; (c) civil service wage bill – although the public sector wage bill (6 percent of GDP) was
        lower than the average in Sub Saharan Africa (10 percent of GDP), public employment was marred by
        structural deficiencies - base wages were low, the civil service structure was inverted (more
        managerial than technical positions), and the system relied heavily on contract workers; (d) SOEs –
        holding monopolies in energy, transportation, and telecommunications, SOEs were loss-making (net
        subsidies ranged from 0.4 to 1.1 percent over 2009-13) were notably indebted (12.6 percent of GDP
        in 2013), and had amassed significant contingent liabilities (15 percent of GDP); (e) debt – a decade
        after obtaining debt relief from the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative in 2006, Cameroon had
        ramped up borrowing anew, doubling public debt from 15.6 percent of GDP in 2012 to 34.1 percent of
        GDP in 2016, and incurring a "high risk" of debt distress (IMF and World Bank, 2015, Cameroon Debt
        Sustainability Analysis); and (f) public financial management – the core problems identified in the
        2007 Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Report remained outstanding, including the low
        execution rate of the capital budget.
       Competitiveness. Ranked 119th of 138 countries on overall competitiveness, and an even poorer
        131st on infrastructure, Cameroon faced significant gaps in infrastructure (World Economic Forum,
        2016, Global Competitiveness Report 2016-2017). The deficiencies plagued a wide range of
        infrastructure sectors: (a) energy – two thirds of manufacturing firms cited power deficiencies as a
        major constraint to firm growth and operations (World Bank, 2006, Cameroon - Investment Climate
        Assessment); (b) roads – 48 percent of paved roads and 85 percent of unpaved roads were in poor
        condition, raising the cost of road transport to US$0.13 per ton-kilometer, compared to US$0.05 in
        southern Africa (c) ports – the key port of Douala was congested, ranking among the least efficient in
        Africa and (d) telecommunications – internet was slow and pricey (US$460/mbps/month versus
        an average US$121/mbps/month for 23 African countries) and fixed-broadband price costs were

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 38
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



       high overall (57.1 percent of GNI per capita versus an average 22.3 percent of GNI per capita for 21
       African countries) (International Telecommunications Union, 2014, Broadband Status in Africa).
      Social Services and Social Protection. Human development outcomes in Cameroon were less than
       what might be expected of a middle income country: (a) in health – life expectancy was barely 54
       years, maternal mortality (782 per 100,000 live births) was twice the average for lower middle income
       countries, and malnutrition (32 percent under-five stunting) was highly prevalent; (b) in education –
       only 23 percent of primary school students were proficient in reading and math, the transition rate
       from primary to secondary education (65 percent) trailed that in Sub Saharan Africa (79 percent), and
       the completion rate for secondary education (40 percent) lagged that of lower middle income states
       (49 percent). Public spending on health and education was relatively low and inefficient. Moreover,
       there were striking differences, among regions, on access to health and education – only 50 percent
       of residents in the poor Adamawa and North regions had access to a health care facility, and only 11
       percent of pupils in the North region had access to a textbook.

Country Priorities. The program objectives were consistent with the development priorities of the
Government. The National Development Strategy 2020-2030 – Structural Transformation and Inclusive
Development (NDS) articulated four pillars: Structural transformation of the national economy, Development
of human capital and wellbeing, Promotion of employment and economic integration, and Governance,
decentralization, and strategic management of the State. The first program objective to improve fiscal
sustainability and public sector management was consistent with the third NDS pillar, the second program
objective to enhance competitiveness, with the first NDS pillar, and the third program objective to enhance
the provision of social services and scale up social protection, with the second NDS pillar.

Bank Group Strategy. The program objectives were aligned with the country strategy for Cameroon. The
Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Cameroon for the Period FY17-FY21 (CPF) was
organized around three focus areas and twelve objectives: Addressing Multiple Poverty Traps in Rural
Areas (with focus on northern regions), Fostering Infrastructure and Private Sector Development,
and Improving Governance. The program objective to improve fiscal sustainability and public sector
management was aligned with the CPF objective "to improve efficiency of public expenditure and
service delivery." The program objective to enhance competitiveness was aligned with the CPF objectives
"to increase national availability of electricity" and "to improve transport and ICT services." The program
objective to enhance the provision of social services and scale up social protection was aligned with the CPF
objectives "to improve maternal and child health, and nutrition," "to enhance quality of, and more equitable
access to, education," and "to expand social safety nets."


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Table 1. Prior Actions (PAs)

 DPO1                             DPO2                                DPO3
 Objective 1 - To improve fiscal sustainability and public sector management
 PA1 - To improve revenue         PA2 - To improve revenue
 mobilization, the Ministry of    mobilization, the 2019 Finance Bill
 Finance has: (i) included an     submitted to Parliament for

                                                                                                  Page 5 of 38
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



assessment of tax expenditures approval includes: (i) specific
from indirect taxes as an annex to measures to eliminate tax
the draft 2018 Finance Law,          incentives and exemptions from
submitted for parliamentary          indirect taxes; (ii) other specific
approval; and (ii) implemented the measures to broaden the non-oil
first phase of a program of joint    tax base and address negative
audits between tax and customs externalities related to tobacco,
authorities of the cement, forestry, soft drinks consumption and the
and telecommunications sectors. level of pollution of imported
                                     vehicles; and (iii) the 2017 tax
                                     expenditures report covering all tax
                                     sources, and assessing tax
                                     expenditures related to the 2013
                                     Investment Promotion Act.
                                                                          PA3 - To mitigate the economic
                                                                          impact of the COVID-19 pandemic,
                                                                          the Recipient adopted specific tax
                                                                          measures to: (a) exempt specific
                                                                          items required for COVID-19
                                                                          prevention and treatment from
                                                                          customs duties and VAT; and (b)
                                                                          mitigate the economic impact of
                                                                          COVID-19 on the following
                                                                          sectors: transportation,
                                                                          tourism, and food retail, as
                                                                          evidenced by presidential
                                                                          ordinance No. 2020001 dated
                                                                          June 30, 2020, amending Article
                                                                          15 (bis), items 3-4-5-6-7 of the
                                                                          revised 2020 Finance Law.
                                    PA4 - To improve public               PA5 - To streamline procurement
                                    procurement processes (notably procedures and improve
                                    for investment projects), increase transparency in
                                    accountability, ensure better value Public Procurement System, the
                                    for money, and improve the quality Recipient has: (a) implemented
                                    of public investment projects, (i)    performance based remuneration
                                    the President has issued a new        for procurement commissions, by
                                    Public Procurement Code in the        applying Decree 0271
                                    form of a decree clarifying the       of September 27, 2018 relating to
                                    responsibilities of stakeholders, the remuneration, to at least five (5)
                                    independence of the grievance         administrations for evaluating the
                                    mechanism, and the separation of bids from tenders / requests for
                                    regulatory, oversight, and            proposals open for
                                    administrative responsibilities in    supplies, works, and consultants;
                                    public procurement processes; and and (b) ensured the organizational
                                    (ii) the Minister of Public Contracts independence of the its
                                    has issued an order defining a new Dispute Resolution Committee, as
                                    performance based method of

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 38
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



                                        remuneration for participation in      evidence by ministerial order No.
                                        public procurement boards.             413 dated December 8, 2020.
PA6 - To improve the payroll and
human resources management
(HRM), the Ministry of Public
Service and Administrative
Reform has initiated disciplinary
proceedings before the
Permanent Disciplinary Council of
the Civil Service of irregular public
officials identified through the
2016 civil service census.
                                  PA7 - To improve the productivity
                                  and efficiency of public service
                                  delivery, the Prime Minister has
                                  issued an order establishing and
                                  specifying the terms of reference of
                                  an inter-ministerial committee for
                                  civil service pay reform to gradually
                                  remove disparities in the pay
                                  system and develop a new base
                                  pay scale to be approved by the
                                  Council of Ministers.
                                  PA9 - To improve the corporate
PA8 - To improve corporate        governance and management of
governance and management of state-owned enterprises (SOEs),
public enterprises, the President the Recipient has issued decrees
of Cameroon has promulgated       setting: (i) criteria for the selection,
two laws detailing the            remuneration and evaluation of
responsibilities, monitoring, and SOE senior management and
control of public enterprises and board members; and (ii) standards
agencies in compliance with       for the presentation and publication
OHADA.                            of SOE financial and operational
                                  information.
                                                                               PA10 - To improve debt
                                                                               transparency. the Recipient has
                                                                               issued specific instructions for the
                                                                               preparation of the 2021 Finance
                                                                               Law to expand the scope of the
                                                                               existing debt data collecting and
                                                                               reporting arrangements to: (a)
                                                                               provide detailed coverage of
                                                                               the debt of state-owned
                                                                               enterprises including by instrument
                                                                               and debt holder on a
                                                                               quarterly basis; and (b) annually
                                                                               publish a report on public debt,


                                                                                                           Page 7 of 38
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



                                                                        including SOEs' debt, consistent
                                                                        with good practice, as evidenced
                                                                        by presidential order No.001 dated
                                                                        July 20, 2020.
                                                                        PA11 - To ensure the adequate
                                                                        and effective use of financial
                                                                        resources to respond
                                                                        funds allocated to the COVID-19
                                                                        response, the Recipient has
                                                                        adopted specific fiduciary
                                                                        arrangements for the better
                                                                        management of COVID- 19
                                                                        response funds. including: (a)
                                                                        specific budget classification
                                                                        codes for COVID-19-related
                                                                        spending; and (b) an
                                                                        bi-annual audits of COVID-19-
                                                                        related spending, as evidenced by
                                                                        the presidential decree 2020/375
                                                                        dated July 7, 2020 and the
                                                                        ministerial order No.00000220
                                                                        dated July 22, 2020.
Objective 2 - To enhance competitiveness
PA12 - To improve the financial
sustainability of the energy sector
and enhance private sector           PA13 - To improve the financial
confidence, the Ministry of          sustainability of the energy sector:
Finance has: (a) concluded with (i) the Recipient and key
ENEO the 11th amendment to the stakeholders have developed and
2005 debt repayment agreement begun implementing a quarterly
to clear arrears of XAF 54 billion mechanism to process the                PA14 - To improve the financial
in electricity bills and             payment of the central                and technical performance of the
compensation subsidies               administration’s electricity bills to energy sector, the
accumulated between the              ENEO, based on quarterly              Recipient has adopted key
Government and ENEO as of            reconciled assessments by the         performance indicators to measure
August 31, 2017; (b) prepared a Recipient and ENEO of electricity the performance of ENEO
payment plan with a clear            consumed and payments due; and Cameroon, as evidenced by the
timetable for the payment of said (ii) ARSEL has issued a regulatory amendment dated November 3.
arrears; and (c) included in the     decision re-adjusting the public      2020, to the existing ENEO
draft 2018 Finance Law submitted electricity tariff schedule,              Concession Contract.
for parliamentary approval, (i) a stipulating that the electricity rates
portion of the arrears to be paid in are as of June 28, 2018, calculated
FY2018 as specified in the           on a quarterly basis with annual
payment plan referred to in (b)      consolidation and adjustment of
above and (ii) the compensatory data at the end of the year.
subsidy to be paid to ENEO in
FY2018.


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 38
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



                                      PA16 - To improve road
                                      maintenance and increase the
                                      road network’s resilience to climate
                                      change: (i) the Minister of Finance
PA15 - To improve road                and the National Director of the
maintenance, the management of BEAC have signed an amendment PA17 - To improve road
road assets, and the climate          to the convention governing the      maintenance, the management of
resiliency of roads, (a) the Ministry dedicated account of the Road        road assets, and road resiliency to
of Finance has included in the        Fund at the BEAC, establishing an climate change, the Recipient has
draft 2018 Finance Law submitted automatic debiting mechanism of completed the organizational and
for parliamentary approval, an        the single Treasury account for the institutional
allocation of CFAF 56 billion to be benefit of said dedicated account audits of the Road Maintenance
transferred to the Road Fund; and for in an amount of at least CFAF 5 Fund for the period of 2002-2017
(b) the Ministry of Public Works      billion per month to ensure the      and a roadmap for the
has adopted a list of selected        regular payment of (priority) road implementation of the
routes to be maintained in            maintenance expenses; and (ii) the recommendations for
accordance with the GENiS             Minister of Public Contracts has     road maintenance.
Agreements.                           issued an implementing order
                                      adopting the Standard Bidding
                                      Documents for road maintenance
                                      and management programs
                                      (OPBCs).
PA18 - To reduce the length of
stay and transit time in the Port of
Douala: (i) the Director General of
Customs, in his capacity as the
president of the Single Window for
                                      PA19 - To improve the efficiency of
Foreign Trade Operations, has
                                      the Port of Douala and the
extended the single form of
                                      performance of logistics platforms
foreign trade operations to all
                                      and supply chains, the GUCE has
phases of the international
                                      set up an electronic payment
logistics chain (that is, pre-
                                      platform for all trade-related fees,
clearance, take-over, clearance,
                                      duties, and taxes.
removal); and (ii) the National Port
Authority has approved the
revised current port tariffs to
increase the storage levy at the
Port of Douala.
                                                                           PA20 - To enhance the clarity,
                                                                           stability and predictability of the
                                                                           legal and
                                                                           regulatory telecommunication
                                                                           environment and the quality of
                                                                           telecommunications
                                                                           services especially Internet
                                                                           services and make them more
                                                                           affordable and accessible
                                                                           to both citizens and businesses,

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 38
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



                                                                              the Recipient has awarded three
                                                                              (3) concessions with detailed rights
                                                                              and obligations to Cameroon
                                                                              Telecommunications (CAMTEL) to
                                                                              operate: (a) a nationwide mobile
                                                                              telecommunications network; (b) a
                                                                              nationwide fixed
                                                                              telecommunications network; and
                                                                              (c) a nationwide
                                                                              electronic communications
                                                                              transport network, including the
                                                                              national backbone, submarine
                                                                              cable landing stations, and satellite
                                                                              earth stations, as evidenced by the
                                                                              Recipient's Ministry of
                                                                              Telecommunications and Ministry
                                                                              of Finance concession agreements
                                                                              dated March 4, 2020.
Objective 3 - To enhance the provision of social services and scale-up social protection
                                        PA23 - To improve the
PA21 - To increase the level of
                                        performance of the public health
funding and management capacity                                               PA24 - To improve the
                                        sector and enhance the quality of
of health facilities and improve the                                          performance of public health
                                        care in public health facilities: (i)
availability of essential medicines                                           facilities and enhance the quality
                                        the Ministry of Finance has
in health regions and districts                                               of care the Recipient has outlined:
                                        disbursed 100 percent of the
covered by PBF: (i) the Ministry of                                           (a) the disbursement modalities for
                                        allocations to PBF subprogram
Public Health and Ministry of                                                 medical and non-medical services
                                        health units under the PBF
Finance have issued a joint                                                   performed under the Recipient's
                                        mechanism; and (ii) the Minister of
circular allowing all health facilities                                       performance based financing
                                        Public Health has signed an order
under the PBF program to benefit                                              program; and (b) disbursed
                                        allowing all public and private
from special fiduciary                                                        performance-based payments for
                                        health facilities in Cameroon to buy
arrangements specified in the                                                 the ten (10) regions, on a quarterly
                                        medicines and medical devices
national PBF manual; and (ii) the                                             basis, and paid subsidies into the
                                        from approved public and private
Ministry of Public Health has                                                 accounts of at least four
                                        suppliers other than CENAME and
issued a circular allowing                                                    thousand (4000) health facilities,
                                        the Regional Health Funds, and
Regional Health Promotion Funds                                               and/or regional health delegations,
                                        establishing simplified procedures
to purchase pharmaceutical                                                    and/or health districts, as
                                        for acquiring these medicines and
products from accredited public or                                            evidenced by presidential order
                                        medical devices that favors high-
private wholesalers through                                                   No. 001 dated July 10, 2020.
                                        quality generics offered at a low
simplified procedures.
                                        cost from approved suppliers.
PA22 - To improve efficiency of
health sector spending, the
Ministry of Public Health has
expanded the administrative
coverage of the PBF program by
introducing at least four additional
performance contracts at the


                                                                                                         Page 10 of 38
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



central level of the Ministry of
Public Health.
                                     PA26 - To make textbooks more
                                     accessible and available: (i) the
PA25 - To increase accessibility
                                     Recipient has published the official
to textbooks in primary and
                                     list of textbooks to be used in
secondary school, the Prime
                                     primary and secondary schools as
Minister has issued (i) a Circular
                                     of school year 2018/2019, in
on the principles guiding the new
                                     accordance with the principles set
school textbook policy to reduce
                                     out in the Prime Minister's
the cost of books and increase
                                     November 2017 circular; and (ii)
their availability and (ii) a Decret
                                     the Recipient has adopted an
reorganizing the Conseil National
                                     orientation document and a
d’Agrément des Manuels
                                     detailed calendar for the
Scolaires et des Matériels
                                     development of a new textbook
Didactiques, (CNAMSMD) and
                                     policy for preschool, primary, and
setting up the national
                                     secondary education, to be
commission to streamline the
                                     implemented at the beginning of
development cycle of textbooks.
                                     the 2019/2020 school year, based
                                     on goals validated in 2017.
                                                                          PA28 - To support the expansion
                                                                          of poverty-targeted social
                                                                          protection programs and facilitates
                                                                          a gradual shift from donor funding
                                    PA27 - The President has issued a to domestic funding the
                                    circular setting out instructions for Recipient has: (a) expanded
                                    the preparation of the 2019           poverty-targeting social safety nets
                                    Finance Law, stipulating that the to cover at least 22,500 additional
                                    Government will make sufficient       beneficiary households in 2020;
                                    provision for the extension of        and (b) paid electronically to at
                                    poverty-targeted social protection least seventy (70) percent of
                                    safety net programs to at least       beneficiaries emergency cash
                                    11,250 beneficiary households in transfers for the COVID-19,
                                    2019.                                 as evidenced by ministerial orders
                                                                          No. 006929 dated July 22, 2020
                                                                          and
                                                                          No. 00000003 dated October 19,
                                                                          2020.

Objective 1 - To improve fiscal sustainability and public sector management.

Domestic Revenue Mobilization. With oil revenues expected to drop (as proven crude reserves decline) and
with customs revenues under pressure (from the implementation of the European Partnership Agreement
with the European Union which would create a free trade area between the European Union and other
countries), non-oil revenues had become more crucial to Cameroon's public finances. Non-oil revenues
stood at only 12.3 percent of GDP in 2016, far below the levels in comparable countries including those with
greater reliance on oil receipts. Tax expenditures were a major cause of the country's poor non-oil revenue
performance – tax expenditures reduced fiscal revenue by about 3.1 percent of GDP in 2017, or 24 percent

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 38
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



of actual non-oil revenue (according to a recent Tax Administration Diagnostic Assessment and a recent IMF
review of tax policy). In response, the Government had embarked on a strategy to increase non-oil tax
revenues, starting by examining the extent of tax expenditures, assessing areas of redundancy and
inefficiency in tax expenditures, and reducing tax exemptions. The prior actions supported by this operation
would help improve the fiscal oversight of tax expenditures and support the implementation of specific
measures to rationalize tax expenditures.

      PA1 – The Ministry of Finance had created a committee of its Tax Department and its Customs
       Department to lead policy analysis of tax expenditures – the committee would prepare comprehensive
       reports on tax expenditures across all tax sources, quantify revenue losses from these tax
       expenditures, and prepare action plans to reduce these losses. The committee assessed tax
       expenditures on the VAT in 2016 and calculated revenues losses from tax exemptions on all indirect
       taxes in 2017. Following these assessments, the committee prepared an action plan to rationalize tax
       expenditures – the medium-term target was CFAF 314 billion. Meanwhile, implementation of the joint
       audits were expected to yield estimated revenue gains of CFAF 2.6 billion. This prior action (the first
       of a two-step measure, the next step would be part of PA2) would publish the report in the 2018
       Finance Law, boosting fiscal transparency. The relevance of PA1 is rated Satisfactory.
      PA2 – The first part of this prior action would follow the reporting on tax expenditures in PA1 and
       implement the Government’s action plan to reduce tax expenditures on indirect taxes (e.g., eliminates
       exemptions from the VAT of life-insurance contracts, certain wood-processing operations, and certain
       types of beer). The second part would raise the excise tax rates on tobacco products, soft drinks, and
       imported vehicles, addressing negative externalities from the consumption of these products as well
       (e.g., pollution from vehicles). Like PA2, the third part would disclose the assessment of tax
       expenditures – this one pertaining to the 2013 Investment Promotion Act. PA1 and the compendium
       of measures in PA2 should be viewed as a continuing effort to rationalize tax expenditures (i.e.,
       address actual and potential revenue losses from tax expenditures). The measures in the 2019
       Finance Law were expected to generate CFAF 20-25 billion. According to the ICR: (a) the measures
       so far taken to rationalize of tax expenditures benefitted from guidance by the Bank; and (b)
       were aligned with the country's IMF program which aimed to improve tax design and build tax
       administration capacity. The relevance of PA2 is rated Satisfactory.
      PA3 –This prior action comprised part of the Government’s fiscal policy response to the pandemic
       (i.e., the measures would be included in the Revised Budget Law of June 2020). The exemptions
       from customs duties and the VAT would principally cover medical products, be time-bound (for six
       months), and made available only to agencies authorized by the Government to procure medical
       products for the pandemic. The amendments to the 2020 Finance Law would temporarily suspend (in
       the second quarter of 2020) certain taxes applicable to the food retail, transportation, and tourism
       industries, principally benefitting micro, small, and medium enterprises. Although the prior action was
       a valid fiscal policy response to the COVID-19 pandemic and would help with economic recovery from
       the crisis, it did not support the objective to improve fiscal sustainability– for this reason, the relevance
       of PA3 is rated Unsatisfactory.

Public Procurement. A cumbersome and lengthy procurement process hamstrung the execution of the
capital budget (World Bank, 2018, Cameroon Public Expenditure Review - Aligning Public Expenditure with
the Goals of Vision 2035): (a) the procurement process (from tender issuance to contract signing) involved 28
administrative stages and lasted an average 167 days for inter-ministerial procurement in 2015, and 58
administrative stages and 366 days for procurement by the Ministry of Public Contracts; (b) the capital budget
execution rate remained a low 40 percent in 2016, dragged down by procurement problems; (c) attempts to
expedite capital spending led to single-source procurement, raising issues about transparency and

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 38
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



accountability, and, more seriously, fraud and corruption; (d) the creation of the Ministry of Public Contracts in
2011 aimed to rationalize procurement (the Ministry would oversee public procurement and address the low
capital budget execution rate, the lack of technical skills at line ministries, and corruption and lack of
transparency in the public procurement process), but overlapping mandates and inadequate accountability
mechanisms sowed confusion about institutional roles, and procurement delays remained common.

      PA4 – The new Public Procurement Code would: (a) separate the functions of the contracting
       bodies (ministries), the supervisory body (Ministry of Public Contracts), and the regulatory body
       (Public Procurement Regulatory Agency); (b) give ministries greater responsibility over contract
       awards and execution, while limiting the role of the Ministry of Public Procurement to prior review; and
       (c) transfer the responsibility over complaint resolution to the Public Procurement Regulatory
       Agency. Separately, the tender board would be rationalized, and a performance-based payment
       system introduced – officers at public contracts commissions would be compensated for deliverables
       produced rather than sessions attended. Meanwhile, procurement reform advanced by this series
       would be complemented by related measures supported by another Bank operations. The
       Strengthening Public Sector Effectiveness and Statistical Capacity Project would help build human
       capital in procurement, strengthen the capacity of institutions, and enhance performance
       monitoring. The relevance of PA4 is rated Satisfactory.
      PA5 – The Government would: (a) implement performance-based remuneration for procurement
       commissions to at least five administrations for evaluating the bids from tenders / requests for
       proposals open for supplies, works, and consultants; and (b) ensure the organizational independence
       of the Dispute Resolution Committee. The effective implementation of the performance-
       based remuneration of procurement commissions would improve transparency. The dispute
       resolution mechanism would be major step at improving the transparency of the public procurement
       system - shifting the authority over, and responsibility for, dispute resolution from the Ministry of Public
       Contracts to the newly established Dispute Resolution Committee, composed of members
       from business and civil society, would strengthen the application of the mechanism. The relevance of
       PA5 is rated Satisfactory.

Civil Service. Irregular human resource practices and a distorted wage structure adversely impacted public
sector performance: (a) the issue was not the size of the public wage bill (5.4 percent of GDP)
which remained comparatively lower than the average in Sub Saharan Africa (10 percent of GDP); (b) rather,
distortions in the human resource and wage structures and perverse attempts to solve these problems
damaged morale and impaired performance; (c) with real wages low and declining (real base wages for
permanent civil servants in 2017 were 23-36 percent their level in 1985), the Government promoted staff on a
massive scale to increase their base pay, creating an inverted pyramid of managerial positions almost equal
in number to technical positions; (d) the Government also introduced a complex allowance system that, in
several cases, resulted in per diems exceeding monthly base salaries; (d) to further supplement base pay,
the Government provided non-wage compensation to civil servants for their participation in commissions,
committees, and working groups, creating a plethora of these bodies across the bureaucracy; (e) meanwhile,
past hiring of teachers as contractual workers produced a workforce composed 30 percent of contractual
staff, with poor pay (a third of teachers were paid outside the formal government wage system and
were supported instead by households through parent-teacher associations) and with no clear career
prospects. The Government had initiated steps to address some of these issues: a decree in November
2018 converted non-wage compensation into an output-based pay system, another decree in February 2019
established a new allowance schedule for participation in commissions, committees, and working groups
using a lower lump-sum amount. PA6 and PA7 would add to these measures.


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 38
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



      PA6 –The Ministry of Public Service and Administrative Reforms had originally identified 3,000
       likely irregular cases in the 2016 civil service census but found 1,200 to have been valid. The 1,800
       irregular cases would be purged from the Integrated Application to Manage Public Human Resource,
       or SIGIPES II, the new human resource management information system formed from the
       combination of the human resource system SIGIPES at the Ministry of Public Service and
       Administrative Reforms and the payroll system ANTILOPE at the Ministry of Finance. SIGIPES II
       would hence be deployed across the government bureaucracy. In addition, a legal framework
       governing remuneration policy and the creation of commissions and committees and an institutional
       framework (cadre organic) defining civil service posts that can be had at each ministry would be
       developed. Work on these reforms would be supported by ongoing Bank operations. While the prior
       action cleans up the civil service payroll, it is a one-time measure and does not provide a mechanism
       to prevent similar irregularities in the future. Moreover, the prior action required only the initiation but
       not the completion of disciplinary proceedings. The relevance of PA6 is rated Moderately
       Unsatisfactory.
      PA7 – The ministerial committee for civil service pay reform would introduce structural reforms to the
       civil service pay system, including by designing an action plan to consolidate ad hoc payments to civil
       servants into their base pay. The committee would pay special attention to the compensation of
       teachers. As with PA6, the work on compensation reform would be complemented by work on payroll
       management supported by another Bank operation, the Strengthening Public Sector Effectiveness
       and Statistical Capacity Project. But the prior action by itself, supported by the second operation in
       the series, consisted solely of the formation of a committee. The measure lacked an explicit follow up
       action in the third operation to reform the civil service pay system more concretely. The relevance of
       PA7 is rated Unsatisfactory.

State-Owned Enterprises. The SOE sector played a large role in the economy – 54 commercial
SOEs earned revenue equal to 17 percent of GDP (2011-2015), held assets worth 21 percent of GDP, and
employed nearly 60,000 (16 percent of the public workforce). However, their poor performance, despite state
support, created significant fiscal risks. (a) transfers and subsidies to SOEs averaged 2.1 percent of GDP; (b)
counting all transfers and arrears, the total cost of supporting SOEs and public agencies was around 11
percent of public revenues; (c) SOE debt stood at 12 percent of GDP, half explicitly guaranteed by the
Government; (d) large SOEs dominated some productive sectors, crowding out private investment, reducing
competition, lowering service standards, and increasing prices to the consumer; and (e) governance
standards remained low, with boards staffed by public officials occupying multiples positions and with little
to no information published on company operations or finances. While not directly addressing the
fundamental question about the role of SOEs in the economy, the Government recently introduced some
measures to strengthen state oversight of SOEs: (a) a working group created to centralize collection and
analysis of financial data produced an SOE reform proposal that would be included in the 2018 Finance Law;
(b) six SOEs started calculating service costs that would hence serve as the bases for future state transfers
and subsidies to SOEs; and (c) all independent public agencies and their public accountants have since
complied with reporting requirements mandated by the Directorate General of Treasury.

      PA8 – In 2016, an SOE platform of all government agencies involved in SOE oversight was
       established. This prior action would update that legal framework. The first would strengthen
       governance and oversight of, and the second would improve disclosure and transparency in, SOEs
       following the corporate governance framework set by the OHADA. The challenge moving forward
       would be to operationalize the framework legislation through the preparation of implementing
       regulations. For this purpose, the Government had requested support from the Bank for legal review
       and drafting. According to the ICR, plans had been made for a public sector capacity

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 38
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



       building operation to support this work, including assistance for the preparation of an SOE sector
       reform action plan, the conduct of specific SOE company reviews, and the conduct SOE monitoring
       and oversight. The relevance of PA8 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.
      PA9 – Setting standards for SOE management and operational and financial transparency
       were worthy aspirations following PA8 and the adoption of a comprehensive reform strategy
       (elaborated in 2018 according to IMF, 2022, Cameroon - Selected Issues). But the prior action
       provided little information about the content of these reforms or how they would be implemented (e.g.,
       would qualification criteria for board members or senior managers apply to incumbents?). The
       relevance of PA9 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

Debt. Debt management had improved significantly on two fronts. First, public debt data collection and
reporting now covered the central government, the expenditure float, contingent liabilities on some external
debt of state-owned enterprises, guarantees, and debt of the National Refining Company (including
unguaranteed debt and short-term supplier debt). In addition, the measure of the debt stock had been
expanded to include "floating" domestic debt at the Treasury (i.e., for government transactions for which
goods had been delivered or services provided, but for which funding had not been committed in the
budget). Second, the Government had adopted a Medium-Term Debt Management Strategy for central
government debt for 2020-2022, which was annexed to the 2020 Budget Law following the guidelines of the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community. The Medium-Term Debt Management Strategy and
reports on public debt were formally approved by the Debt Management Office of Cameroon and published
on its website. Notwithstanding, considerable scope for improvement remained. According to the Debt
Management Performance Assessment of 2019, the principal challenge would be to expand reporting to
domestic public debt, including: (a) quarterly reporting on publicly guaranteed debt; (b) the debt of all non-
financial state-owned enterprises; (c) inter-state-owned enterprise debt; and (d) arrears between state-owned
enterprises and the Government.

      PA10 – The Government would issue instructions in the preparation of the 2021 Finance Law to
       expand the scope of current debt data collection and reporting arrangements – the authorities would
       hence provide detailed coverage of the debt of state-owned enterprises, including by instrument and
       debt holder on a quarterly basis, and publish an annual report on public debt, including debt of state-
       owned enterprises, consistent with good practice. This prior action would expand debt reporting
       to the debt stock and the debt service of at least five public enterprises. The Autonomous
       Amortization Fund would publish an annual bulletin on public debt, including debt of state-owned
       enterprises. This prior action would form the foundation for the performance and policy actions under
       the Sustainable Development Finance Policy(SDFP) and be aligned with the objectives to strengthen
       debt management and reduce debt vulnerabilities agreed under the three-year program supported by
       the Extended Credit Facility (ECF) and the Extended Fund Facility (EFF) arrangements with the IMF
       for 2021-24 (IMF, July 2021, Cameroon - Request for Three-Year Arrangements Under the ECF and
       the EFF). The relevance of PA10 is rated Satisfactory.

Public Financial Management. Despite recent reforms, the public financial management system
faced considerable challenges, involving transparency, anticorruption, procurement, and internal and external
audit. The COVID-19 lent urgency to the reform agenda – strong fiduciary arrangements were needed if
funds allocated to the COVID-19 response, including those obtained from the international community, were
to be used effectively. While budget execution would be accelerated, it would have to be subject
to appropriate controls to ensure that funds were used properly, reducing the risk of extra-budgetary
spending, unreported operations, or the diversion of funds to other purposes.


                                                                                                 Page 15 of 38
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



      PA11 – The Government would adopt specific fiduciary arrangements to better manage COVID-19
       response funds: (a) use budget classification codes for COVID-19-related spending, and (b) conduct
       bi-annual audits of COVID-19-related spending. The use of COVID-19 budget classification codes
       would better track COVID-19-related spending. Funds and accounts would be audited by
       the Supreme State Audit Office, the Chamber of Accounts of Cameroon, and international audit
       firms. The relevance of PA11 is rated Satisfactory.

Objective 2 - To enhance competitiveness

Energy. The financial sustainability of energy utility was crucial to attracting private investment in the energy
sector. Yet, the principal electric utility, ENEO Cameroon, an off-taker of energy generated by private power
plants, suffered from years of financial fragility, denting confidence among prospective private investors in
new power generating projects. Two major problems imperiled the financial viability of ENEO Cameroon: (a)
arrears with the payment of electricity bills – the Government, state-owned enterprises, and municipalities
had accumulated sizable arrears with ENEO Cameroon, and (b) deficiencies with the tariff regulation
mechanism – tariff adjustments were not properly applied and often delayed, jeopardizing compensation to
ENEO Cameroon. The prior actions supported by this programmatic series would address Government
arrears with the electric utility and tariff adjustments.

      PA12 – The arrears clearance plan (at least of arrears as of end-August 2017) was detailed (would
       involve XAF 54 billion in electricity bills and compensation subsidies), had legal cover (would be
       approved by parliament), and was funded (with the 2018 Finance Law). The relevance of PA12 is
       rated Satisfactory.
      PA13 – While PA12 addressed arrears, this prior action would focus on current payments and tariff
       adjustments. The Government and key stakeholders would develop and implement quarterly a
       mechanism to process the payment of the central administration’s electricity bills to ENEO Cameroon
       (based on quarterly assessments made by, and reconciled between, the Government and ENEO
       Cameroon of electricity consumed and payments due). In addition, the Electricity Sector Regulatory
       Agency would issue a regulatory decision re-adjusting the public electricity tariff schedule, stipulating
       what the electricity rates would be (as of June 28, 2018); the tariff schedule would be calculated on a
       quarterly basis, with annual consolidation and adjustment of data at the end of the year. The
       relevance of PA13 is rated Satisfactory.
      PA14 – . An amendment to the current concession contract between the Government and ENEO
       Cameroon, renewed in 2018 through 2031, would establish a set of ten key performance indicators
       (none were previously required) aimed at improving the utility's operational performance and
       investments over the concession period. The key performance indicators would include targets to
       increase access to electricity and investments in the distribution network, improve the quality and
       reliability of electricity supply (i.e., reduce service interruptions), and reduce technical and commercial
       losses. Positive outturns on these indicators would reflect improved energy efficiency. The reform
       plan would include Bank technical assistance to the Electricity Sector Regulatory
       Agency to monitor compliance by ENEO Cameroon with the concession contract. Performance
       contracting would be stronger if there were penalties for under-performance. The relevance of
       PA14 is rated Satisfactory.

Roads. Roads were poorly maintained, raising the costs of road transport (US$0.13 per ton-kilometer) to
more than three times the average in developing countries (US$0.4 per ton-kilometer): (a) the old road
maintenance financing mechanism (a "second generation road fund" covered by specific legislation, funded
by fuel levies, overseen by a representative board, and managed by a secretariat), operational since 1999,

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 38
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



was dismantled in 2007; (b) since then, funding for road maintenance had been determined arbitrarily,
with resources collected for a road fund accruing to the Treasury, which would provide an annual budget
allocation for road maintenance; (c) although fuel levies for road maintenance and rehabilitation had
increased substantially to XAF 100 billion (US$213 million equivalent) per year, only half was used for road
maintenance; (d) only 43 percent of the of the maintenance requirements for 27,000 kilometers of roads was
met; and (e) delays in payments to road maintenance contracts rose from 7 days in 2008 to 90 days in 2015,
creating liquidity problems for the mostly small and medium enterprise contractors.

      PA15 –This prior action should secure budgetary authorization for the Road Maintenance Fund, at
       least for 2018, and its availability in a dedicated account at Bank of Central African States. It would
       also prioritize roads to be maintained using service level management and maintenance
       agreements. However, the question of adequacy of resources in the Road Maintenance Fund
       for annual road maintenance expenditures is not addressed. And neither is the question of budgetary
       authorizations for succeeding years, as the measure is entirely focused on a budgetary transfer of
       CFAF 56 billion for 2018. The relevance of PA15 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.
      PA16 – The Minister of Finance and the National Director of the Bank of Central African States would
       amend the convention governing the dedicated account of the Road Maintenance Fund at the Bank of
       Central African States, allowing an automatic debiting of the single Treasury account (for the benefit
       of the dedicated account) of at least CFAF 5 billion monthly to pay priority road maintenance
       expenses. The Minister of Public Contracts would issue an order adopting standard bidding
       documents for road maintenance and management programs (output- and performance-based
       contracts). The automatic account debiting mechanism should facilitate road maintenance
       payments. Additionally, the use of standard bidding documents should facilitate road maintenance
       contracting. The relevance of PA16 is rated Satisfactory.
      PA17 – Organizational and institutional audits of the Road Maintenance Fund for 2002-2017 would
       inform and enable additional efforts to improve road maintenance. . According to the third Program
       Document, it was anticipated that the audits would lead to major reforms including: (a) an amendment
       to the law protecting road assets, revising the operating and maintenance modalities of weighing
       stations, and accepting the GENIS systematization of part of the road network; (b) the revision of the
       road maintenance programming strategy; (c) a redefinition of a priority road maintenance network,
       after consultations with regions and municipalities; (d) new measures to restore the normal operation
       of the maintenance window; and (e) the transition to a second-generation Road Fund before end-
       2021, which would allow payments to service providers within set deadlines. The audits should set
       the bases for reforms, but it would be premature to conclude that the reforms would follow. The
       relevance of PA17 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

Ports. To attain its aspiration to build a modern logistics hub, Cameroon needed to improve the efficiency
of the Port of Douala, a natural hub for the Central African region (given its strategic location) and the
country's largest port (accounting for 95 percent of all goods exports and imports). Yet, the Port of Doula was
riddled with inefficiencies: (a) waiting times at the entry gate and dwelling times for ships and cargo were both
lengthy; (b) procedures to clear goods were cumbersome; (c) progress in automating customs clearance had
been slow; (d) the port's storage price was low, inviting traders to use the port as a storage facility rather than
pay for commercial warehouse space; and (e) overall, the dwell time for cargo was 19 days in 2017, four
times that at the Port at Mombasa and eight times that the Port at Durban – in Asia and in Latin
America, dwell times averaged a few days to less than a week.

      PA18 The adoption by the Director General of Customs of the single form would help streamline
       customs clearance procedures. Meanwhile, a hike by the National Port Authority of storage levies

                                                                                                     Page 17 of 38
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



       would help discourage use of the port for cargo storage. There is no mention, however, of private
       warehouses and other logistics facilities within distance from the Port of Douala that could relieve
       cargo congestion at the port. The relevance of PA18 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.
      PA19 – This prior action would operationalize the electronic payment platform, part of the reforms in
       the 2017-2019 Strategic Plan of the National Trade Facilitation Committee. Specifically, the One Stop
       Shop for Foreign Trade Operations would set up an electronic payment platform for all trade-related
       fees, duties, and taxes at the Port of Douala. Most trade facilitation, transit facilitation, cross-border
       paperless trade, and paperless trade measures have only been “partially implemented” by Cameroon
       in 2015, 2017, 2019, and 2021, according to the U.N. Global Survey on Digital and Sustainable Trade
       Facilitation (https://www.untfsurvey.org/economy?id=CMR). It is not clear that this prior action
       addresses the factors that prevented implementation of the electronic payment platform at the Port of
       Douala. The relevance of PA19 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

Telecommunications. Cameroon lacked the strategies, policies, and regulations to stimulate growth, facilitate
investment, and foster competition in the digital economy, hurting both parts of the telecommunications value
chain – the international access (i.e., the landing stations for submarine cables that brought internet
connectivity to the country) and the national transport (i.e., the national fiber optic backbones that linked the
landing stations to the main cities). The state-owned Cameroon Telecommunications (it operated in the
fixed telephone market under an expired concession agreement granted provisionally in 2003) had a
monopoly over the country’s international access and over significant parts of the national terrestrial fiber
networks. At the same time, the industry regulator was unable to implement reforms to reduce prices,
improve service quality, provide incentives for innovation, or even ensure a safe and secure online
environment. High wholesale prices charged by Cameroon Telecommunications led to high costs and poor
quality in the retail markets, despite more competitive retail broadband and retail mobile telephone segments.

      PA20 – The Government would award three concessions to Cameroon Telecommunications
       to operate a nationwide fixed telecommunications network, a nationwide mobile telecommunications
       network, and a nationwide electronic communications transport network, including the national
       backbone, submarine cable landing stations, and satellite earth stations. The concessions would
       enable internet service providers to compete in the internet segment by accessing the infrastructure of
       Cameroon Telecommunications on a wholesale basis, encouraging competition at the retail
       level. The terms of the concessions should enable the Government to regulate key wholesale
       markets more effectively. This prior action aimed to advance competition at the retail level in the
       internet sector (by internet service providers accessing Cameroon Telecommunications’
       infrastructure), This prior action does not alter Cameroon Telecommunications’ de facto monopoly of
       the two principal elements of the internet value chain – the international access (landing stations for
       submarine cables to bring Internet connectivity to the country) and the national transport (national
       fiber optic backbones to link the landing stations to the main cities) – which it fully owns and
       operates. It only allows internet service providers access to the infrastructure under contractual
       obligations set by the concessions. The relevance of PA20 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

Objective 3 - To enhance the provision of social services and scale-up social protection

Health. Cameroon faced considerable challenges in improving health services delivery across regions in the
country. The inefficient allocation of the health budget among the regions led to major regional discrepancies
in the quality of services, impacting overall health outcomes. According to the 2018 Public Expenditure
Review: (a) central administration received most of the public health budget, while regions and
districts received little resources (the public health sector was organized with a centralized system of

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 38
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



administration that ran from the central or ministry level, through the intermediary or regional delegation level,
and cumulating at the peripheral or health district level); (b) budget allocations did not reflect health needs at
the regional level, and (c) the performance with pharmaceutical supply and distribution
was unsatisfactory. Cameroon pursued a strategic transition from input-based to performance-based
budgeting in health with the launch of the Performance Based Financing Program in 2011.

      PA21 – With the adoption of the Performance Based Financing Program, Cameroon became one of
       30 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa to implement a governance scheme that linked funds or payments
       to service providers to results achieved and that gave the service providers considerable autonomy in
       the use of these funds. A joint circulaire from the Ministry of Public Health and the Ministry of Finance
       would henceforth allow all health facilities under the Performance Based Financing Program to
       benefit from special fiduciary arrangements under the Performance Based Financing Manual. The
       fiduciary arrangements allow the retention of all resources at health facilities, thereby increasing their
       level of funding. Separately, a circulaire from the Ministry of Public Health would allow Regional
       Health Promotion Funds to purchase pharmaceutical products from accredited public or private
       wholesalers through simplified procedures (Regional Health Promotion Funds are special funds set up
       by the Government for select regions and managed by the Ministry of Health to finance health
       promotion programs and activities). The direct procurement from accredited suppliers would
       compensate for the poor performance of the National Center for the Supply of Essential Medicines
       and Medical Consumables (CENAME) (the public sector agency responsible for the procurement,
       warehousing, and distribution of essential medical products), and reduce the frequency and duration
       of stockouts of pharmaceutical products. These measures would strengthen the Performance Based
       Financing Program. The relevance of PA21 is rated Satisfactory.
      PA22 – The expansion of the administrative coverage of the Performance Based Financing
       Program to include at least four additional performance contracts at the central level of the Ministry of
       Public Health would broaden and improve service delivery in the health sector. The relevance of
       PA22 is rated Satisfactory.
      PA23 – Following the expansion of the Performance Based Financing Program, the Government
       would need to ensure that the program financial mechanisms reliably conveyed public funds to health
       facilities to sustain the performance-based financing model and prevent shortages of medicines and
       medical supplies. Three measures under this prior action would address this issue: (a) the Ministry of
       Finance would disburse 100 percent of the allocations under the Performance Based Financing
       Program to health units; (b) the Ministry of Public Health would allow all public and private health
       facilities to buy medicines and medical devices from approved public and private suppliers other than
       CENAME and the Regional Health Funds; and (c) the Ministry of Public Health would
       establish simplified procedures for acquiring these medicines and medical devices that favored high-
       quality generics which offered lower costs. The relevance of PA23 is rated Satisfactory.
      PA24 – In addition to PA23, three other measures would improve the payment system to health
       facilities. The Government would: (a) establish disbursement modalities for medical and non-medical
       services performed under the Performance Based Financing Program; (b) disburse performance-
       based payments for 10 regions on a quarterly basis; and (c) disburse subsidies into the accounts of at
       least 4,000 health facilities, regional health delegations, and health districts. The payment modalities
       would strive to balance efficiency (e.g., allowing health units to open bank accounts) against fiduciary
       risk. The performance-based payments would be based on a set of indicators focused on the delivery
       of maternal and child health care services. The relevance of PA24 is rated Satisfactory.

Education. Cameroon faced significant challenges in education. While access to basic education
had improved, education quality remained low – completion rates were lower-than-average among lower-

                                                                                                     Page 19 of 38
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



middle-income countries and learning outcomes were modest, according to the Programme d'Analyse des
Systèmes Educatifs de la Confemen (PASEC) evaluation of the Conference of Ministers of Education of
French-Speaking States and Governments (COFEMEN) in 2014. Notably, some 77 percent of children aged
10 could not read and understand a simple paragraph at age 10. The leading causes of the poor outcomes
were: (a) a shortage of teachers; (b) a weak national assessment framework for learning evaluations; (c)
limited preschool education; and (d) a severe lack of textbooks and learning materials to support students
and teachers in the learning process. According to the Bank analysis textbooks were considered a key
binding constraint because of the absolute magnitude of the shortage and the strong negative impact of the
shortage on learning outcomes – Cameroon had one of the lowest textbook-to-student ratios in Sub-Saharan
Africa before 2017 (one for 12 nationwide, one for 30 in disadvantaged areas) and national student
assessments showed that students without direct access to textbooks performed significantly worse than
those with their own textbooks (World Bank, Improving Textbook Availability and Affordability in Cameroon: A
Decade-Long Engagement).

      PA25 – The circulaire articulating the principles of a new school textbook policy aimed at reducing the
       cost of books and improving their availability and the decret reorganizing the National Council for the
       Approval of Textbooks and Didactic Materials (CNAMSMD) and creating a National Commission to
       streamline the development of textbooks appear to be tentative measures at addressing the shortage
       of textbooks. There is little assurance that a policy statement alone or a governmental reorganization
       alone would be sufficient to increase the availability of textbooks. The relevance of PA26 is rated
       Moderately Satisfactory.
      PA26 – Like PA26, the publication on an official list of textbooks for primary and secondary schools
       for school year 2018-2019 and the adoption of a detailed timeline for the development of a new
       textbook policy for preschool, primary, and secondary schools, to be implemented at the beginning of
       school year 2019-2020, appear to be tentative measures. Listing official textbooks and agreeing on a
       schedule to develop policy would not be sufficient to increase the availability of textbooks. The
       relevance of PA26 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

Social Protection. Cameroon was one of a few countries in the Sub Saharan Africa region that lacked a
national social protection system: (a) the framework for delivering social assistance was weak, with no clear
guidelines and prioritization; (b) overall, Cameroon devoted only 0.23 percent of GDP for social assistance;
(c) annually between 2006 and 2010, the Government allocated only 0.76 percent of total government
spending for social assistance, with around 80 percent of the amount spent on emergency programs in
response to droughts and floods; (d) targeted programs (excluding universal subsidies) covered only 1
percent of the population – compared to 14 percent in other Sub-Saharan African countries and 16 percent in
all lower-income countries (Cameroon was a lower-middle-income country).

      PA27 – A circulaire (part of the preparation of the 2019 Finance Law) stipulating that the Government
       would make sufficient provision for the extension of poverty-targeted social protection safety net
       programs to at least 11,250 beneficiary households in 2019 lacked specificity. The relevance of PA27
       is rated Moderately Satisfactory.
      PA28 – Poverty-targeted social safety nets would be expanded to cover at least 22,500 additional
       households in 2020, and COVID-19 emergency cash transfers would be electronically paid out to at
       least 70 percent of beneficiaries. Effectively, PA27 and PA28 would double the National Social Safety
       Nets Program in four years from 40,000 households in 2016 to at least 74,000 households by
       2020. Moreover, PA#28 would extend emergency cash transfers to 80,000 households under a
       government-funded COVID-19 response plan. The ICR adds that the policy dialogue with the
       Government about PA27 and PA28 led the Government to place a higher priority on social assistance

                                                                                                 Page 20 of 38
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



         than in the past. It appeared that a medium-term strategy statement, or the outlines of one, was
         produced. The relevance of PA28 is rated Satisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Table 2. Results Indicators

                                                                         Actual
                                                                         Change in
                                                                         Results
                                                                         Indicator
Results         Associated Relevance                             Actual                     Achievement
                                            Baseline Target              Relative to
Indicator       Prior Action Rating                              Value                      Rating
                                                                         the
                                                                         Targeted
                                                                         Change, in
                                                                         Percent
Objective 1 - To improve fiscal sustainability and public sector management
Domestic Revenue Mobilization
RI1 - Revenue
mobilized
through base
                                            0
broadening      PA1                                  130         350
                              Satisfactory (2016)                        269                High
and tax         PA2                                  (2020)      (2021)
expenditure
suppression,
CFAF billion
RI2 - Amount
of exempted
revenue in
support of
products to
prevent, treat,                             40       116
                              Unsatisfactor                      116
and manage PA3                              (2020)   (2021)              100                [High]
                             y                                   (2021)
COVID-19
cases
and mitigate
the economic
impact of
the pandemic


                                                                                                   Page 21 of 38
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



on MSMEs in
selected
sectors, XFAF
billion
Public Procurement Reform
RI3A - Average
time between
the issuance of
tender
documents and                              128      90
                  PA4       Moderately                       141
the signing of                             (2016)   (2021)              -157         Negligible
                  PA5       Satisfactory                     (2021)
the respective
contracts - For
contracts under
the MINMAP
threshold, days
RI3B - Average
time between
the issuance of
tender
documents and
                                           225
the signing of PA4          Moderately              150      193
                                           (2016)                       43           Modest
the respective PA5          Satisfactory            (2021)   (2021)
contracts - For
contracts
above the
MINMAP
threshold, days
Civil Service Reform
RI4 -
  Percentage
of irregular/inva
lid human                                  0        80
                  PA6       Moderately                       16
resources                                  (2016)   (2020)              20           Negligible
                  PA7       Unsatisfactory                   (2021)
and payment
cases
eliminated from
SIGIPES
SOE Reform
RI5 - Number PA8            Moderately     0        6        6          100          High
of SOEs           PA9       Satisfactory   (2016)   (2020)   (2021)
publishing
their audited
annual
financial
reports within


                                                                                            Page 22 of 38
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



the prescribed
deadlines
Debt Reform
RI6 - Number
of SOEs whose
detailed debt
data are                  Moderately     0        5        7
                PA10                                                  140          High
published in              Satisfactory (2018)     (2020)   (2021)
the
CAA annual
bulletin
Public Financing Management Reform
RI7 - Number
of bi-annual
audit reports
on COVID-19-                             0
related                   Moderately     (2019)   2        2
                PA11                                                  100          High
expenditures              Satisfactory            (2021)   (2021)
published on
the Ministry of
Finance websit
e
Objective 2 - To enhance competitiveness
Energy Sector Reform
RI8A - Arrears
owed by the
central         PA12
                                         102.95   47       25
government to PA13        Satisfactory                                139          High
                                         (2019)   (2022)   (2022)
ENEO            PA14
Cameroon,
XAF billion
RI8B - Arrears
owed by the
central
government
and major
                PA12
SOEs (i.e.,                              57.2     25       31
                PA13      Satisfactory                                81           Substantial
CAMTEL,                                  (2019)   (2022)   (2022)
                PA14
CDE, and
CAMWATER)
to ENEO
Cameroon,
XAF billion
Roads Sector
RI9 - Average PA15         Unsatisfactor 150      50       15         235          [High]
time required PA16        y              (2016)   (2021)   (2021)
for the Road PA17

                                                                                          Page 23 of 38
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



Fund to pay
invoices to
service provide
rs, days
Ports Sector
RI10 - Average
length of stay
                PA18                     19         11         16
of a container            Satisfactory                                    37.5        Modest
                PA19                     (2017)     (2020)     (2021)
at the port of
Douala, days
Telecommunications Sector Reform
RI11 - Number
of subscribers
                                         25         35
to Internet               Moderately                           38
                PA20                     (2018): 25 (2021)                130         [High]
services as a             Unsatisfactory                       (2021)
percentage of
the population
Objective 3 – To enhance the provision of social services and scale-up social protection
Health Sector Reform
RI12 – Share
of births
attended
                PA21
by skilled                               37.6       42
                PA22      Moderately                           47
health care                              (2016)     (2020)                114         [High]
                PA23      Unsatisfactory                       2021)
professionals
                PA24
in the three
northern
regions.
Education Sector
RI13A -
 Number of                               1:14       1:2
                PA25      Moderately                           1:1.7
textbooks per                            (2016)     (2020)                103         High
                PA26      Satisfactory                         (2021)
student in
primary school
RI13B -
Number of                                1:3        1:1.5
                PA25      Moderately                           1:1.3
textbooks per                            (2016)     (2021)                113         High
                PA26      Satisfactory                         2021)
student in high
school
Social Protection Reform
RI-14 -
  Number of                              40,000
households      PA27                     (2016):    180,000    273,000
                          Satisfactory                                    166         High
covered by the PA28                                 (2021)     (2021)
social safety
net program


                                                                                            Page 24 of 38
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)




Note: RI achievement ratings note achievement of the targeted change for the RI. Ri achievement ratings in
brackets reflect ratings that may have been adjusted based on weak relevance of the results indicator
(discussed in efficacy section).

Objective 1 - To improve fiscal sustainability and public sector management.

Domestic Revenue Mobilization

      RI1 – The amount of revenue mobilized through base broadening and tax expenditure suppression –
       was adequate to measure the impact of assessing tax expenditures from indirect taxes in the draft 2018
       Finance Law (PA1), adding measures to eliminate tax incentives and exemptions from indirect taxes,
       adding measures to broaden the non-oil tax base and address externalities related to tobacco and soft
       drink consumption and the level of pollution from imported vehicles, reporting on tax expenditures on all
       tax sources in 2017, and assessing tax expenditures related to the 2013 Investment Promotion Act in the
       2019 Finance Bill (PA2). Incremental revenues from broadening the tax base and reforming tax
       expenditures – the target was CFAF 130 billion or (0.5 percent of estimated GDP in 2020) (note - total
       revenue was 16.2 percent of GDP in 2019 and would rise to 16.3 percent of GDP in 2020) – would help
       with domestic revenue mobilization and fiscal sustainability. The relevance of RI1 is rated Satisfactory.
      RI2 – The amount of exempted revenue in support of products to prevent, treat, and manage COVID-19
       cases and mitigate the economic impact of the pandemic on MSMEs in selected sectors – was
       intended to measure the impact of temporarily exempting medical products needed for the COVID-19
       response from customs duties and the VAT and temporarily suspending certain taxes on the food retail,
       transportation, and tourism industries (PA3). The target – CFAF 116 billion or 0.46 percent of estimated
       GDP in 2021 – would represent the revenue that the Government was willing to forego to support its
       health and economic response to the COVID-19 pandemic, at least those supported by PA3 (social
       protection would be funded separately – see PA28 and RI14). However, since PA3 was not consistent
       with the objective to improve fiscal sustainability at all, RI2 cannot measure progress toward the
       objective. The relevance of RI2 is rated unsatisfactory.

Public Procurement

RI3A – The average time between the issuance of tender documents and the signing of the respective contracts
for contracts under the Ministry of Public Contracts threshold – was mostly adequate to measure the impact of a
new Procurement Code, providing for performance-based compensation for public procurement boards (PA4)
and implementing the performance-based compensation and mandating the independence of the Dispute
Resolution Committee (PA5). A reduction in the average time would denote an improvement in the procurement
process, with a more efficient procurement process signifying an enhancement in public sector
management. However, the indicator appears somewhat limited in its ability to fully reflect of the impact of the
legal and institutional reforms supported by PA4 and PA5. A Bank paper suggests measuring the effective
implementation of public procurement systems in practice along four dimensions – apart from the time to
complete a procurement, they would include the number of steps to complete the procurement process, the
availability of e-procurement platforms, and some measure of the quality of the regulatory framework governing
contracts (Nogues Comas and Mendes Dos Santos, 2021, Measuring Public Procurement Rules and Practices,
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 965). The relevance of RI3A is rated Moderately
Satisfactory.




                                                                                                 Page 25 of 38
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



        RI3B – The average time between the issuance of tender documents and the signing of the respective
         contracts for contracts over the Ministry of Public Contracts threshold – was mostly adequate to measure
         the impact of a new Procurement Code, providing for performance-based compensation for public
         procurement boards (PA4) and implementing the performance-based compensation and mandating the
         independence of the Dispute Resolution Committee (PA5). A reduction in the average time would
         denote an improvement in the procurement process, with a more efficient procurement process signifying
         an enhancement in public sector management. The same criticism of RI3A applies to RI3B. The
         relevance of RI3B is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

Civil Service

        RI4 – The percentage of irregular/invalid human resource and payment cases eliminated from SIGIPES
         – would have been mostly adequate to measure the impact of initiating disciplinary proceedings against
         1,800 irregular cases (PA6), except that the ICR raised valid questions about the validity of the baseline
         data (zero meant that there were no irregular cases to be purged) and of the target (80 percent).
         The proceedings should purge the civil service roster of unlawful hires and the payroll of illegitimate
         transactions. The results indicator does not measure, however, the impact of the measures to reform
         civil service pay, including developing a new base pay scale for approval by the Council of Ministers
         (PA7). The relevance of RI4 is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.

SOE

        RI5 – The number of SOEs publishing their audited annual financial reports within the prescribed
         deadlines – was mostly adequate to measure the impact of enacting two laws strengthening the
         governance and management of SOEs and improving the disclosure and transparency of SOEs (PA8)
         and the impact of issuing two decrees setting criteria for the selection and remuneration of SOE board
         members and senior managers and setting the standards for preparing and publishing SOE operational
         and financial information (PA9). There were certain aspects of the laws enacted and the decrees passed
         that could not be captured by the publication of audited financial reports - for example, the selection and
         remuneration of SOE board members. The relevance of RI5 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

Debt

        RI6 – The number of SOEs whose detailed debt data were published in the CAA annual bulletin – was
         mostly adequate to measure the impact of expanding the coverage of debt data collection and reporting
         in the 2021 Finance Law (PA10). While publication of the annual debt data would have sufficed to
         measure the result of the 2021 Finance Law, the results indicator reveals little of the quality of the debt
         reporting by the SOEs. The relevance of RI6 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

Public Financial Management

        RI7 – The number of bi-annual audit reports on COVID-19-related expenditures published on the Ministry
         of Finance website – was mostly adequate to measure the impact of adopting specific fiduciary
         arrangements (using COVID-19 budget classification codes and conducting bi-annual audits) for COVID-
         19 spending (PA11). The prior action only required that audits be conducted, and the indicator was
         sufficient to measure the result of the requirement, although a favorable audit result –an "unqualified
         or clean opinion," for example – would have been a stronger indicator to measure progress toward the


                                                                                                      Page 26 of 38
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



         objective to improve fiscal sustainability and public sector management. The relevance of RI7 is rated
         Moderately Satisfactory.

Objective 2 - To enhance competitiveness.

Energy

     RI8A – the arrears owed by the central government to ENEO Cameroon (the electricity company) – was
      adequate to measure the impact of concluding an agreement to clear arrears of XAF 54 billion (PA12),
      developing a mechanism to pay central administration electricity bills quarterly (PA13), and adopting key
      performance indicators for ENEO Cameroon (PA14). A reduction of the arrears by XAF 47 billion by
      closing would reflect an enhancement of competitiveness in the energy sector. The relevance of RI8A is
      rated Satisfactory.
     RI8B – the arrears owed by major state-owned enterprises (Cameroon Telecommunications, Cameroon
      Waters, and Cameroon Water Corporation) to ENEO Cameroon (the electricity company) – was
      adequate to measure the impact of concluding an agreement to clear arrears of XAF 54 billion (PA12),
      developing a mechanism to pay central administration electricity bills quarterly (PA13), and adopting key
      performance indicators for ENEO Cameroon (PA14). A reduction of the arrears by XAF 25 billion by
      closing would reflect an enhancement of competitiveness in the energy sector. The relevance of RI8B is
      rated is rated Satisfactory.

Roads

     RI9 – the average time required for the Road Fund to pay invoices to service providers – would only
         peripherally measure the impact of allocating CFAF 56 billion to the Road Fund (PA15), enabling
         automatic debiting of the single Treasury account of CFAF 5 billion annually to pay priority road
         maintenance expenses and adopting standard bidding documents (PA16), and completing an
         institutional and organizational audit of the Road Fund (PA17), all of which would raise the amount of
         budgetary resources available for road maintenance and facilitate their disbursement for projects and to
         contractors. The relevant measure would have been one that indicated the utilization or extent of
         utilization of the available budget. The relevance of RI9 is rated Unsatisfactory.

Ports

     RI10 – the average length of stay of a container at the port of Douala – was fully adequate to measure
         the impact of two measures to improve trade logistics at Cameroon's main port, which was saddled with
         operational inefficiencies – extending the single form to all phases of the international logistics chain and
         increasing the storage fee at the port of Doula (PA18) and establishing an electronic payment platform
         for all trade related fees, duties, and taxes (PA19). Like other indicators measuring the ease of trading
         across borders (e.g., the time to export/import, or the cost to export/import), this indicator would
         reflect progress toward achieving the objective to enhance competitiveness. The relevance of RI10 is
         rated Satisfactory.

Telecommunications

     RI11 – the number of subscribers to Internet services as a percentage of the population – would
         partly measure the impact of awarding three concessions (nationwide mobile
         telecommunications network, nationwide fixed telecommunications network, nationwide electronic

                                                                                                       Page 27 of 38
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



         communications transport network) to Cameroon Telecommunications (PA20) on the achievement of the
         objective to enhance competitiveness. While an increase in the proportion of the population subscribing
         to Internet services would reflect an enhancement of competitiveness, it is questionable that the result
         would have been entirely driven by the new concession agreements with Cameroon
         Telecommunications. Because of the attribution problem, the relevance of RI11 is rated Moderately
         Unsatisfactory.

Objective 3 - To enhance the provision of social services and scale-up social protection.

Health

     RI12 – the share of births attended by skilled health care professionals in the three northern regions was
         only partially adequate to measure the impact of a wide range of prior actions that aimed to increase the
         level of funding and management capacity of health facilities and improve the availability of essential
         medicines in health regions and districts covered by the Performance Based Financing
         (PA21), expand the efficiency of budgetary spending by the Ministry of Public Health (PA22), improve the
         quality of care at public health facilities (PA23), and improve the performance of public health facilities
         (PA24). An increase in the proportion of births attended by skilled health care professionals in three
         poor northern regions would arguably reflect an improvement in the quality of health services,
         highlighting the severity of the under-five mortality problem overall and especially in the North (173 per
         100,000 live births in the North versus 78 in the South-West). Nonetheless, the indicator does not fully
         measure the impact of a wide range of reform measures, including allowing public and private health
         facilities to purchase medicines and medical devices from suppliers other than the Regional Health
         Funds and Central Procurement Centre for Essential Drugs and Medical Devices, or disbursing
         performance-based payments to ten regions on a quarterly basis, or paying subsidies into the accounts
         of 4,000 health facilities under a new presidential order. Because of the mismatch of prior actions and
         results indicator, the relevance of RI12 is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Education

     RI13A – the number of textbooks per student in primary school – was mostly adequate to measure the
      impact of improving the availability and reducing the cost of textbooks and reorganizing the National
      Council for the Approval of Textbooks and Didactic Materials (PA25) and adopting timeline for the
      development of a new textbook policy for preschool, primary, and secondary schools, to be implemented
      beginning school year 2019-2020 (PA26). Considering the poor availability of textbooks (one for every
      14 primary school students), a material reduction in the textbook to student ratio would signify an
      improvement in education services. However, the indicator is too aggregate a measure to fully reflect the
      impact of reforming textbook policy – some reference to the quality of the textbooks would have made for
      a stronger measure. The relevance of RI13A is rated Moderately Satisfactory.
     RI13B – the number of textbooks per student in high school – was mostly adequate to measure the
      impact of improving the availability and reducing the cost of textbooks and reorganizing the National
      Council for the Approval of Textbooks and Didactic Materials (PA25) and adopting timeline for the
      development of a new textbook policy for preschool, primary, and secondary schools, to be implemented
      beginning school year 2019-2020 (PA26). Although textbook availability was better in high schools than
      in primary schools, the textbook to student ratio (one for every three high school students) was less than
      ideal (UNESCO, 2016, Policy Paper 23 - Every Child Should Have a Textbook). A reduction in the ratio
      would signify an improvement in education services. As with RI13A, RI13B is too aggregate a measure


                                                                                                     Page 28 of 38
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



                    to fully reflect the impact of reforming textbook policy – some reference to the quality of the textbooks
                    would have made for a stronger measure. The relevance of RI13B is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

  Social Protection

                  RI14 – the number of households covered by the social safety net program – was adequate to measure
                    the impact of extending the social protection program to at least 11,250 households in 2019 (PA27)
                    and 22,500 additional households in 2020 and paying the COVID-19 emergency cash transfers to at
                    least 70 percent of beneficiaries using electronic means (PA28). A target quadrupling of the beneficiary
                    pool and digital payments would represent a scaling up of social protection and an improvement in social
                    services. There is no indication, however, whether the protection provided by the emergency cash
                    transfer would have been adequate to the problem posed by the COVID-19 crisis. The relevance of RI14
                    is rated Satisfactory.



  Rating

  Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To improve fiscal sustainability and public sector management.


               Rationale
               The program achieved the targets for five, partially achieved the target for one, but failed to achieve the target
               for two of eight outcome indicators defined for the objective to improve fiscal sustainability and public sector
               management.

               Domestic Revenue Mobilization

                     RI1 – The amount of revenue mobilized through base broadening and tax expenditure suppression
                      reached CFAF 350 billion by closing, exceeding the target of CFAF 130 billion. The degree of
                      achievement of the target is rated High.
                     RI2 – The amount of exempted revenue in support of products to prevent, treat, and manage COVID-
                      19 cases and mitigate the economic impact of the pandemic on MSMEs in selected sectors was XFAF
                      116 billion, meeting the target. Because the prior action (PA3) underlying this results indicator did not
                      support the objective to improve fiscal sustainability, the degree of achievement of the target is rated
                      Negligible.

               Public Procurement


                                                                                                                  Page 29 of 38
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)




        RI3A – The average time between the issuance of tender documents and the signing of the respective
         contracts for contracts under the MINMAP threshold increased from 128 days in the baseline to 141
         days by closing, failing to achieve the target of a reduction to 90 days. The degree of achievement of
         the target is rated Negligible.
        RI3B – The average time between the issuance of tender documents and the signing of the respective
         contracts for contracts over the MINMAP threshold declined from 225 days in the baseline to 193 days
         by closing, partially achieving the target of a reduction to 150 days. The degree of achievement of the
         target is rated Modest.

Civil Service

        RI4 – The percentage of irregular/invalid human resource and payment cases eliminated from
         SIGIPES was 16 percent by closing, partially achieving the target of 80 percent. The degree of
         achievement of the target is rated Negligible.

SOE

        RI5 – The number of SOEs publishing their audited annual financial reports within the prescribed
         deadlines was 6 by closing, meeting the target. The degree of achievement of the target is rated
         High.

Debt

        RI6 – The number of SOEs whose detailed debt data were published in the CAA annual bulletin was 7
         by closing, exceeding the target of 5. The degree of achievement of the target is rated High

Public Financial Management

        RI7 – The number of bi-annual audit reports on COVID-19-related expenditures published on the
         Ministry of Finance website was 2 by closing, meeting the target. The degree of achievement of the
         target is rated High.



Rating
Moderately Unsatisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To enhance competitiveness.


Rationale


                                                                                                 Page 30 of 38
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



The program achieved the targets for three and partially achieved the target for two of five outcome indicators
defined for the objective to enhance competitiveness.

Energy

      RI8A – The arrears owed by the central government to ENEO Cameroon (the electricity company)
       was reduced from Central African CFA franc (XAF) 102.95 billion in the baseline to XAF 25 billion by
       closing, exceeding the target reduction to XAF 47 billion. The degree of achievement of the target is
       rated High.
      RI8B – The arrears owed by major state-owned enterprises (Cameroon Telecommunications,
       Cameroon Waters, and Cameroon Water Corporation) to ENEO Cameroon (the electricity company)
       was reduced from XAF 57.2 billion in the baseline to XAF 31 billion by closing, partially achieving the
       target reduction to XAF 25 billion. The degree of achievement of the target is rated Substantial.

Roads

      RI9 – The average time required for the Road Fund to pay invoices to service providers was reduced
         from 150 days in the baseline to 15 days by closing, exceeding the target reduction to 50
         days. Because the results indicator is not relevant, the degree of achievement of the target is
         rated Negligible.

Ports

      RI10 – The average length of stay of a container at the port of Douala was reduced from 19 days in
         the baseline to 16 days by closing, partially achieving the target reduction to 11 days. The degree of
         achievement of the target is rated Modest.

Telecommunications

      RI11 – The number of subscribers to internet services as a percentage of the population rose from 25
         percent in the baseline to 38 percent by closing, exceeding the target of 25 percent. The data are
         from the International Telecommunications Union. Because the results indicator cannot be attributed
         to the associated prior action (PA#20). the rating for the degree of achievement of the target is
         downgraded from high to Substantial.



Rating
Moderately Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To enhance the provision of social services and scale up social protection.



                                                                                                  Page 31 of 38
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)




                  Rationale
                  The program achieved the targets for all four outcome indicators defined for the objective to enhance the
                  provision of social services and scale up social protection.

                  Health

                        RI12 – The share of births attended by skilled health care professionals in the three northern regions
                           rose from 37.6 percent in the baseline to 47 percent by closing, exceeding the target of 42
                           percent. Because the results indicator does not adequately reflect the impact of the wide range of
                           reform measures to which it is associated (PA#21, PA#22, PA#23, and PA#24), the rating for the
                           degree of achievement of the target is downgraded from high to Substantial.

                  Education

                        RI13A – The number of textbooks per student in primary school improved from 1:14 in the baseline to
                           1:1.7 by closing, exceeding the target of 1:2. The degree of achievement of the target is rated High.
                        RI13B – The number of textbooks per student in high school improved from 1:3 in the baseline to
                           1:1.3 by closing, exceeding the target of 1:1.5 The degree of achievement of the target is rated High.

                  Social Protection

                        RI14 – The number of households covered by the social safety net program rose from 40,000 in the
                           baseline to 273,000 by closing, exceeding the target of 180,000. The degree of achievement of the
                           target is rated High.



                  Rating
                  Satisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The degree of achievement of the first objective to improve fiscal sustainability and public sector management is
rated moderately unsatisfactory. The degree of achievement of the second objective to enhance
competitiveness is rated moderately satisfactory. The degree of achievement of the third objective to enhance
the provision of social services and scale up social protection is rated satisfactory. The overall efficacy is rated
Moderately Satisfactory.




                                                                                                                    Page 32 of 38
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



Overall Efficacy Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

With the relevance of prior actions rated moderately satisfactory, and the overall efficacy rated moderately
satisfactory, the outcome of the programmatic series is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Risks to Tax Expenditure Reform Outcomes. Macroeconomic shocks pose a challenge to gradually
removing ineffective universal tax expenditures over the medium term. The economic slowdown triggered
by the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic forced the Government to temporarily pause tax expenditure
reforms in 2020. Meanwhile, a doubling of the annual inflation rate made removing exemptions on value-added
taxes (VAT) on certain goods difficult in 2021. Moreover, political and political economy pressures pose a
continuing threat to the sustainability of tax expenditure reforms that had been previously completed, with vested
interests persistently angling to reintroduce exemptions, according to a recent assessment of revenue reforms
globally by the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG, 2023, World Bank Support for Domestic Revenue
Mobilization - An Independent Evaluation). Continuing support from the IMF under the three-year ECF and EFF
arrangements, approved in 2021, for structural fiscal reforms, including systematic reductions to tax
expenditures under a prospective Medium-Term Revenue Strategy, should help mitigate these risks (IMF, July
2021, Cameroon - Request for Three-Year Arrangements under the Extended Credit Facility and the Extended
Fund Facility). Additionally, a focus on reforming the governance framework that would make it more difficult to
grant exemptions would be appropriate, following the recommendation of the recent IEG evaluation of Fworld
Bank Support for Domestic Revenue Mobilization.

Risks to Debt Management Reform Outcomes. The inclusion of the debt transparency measure supported by
this series (PA10) as part of the performance and policy actions under the SDFP of the IDA for FY21 helped
reinforce the importance of debt reporting and fiscal risk monitoring in Cameroon, where the risk of debt
distress remains high, but debt is sustainable. Continued participation by Cameroon in the SDFP,
which incentivizes IDA-eligible countries to move towards transparent and sustainable financing, will likely keep
the momentum for debt transparency reform active. For example, under the SDFP for FY22, Cameroon will
publish an assessment of contingent liabilities arising from the portfolio of existing public-private
partnerships using a risk assessment model and adopt legislation mandating a fiscal risk assessment of
proposed new public-private partnerships (IDA, April 2022, Sustainable Development Finance Policy of the
International Development Association FY21 Implementation Update).

Risks to Energy Reform Outcomes. Although it is close to completing a transformational investment in
energy, the Euro 1.2 billion 420 megawatt Nachtigal Hydropower Project will add 30 percent to the country's

                                                                                                    Page 33 of 38
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



installed generation capacity by 2024 at a low cost of US$0.07 kWh (among the lowest in the Sub Saharan
Africa region) (World Bank, July 2019, Performance and Learning Review of the Country Partnership
Framework) – Cameroon has lagged with reforms to electricity distribution. The operational performance of
ENEO Cameroon has historically been mediocre. Service has been poor and metering insufficient. Tariff
adjustments have been deficient. In addition to systematically clearing its arrears with the utility, the
Government will have to devise effective measures to ensure the timely payment by all consumers, not least the
Government itself, of electricity bills as they fall due. The risk is that "reform fatigue" may emerge, according to
the ICR.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

Analytical Underpinnings. The assessment of binding constraints to development and the design of prior
actions were informed by analytic work produced by the Bank, the IMF, and the government (see Section 3.A
and 3.B).

Donor Coordination. The Bank collaborated with other development partners on various parts of the
programmatic series, including with: (a) the IMF, on the prior actions related to fiscal sustainability and public
sector management; (b) the African Development Bank, the Agence Française de Développement, and the
European Union, on the prior actions related to enhancing competitiveness and encouraging private-sector led
economic diversification; (c) the European Union and the African Development Bank, as well as with the IMF, on
additional external budget support to help cover a financing gap of 2.9 percent of GDP in 2020; and (d) the
World Health Organization, World Food Programme, the United Nations International Children's Emergency
Fund, and the United Nations Population Fund, on the COVID-19 response, including those embedded in prior
actions supported by this series (e.g., PA28).

Identification of Risks and Mitigation Measures. Political and governance risk, macroeconomic risk, and
fiduciary risk were rated substantial by the third operation, from high for the first two. According to the appraisal
documents, political risk (in terms of threats to political stability and social peace) would be mitigated by the
extension of social safety-net programs to vulnerable populations, broader access to medicines to the public,
and economic support to micro, small, and medium enterprises. Government compliance with the conditions set
(i.e., observance of quantitative performance criteria and attainment of structural benchmarks, following
adoption of prior actions) in the country's three-year arrangement under the ECF with the IMF, approved in
2017, and the successor three-year arrangement under the ECF and the EFF, approved in 2021, would help
mitigate macroeconomic risk. Meanwhile, fiduciary risk would be addressed with the extension of technical
assistance on public financial management to the government.



Rating

Satisfactory


                                                                                                      Page 34 of 38
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)




b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Supervision. The Bank supervised the implementation of the three operations regularly. Supervision was
satisfactory: (a) the Bank fielded several supervision missions – on May 9-19, 2017, May 7-24, 2018, July 23-
27, 2018, February 4-22, 2019, September 30 to October 8, 2019, and January 15-24, 2020; (b) the presence in
the field of sector experts was valuable; (c) the Bank coordinated its supervision activities closely with other
development partners, especially the IMF; (d) the Bank maintained a close working relationship with
the Economic Program Monitoring Technical Committee at the Ministry of Economy and Planning, which
facilitated supervision and monitoring; although (e) given the complex political dynamics in government, the
Bank could have engaged senior officials at the President's Office and at the Prime Minister's Office more
proactively to secure the firm commitment of the highest levels of government to the reform efforts – in the highly
centralized structure in Cameroon, reform measures could only be endorsed by the line Ministers and required
approval by the President and the Prime Minister.

Adaptation. The outbreak COVID-19 in March 2020 during the implementation of the second operation
prompted the Government to adjust the design of the third operation. While the headline objectives and original
scope of the programmatic series remained relevant overall, the Government made four notable adjustments in
response to the health and economic crisis: (a) new tax relief measures were designed to help
businesses affected by the pandemic to remain open and avoid layoffs (PA3); (b) the high risk of debt distress
motivated the Bank and the Government to introduce measures to improve debt transparency and fiscal risk
management (PA10) (debt transparency had not been included in the first or second operation); (c) to ensure
the effective use of budgetary and donor resources for the COVID-19 response, the Bank and the Government
introduced new fiduciary arrangements to better manage COVID-19 funds (PA11) (public financial management
reform had not been part of the first or second operation); and (d) in view of the importance of the digitalization
of private economic activity and public services (as demonstrated during the pandemic, and which may well hold
into the future), the Bank and the Government decided to include a reform measure to strengthen the legal and
regulatory framework for telecommunications services, especially internet services (PA20) (there were no
telecommunications sector reform measures in the first or second operation). The tax relief measures were an
appropriate response to the COVID-19 pandemic but were unrelated to the objective to improve fiscal
sustainability and mobilize domestic revenue. The third operation should have amended the fiscal sustainability
objective.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

---


                                                                                                    Page 35 of 38
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

There was no formal assessment of the social and poverty impacts of the programmatic series, ex-post. The
ICR only stated that the program was "likely to have impacted poverty reduction positively."



b. Environmental

There was no formal assessment of the environmental impacts of the programmatic series, ex-post. The ICR
only stated that "the program did not have any negative environmental impact."



c. Gender

There was no formal assessment of the gender effects of the programmatic series, ex-post. The ICR only
stated, without evidence, that the program "directly and indirectly helped gender equality and women's
empowerment."



d. Other

---
10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR is consistent with OPCS guidelines on ICRs for development financing operations and includes
sections on the relevance of prior actions and the relevance of results indicators. The sector context and the
binding constraints in each of the reform areas covered by the three objectives are clearly described in the
document (paragraphs 14-27). The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 required an adjustment to the
three-operation series, as did the higher level of the risk of debt distress as well as the emergence of
opportunities to improve telecommunications regulation at the wholesale level. Changes to the indicative
triggers as they became prior actions and new prior actions drawn in response to these developments are well
documented (Annex 6). The account of the project’s performance is well informed and concisely
presented. The efficacy assessment is outcome-oriented and based on the degree of achievement of the
results targets (paragraphs 58-71).




                                                                                                 Page 36 of 38
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



Quality of Evidence. The ICR presents ample evidence to support its assessment of the Bank’s performance at
design and during implementation.

Quality of Analysis. The assessment of the efficacy of the program is candid and evidence-based.

Lessons. The ICR draws lessons that would be valuable to reform programs that address development
constraints across a range of sectors and require considerable technical assistance for design and
implementation.


a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreement/Comments
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Two lessons are drawn from the ICR, with some adaptation.

Rigorous political analyses and constant political consultations are vital in operations in Cameroon,
with its highly centralized government. In this series, it was necessary to draw a strong commitment from
the Ministry of Economy and the Ministry of Finance to the reforms supported by the three operations, apart from
the cooperation and collaboration extended by the line ministries and state-owned enterprises which were
responsible for the fulfillment of the prior actions. More importantly, in the highly-centralized structure of the
executive branch of the government, it was crucial for the President and the Prime Minister to own the reform
program. In Cameroon, executive power remained highly centralized in the Presidency, with public policies
vetted at length by the Prime Minister before final decisions were taken by the President. The ICR
raised questions about the level of political support for the program, stating that there was "unclear commitment
at the highest level of government." Better political analyses and constant Bank dialogue with officials at the
highest levels of the central government could have secured firmer political support for the reform program.

In operations that support tax expenditure reforms, it would be better to address the governance
framework by which tax exemptions are granted to forestall their reintroduction rather than simply
decree the withdrawal of individual exemptions. In this operation, the 2019 Finance Bill eliminated certain
tax incentives and tax exemptions related to indirect taxes to help boost domestic revenue mobilization. The
measure did not consider the system by which the government studied, evaluated, and approved tax

                                                                                                   Page 37 of 38
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cameroon DPO Series (P163657)



expenditures. However, a recent assessment by the Independent Evaluation Group, World Bank Support for
Domestic Revenue Mobilization - An Independent Evaluation (2023), found that changes in governance
frameworks that made it more difficult to grant exemptions tended to be the most resilient reform
measure. Meanwhile, eliminating specific exemptions was frequently overridden over time under pressure from
vested interests.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                              Page 38 of 38
