     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Indigenous Peoples Program and DGM (P156473)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023734

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P156473                                  Indigenous Peoples Program and DGM

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Indonesia                                Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A4242                                 30-Jun-2021                                           5,875,098.24

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Mar-2017                              30-Nov-2022

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           6,325,000.00                                    6,325,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            6,325,000.00                                    5,875,098.24

 Actual                                        6,098,199.48                                    5,875,098.24




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl            J. W. van Holst              Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
                           Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p.ii) and the Financing Agreement of March 27, 2017 (p.
   5) the objective of the project was “to improve the capacity of participating indigenous peoples and local
   communities (IPLCs) to engage in tenure security processes and livelihood opportunities from sustainable
   management of forests and land”.




                                                                                                Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Indigenous Peoples Program and DGM (P156473)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included three components:

   Component 1: Subgrants to Strengthen IPLC Capacity to Enhance Tenure Security and Improve
   Livelihoods (appraisal estimate US$3.40 million, actual US$3.19 million): This component was to
   finance, through sub-grants, building the capacity of Indigenous People and Local Communities (IPLCs) to
   pursue: a) clarity and security over their rights to land (including forestland) in rural areas and b) improved
   livelihoods. The main activities included: i) community outreach and mobilization; ii) strengthening IPLC
   capacity to enhance land tenure security; and iii) building IPLC capacity to improve livelihoods.

   According to the PAD (para. 30) the selection of communities eligible for support from this component was
   based on criteria such as a) whether the community had started or had completed participatory mapping of
   territories or process for applying for forestry permits; b) whether intervention areas were part of vulnerable
   landscapes; c) leveraging of other public, donor, or private support; and d) feasibility (both financial and
   political).

   Component 2: Inform Policy Processes and Dialogue (appraisal estimate US$0.82 million, actual
   US$0.66 million): This component was to support strengthening how IPLC representatives engage in
   national and subnational policy and decision-making processes that were to inform issues regarding
   Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+), addressing drivers of
   deforestation, landscape management, and IPLC livelihoods. The main activities included: i) strengthening
   the capacity of the National Steering Committee (NSC) and emerging IPLC leaders; and ii) identifying and
   supporting strategic engagement in policy processes and dialogues.

   Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Institutional Development
   (appraisal estimate US$2.11 million, actual US$1.81 million): This component was to finance
   management and supervision of the project including the cost of monitoring compliance with safeguards,
   M&E, financial management (FM), procurement, safeguard specialists, communication/knowledge
   management specialists, and a project grants management.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$6.32 million, actual cost was US$5.87 million.

   Financing: The project was financed by a Trust Fund (TF-A4242) in the amount of US$6.32 million of
   which US$5.87 million was disbursed.

   Borrower Contribution: It was not planned for the Borrower to make any contributions.

   Dates: The project was restructured on May 28, 2021, to: i) extend the closing date by 17 months from
   June 30, 2021 to November 30, 2022 to allow for additional capacity building for subgrantees on technical

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Indigenous Peoples Program and DGM (P156473)



   and administrative aspects such as fiduciary management, safeguards management, and project monitoring
   and reporting; and ii) reallocate remaining funds among the two components and between two
   disbursement categories to finance the additional capacity building activities.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. According to the PAD (p. 1) at the time of appraisal, Indonesia had the
largest tropical forest area in the world. Indonesia’s rural population accounted for 47 percent of the total
population, nearly half of which lived in or around forestland. The poverty rate in forest areas was 20
percent, double the national average. Many of Indonesia’s communities had longstanding, direct, and
multifaceted relations with natural ecosystems, and relied on these systems for subsistence, livelihoods,
and economic development. However, unclear land-use policies and land tenure was an underlying cause
of deforestation and forest degradation.

According to the ICR (para. 4) while the 1945 constitution of Indonesia acknowledged the existence of Adat
and Adat law communities [the communities of people (primarily indigenous and on outlying islands) who
follow customary law] and recognized their customary claims to land, administrative laws like the Basic
Agrarian Law No. 5 of 1960 and the Basic Forestry Law of 1967, did not reflect this recognition. Also, the
livelihoods of forest-dependent communities were also affected by lack of tenure security. In addition,
communities in forested areas faced limited access to services since they were often not assigned a village
status and code. As a result, these communities only received support from the Ministry of Environment and
Forests (MOEF) but did not receive public transfers such as the village fund, reliable flow of services from
line ministries such as Health and Education.

Furthermore, the lack of land tenure clarity, including for IPLCs, was a critical underlying factor causing
deforestation and hindering land use change which was estimated (at appraisal) to account for nearly 60
percent of Indonesia’s greenhouse gas emissions.

Alignment with the Government Strategy. According to the PAD (p. 2) at the time of appraisal, the
government of Indonesia was reviewing its land governance policy. There had already been several
national efforts to address land conflicts and unsustainable land use. In 2014, President Joko Widodo made
a commitment to strengthen the rights of IPLCs over land and forest resources and the MOEF announced
that 12.7 million hectares of forestland were to be transferred to local communities by 2019 through a
systematic process. While tenure security and clarity over land and forestry rights were a necessary
condition for improved livelihood, it had to be accompanied with livelihood support to help reduce poverty in
indigenous communities.

Key national strategies including the Medium-Term Development Plan 2020-2024, the Agrarian Reform and
Social Forestry National Program, and the Strategic Plan 2020-2024 of MoEF included as key objectives to
increase community access to natural resources, the reduction of conflicts from overlapping land claims
and the improvement of livelihoods for forest dependent communities.

Alignment with the World Bank Strategy. The objective of the project was in line with the Bank’s most
recent Country Partnership Framework (FY21-25) and its Engagement Area IV “sustain management

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Indigenous Peoples Program and DGM (P156473)



               of natural assets, natural resources-based livelihoods and disaster resilience” especially objective 4.1
               “strengthen management of natural assets and environment”. The objective of the project also supported
               the objective of the Bank’s Dedicated Grant Mechanism - Indonesia (DGMI) Program for Indonesia, which
               aims to improve the capacity of IPLCs to engage in tenure security processes and livelihood opportunities
               from sustainable forest and land.

               The objective of the project was pitched at an appropriate level to address a critical development problem.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve the capacity of participating indigenous peoples and local communities (IPLCs) to engage in tenure
                             security processes

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change stated that project inputs/activities such as providing sub-
                             grants to strengthen IPLC capacity to enhance clarity and security over their rights to land, and conducting
                             consultations and trainings for IPLCs to raise awareness of tenure processes/map validation were to result in
                             outputs such as IPLCs’ capacity to enhance clarity and security over their land rights being strengthened, and
                             IPLCs awareness to tenure processes/map validation being raised. These outputs were intended to result in
                             the capacity of participating IPLCs to engage in tenure security processes to improve.

                             The theory of change was sound and logical.

                             Outputs:

                                        16,616 participants participated in consultation activities during project implementation, exceeding the
                                         target of 4,500 participants. Of those participants, 4,614 were female, exceeding the target of 1,350
                                         participants being female (ICR, Annex 1). Activities included: i) community outreach and mobilization;
                                         ii) training communities on different social forestry schemes and documentation requirements for
                                         processing tenurial claims; iii) training to effectively engage and liaise with government entities and
                                         other external entities on land tenure processes; iv) technical assistance on compiling the required
                                         evidence to comply with land tenure recognition requirements; and v) training on the typology of
                                         tenurial conflict and dispute resolution mechanisms to address conflicting claims, if necessary. The
                                         Bank's project team advised IEG (December 5, 2023) that clearly the targets were notional since there
                                         was no basis for estimating the extent of the demand for grants. The program’s design was attractive,
                                         and the demand for grants was much higher than expected. Given the majority of grant allocation was
                                         under Component 1, where the delivery mechanism was through small grant distribution to the IPLC

                                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Indigenous Peoples Program and DGM (P156473)



       (using the call for proposal mechanism), the pilot sites were consequently dependent on the selected
       IPLCs, which were identified during the project implementation. During the preparation stage,
       IPLCs decided that the project was to be implemented in six regions across Indonesia (Sumatra,
       Kalimantan, Sulawesi, Java-Bali-Nusa Tenggara, Maluku and Papua) without further quantitative
       estimation. Overall, therefore, the participation targets were substantially surpassed.
      In addition, 89 participating IPLCs shared lessons/experiences from the project in regional/national
       policy dialogues on FIP and other REDD+ processes, exceeding the target of 60 participating IPLCs
       (ICR p.31).

Outcomes:

      51 participating IPLCs submitted evidence for recognition of tenure to the government, exceeding the
       target of 30 IPLCs.
      92 percent of participants in the capacity development activities had an increased role in the FIP and
       REDD+ processes, exceeding the target of 75 percent.

According to the ICR (para. 25) the project supported communities in understanding the complex process of
obtaining legal access to land resources. As a result of the project, the Sungai Utik community became aware
of the option of obtaining full indigenous rights for its customary territory and successfully submitted the
application and obtained customary forest status in May 2020. Also, through the communities’ collaboration
with organizations or consortia eight district decrees for specific indigenous people and 20 district indigenous
peoples regulations were issued, four customary forest statutes were granted, one social forestry license was
issued, six conservation partnerships were signed and one Kawasan Hutan Dengan Pengelolaan Khusus
(Forest Management Area with Special Management which granted management permits to a Village
Management Institution, mostly used as a practical option for communities experiencing conflict over land
with Perhutani – a state-owned company - in Java).

Overall, based on this evidence that an enhanced capacity of indigenous communities led to land tenure
security in forest areas, the efficacy with which Objective 1 was achieved was Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the capacity of participating indigenous peoples and local communities (IPLCs) to engage in
livelihood opportunities from sustainable management of forests and land

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change stated that project inputs/activities such institutional
strengthening and capacity building such as in marketing and developing community business plan and
strategy, conducting community outreach and mobilization, as well as strengthening IPLC representatives’
engagement in national and subnational policy to inform issues regarding REDD+, addressing drivers of
deforestation, landscape management, and IPLC livelihoods were to result in several outputs. These outputs


                                                                                                  Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Indigenous Peoples Program and DGM (P156473)



were to include institutions being strengthened, capacity in key areas such as marketing and developing
community business plan and strategy being strengthened, as well as IPLC representatives’’ engagement in
national and subnational policy being strengthened.

The theory of change was sound and logical.

Outputs:

      59 subgrants involving 146 community groups were provided. This output did not have a target.
       According to the ICR (para. 35) these grants enabled communities to identify potential natural
       resources and develop viable investment plans as a potential source for income diversification. The
       community livelihood activities included in the investment plans mostly focused on agroforestry,
       nursery, and fishpond development as well as handicraft based on non-timber forest products, post-
       harvest processing and packaging of food crops, and eco-tourism development resulting in the
       generation of jobs. The ICR did not state how many jobs were generated as a result of these activities.
      46 community plans were developed in a participatory manner, exceeding the target of 20 plans.
      63 percent of participating IPLCs were aware of tenure and map validation processes at the local
       level, exceeding the target of 60 percent of participating IPLCs.
      According to the ICR (para. 36) through the project’s support on customary forest use applications,
       traditional rural landlords achieved land tenure rights in several categories of forest areas including
       logging concession, industrial timber concession, and conservation of forest areas.

Outcomes:

      8,805 DGM participants benefitted (in monetary or non-monetary terms) from livelihood grant
       activities, exceeding the target of 700 participants which (as noted for Objective 1) was set at a
       conservative level. Of those participants, 2,471 participants were female, exceeding the target of 210
       participants being female.

According to the ICR (para. 31) project outputs such as providing cold storage allowed communities to store
fisheries catches and therefore making it possible to delay sales and fetch higher prices in the market. Also,
the project’s weaving training for women provided the opportunity to generate income. Furthermore, the
project supported fostering conservation partnerships such as in West Java where local communities relied
on ecotourism in the Mount Gede-Pangrano National Park. Through a mutually beneficial program, the park
granted the community a five-year conservation partnership allowing it to operate its income-earning
ecotourism enterprise in the national park.

 Overall, based on this evidence, the efficacy with which Objective 2 was achieved was Substantial. Even
though the project exceeded its targets, the original targets were set at a conservative level since there was
no basis for estimating the extent of the demand for grants at the time of appraisal.



Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 6 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Indigenous Peoples Program and DGM (P156473)



OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project was able to make Substantial progress in improving the capacity of IPLCs to engage in tenure
                            security processes as well as in improving the capacity of participating IPLCs to engage in livelihood
                            opportunities from sustainable management of forests and land.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency:

   Neither the PAD nor the ICR conducted a traditional economic analysis. The PAD stated that the demand-
   driven nature of Component 1 of the project made it difficult to conduct a conventional cost-benefit analysis
   because exact project investments were not known. The ICR stated that the outcomes the project achieved
   were indicators of its efficiency. Per para 31, the ICR notes that "while the project did not perform a cost-benefit
   analysis on the community livelihoods subprojects, there is ample anecdotal evidence that the IPLC recipients’
   lives improved as a result of that support".

   Operational Efficiency:

   The project’s implementation period was extended once by a total of 17 months as a result of the COVID-19
   pandemic. The extension was needed to finish the implementation of project activities. Furthermore, the ICR
   (para. 55) noted that implementation was affected by several factors including: i) the need for intensive
   reporting; ii) complex administrative procedures for proposal submissions and report templates; iii)
   implementation challenges faced by NEA including complex fiduciary reporting, safeguards implementation,
   insufficient institutional capacity, which resulted in a low disbursement rate; and iv) policy and social challenges
   including inconsistent progress in government policy implementation, local elitism, and patriarchal patterns
   resulting in unequal distribution of benefits after acquiring access and/or land rights. However, it was not clear
   whether these factors affected the project’s operational efficiency.

   There is no quantitative or qualitative evidence or analysis in the ICR regarding the project’s economic or
   financial efficiency. Nor is there any convincing evidence or discussion in the ICR of its operational efficiency
   except for extension due to COVID-19 delays. 30 percent of project funds were devoted to project
   management, M&E and institutional development (ICR, Annex 3). According to the Samdhana Institute/NEA
   (January 8, 2024) the reasons for the high costs were related to the project being implemented across seven
   different regions, involving 198 IPLCs, and 78 contracts to IPLCs institutions or their fiscal-sponsored NGOs.

   Given the weaknesses in the quality of the efficiency analysis, efficiency is rated as Modest.




                                                                                                                           Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Indigenous Peoples Program and DGM (P156473)



Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the project’s objective was High, given its close alignment with the government’s development
strategy for indigenous peoples and local communities and the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership
Framework (FY21-25). The project was able to generate Substantial achievements under both objectives
resulting in an overall Efficacy rating of Substantial. Even though the project exceeded most of the targets,
these were set at a conservative level, given the difficulty in estimating targets due to the demand-driven nature
of the project. The project’s efficiency is rated Modest given the weak quality of quantitative or qualitative
evidence of the project’s efficiency in reaching its objectives. The overall outcome is rated as Moderately
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project’s risks to development outcomes can be classified into the following categories:

Government commitment: According to the Bank team (October 26, 2023) the government remains
committed to the objective of the project as demonstrated through the recognition of customary land rights
(including to forests) and the issuance of Land Management Rights (HPL) by the National Land Agency.
Also, the government pursues the issuance of Customary Forests designation by MOEF as part of Social
Forestry Program. Supporting regulations included, among others, the issuance of Regulation of
the Minister of Environment and Forestry No.17/2020 concerning Customary Forests and
Private Forests Subject to Rights, Government Regulation No23/2021 on Forestry Management, which
included supporting indigenous peoples and local communities (IPLC) to receive user rights in the forest
area through social forestry schemes.


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Indigenous Peoples Program and DGM (P156473)



Financing/technical: According to the Bank team (October 26, 2023) the government had recently issued
Presidential Regulation No. 28 of 2023 concerning Integrated Planning for the Acceleration of Social Forestry
Management, that confirmed the government’s continued effort to give use rights for customary forests (a
form of community-based forest management programmed by the government with the aim of achieving
equity and reducing economic inequality for the welfare of the Indonesian people) (Hutan Adat) to IPLCs.
Further support is still required from relevant authorities, i.e., District Government, Ministry of Home Affairs,
Ministry of Agrarian and Spatial Planning and Ministry of Environment and Forestry, as well as NGOs and
other partners to further accelerate the process of legal recognition for the IPLC. Such support would include,
among others, awareness building on the tenure issues and legal requirements (based on national policy
changes), technical assistance and capacity building to conduct technical verification, consultation with
district government particularly on the issuance of local government regulation on legal recognition to the
adat community and its territories.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the PAD (para. 49) the project incorporated lessons learned from ongoing World Bank
  supported dedicated grant mechanism (DGM) projects in Brazil and Peru which included the following: i)
  importance of the project engaging with the government and other key stakeholders, including local
  communities and women, to build their commitment to, and understand the project; ii) land titling is
  necessary but not sufficient to guarantee sustainable forest management; and iii) ensuring good
  governance when implementing DGM activities requires making sure that the project’s National Steering
  Committee (NSC) is representing the diverse voices of IPLC stakeholders.

  Also, according to the ICR (para. 48) the Bank conducted a comprehensive government commitment and
  needs assessment as well as intensive stakeholder consultations.

  The Bank team identified relevant risks and rated the following as Substantial: i) political and governance:
  the political will of the government to advance the agenda of land tenure security at all levels (national to
  subnational) was to determine how rapidly the outputs of this project were to be adopted into existing
  processes; ii) sector strategies and policies: forest sector strategies do not readily support the recognition
  of customary claims to forestlands; iii) institutional capacity: the NSC and the Samdhana Institute in
  Indonesia (the National Executing Agency or NEA) lack experience in managing Bank-funded projects.
  Also, the scope of this project was to require the NEA to oversee activities in seven regions; iv) fiduciary:
  geographically disperse project locations with weak financial capacity; and v) environmental and social:
  the determination of rights over resources can be a conflict-laden process and result in the unintentional
  exclusion of marginalized and vulnerable households and community groups.

  Risk mitigation measures included appointing a representative from the MOEF to the NSC, raising the
  awareness of community members regarding the role of different stakeholders, as well as capacity
  building in the NSC, NEA and community groups. Overall mitigation measures were adequate.

  Despite the positive features of the project’s design, the Results Framework had some shortcomings
  which had implications for monitoring and evaluation (see section 9a for more details).


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Indigenous Peoples Program and DGM (P156473)



  Nevertheless, quality at entry has been rated Satisfactory by this review.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank teams consisted of the appropriate mix of expertise and conducted a total of nine supervision
 missions. One of the project’s task team leaders (TTLs) was based in Indonesia, allowing for continuous
 implementation support. Also, the Bank’ s technical and fiduciary teams provided regular technical support
 and advice.

 According to the ICR (para. 76) the Bank project team ensured compliance with the implementation
 covenants, provided regular technical and fiduciary guidance, restructured the project and extended the
 closing date when necessary.

 However, the Bank team did not revise the Results Framework to better capture the project’s contributions
 to the achievement of the second objective. Nevertheless, overall, the quality of supervision was
 Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objectives of the project were clearly specified. The selected indicators were sufficiently specific,
 measurable, and relevant. However, the indicators included in the Results Framework mostly measured
 achievements under the first objective with only one PDO indicator measuring the achievements under the
 second objective.

 The National Executing Agency (NEA) was responsible for the project’s M&E activities. According to the
 PAD (para. 60) the M&E plan was to include at least two formal evaluations (including one Mid-Term
 Review) during the project implementation period. Both were implemented.




                                                                                                  Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Indigenous Peoples Program and DGM (P156473)



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (para. 65) before the COVID-19 pandemic, NEA conducted regular monitoring
  visits. During the pandemic, regional NSC representatives were key in ensuring continued monitoring, in
  addition to virtual meetings. The importance of increasing the role of the NSC was one critical finding of
  the project’s Mid-Term Review, which was reflected in the work planning and resource allocation after the
  project’s restructuring. The Bank project team, in an exchange with IEG in October 26, 2023, stated that
  all project indicators were discussed with counterparts during supervision missions and adequately
  reflected in aide memoirs and implementation support reviews.

  The NEA had a dedicated project team (an M&E specialist and a team responsible for monitoring
  subgrant implementation) which conducted regular site visits and was in close and regular contact with
  project implementers and stakeholders in the field. The NSC also had a key role in monitoring and
  evaluation with each member of NSC involved in the monitoring of the subproject implementation at the
  regional level, along with the NEA M&E team. The Bank team advised IEG that M&E data were robust
  and accurate for reporting on project results. Also, the robust and well-maintained M&E system
  provided reliable data and information on the DGM subgrants implementation that could be used to select
  the potential support from different funding sources.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (para. 66) the project’s M&E data were used to inform decision making and project
  implementation. For example, M&E data were used to adjust the budget and project work plan, as well
  as project restructuring.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous People), OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats), OP/BP 4.09
   (Pest Management), and OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources). The project prepared an
   Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). According to the ICR (para. 69) at the
   beginning of project implementation, monitoring focused on high-risk subprojects and was later expanded to
   all subprojects with monitoring of medium and low-risk subprojects on a quarterly basis. These monitoring
   activities allowed the national executing agency (NEA) and subgrantees to discuss risks and their mitigation
   in a proactive manner. The ICR (para. 71) stated that the project identified artisanal gold mining within
   project villages. Even though this activity was not part of any sub-project, it involved substantial
   environmental and social risks. The project was able to raise the community’s awareness of the risks
   resulting in changes of practice and attitude to gold mining within the village.

   Environmental safeguard performance was rated Moderately Satisfactory for the period of May 2019 until
   September 2021 due to insufficient attention to environmental issues as part of the review of sub-grantees’

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Indigenous Peoples Program and DGM (P156473)



  proposals. Also, during that period, the sub-project risk watch list did not incorporate environmental
  indicators into the analysis (such as the risks of pesticide use) nor acknowledge existing community
  practices that could lead to environmental risks (such as slash-burn swidden farming and artisanal mining
  activities). In the September 2021 Implementation Status and Results Report (ISRR), the safeguard
  performance rating was upgraded reflecting improvements on most of the above aspects (other than the
  use of pesticides/pest management) and in November 2021, the performance of pest management
  implementation was also upgraded.

  According to the ICR (para. 68) the project complied with all of the Bank’s safeguard policies when it
  closed.

  The project also developed a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) to which grievances could be
  submitted by text messages, social media, email, or letter. The project received six grievances which were
  all addressed appropriately.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management:

  According to the ICR (para. 74) the project met the Bank’s FM covenant, and audit reports and Interim
  Unaudited Financial Reports (IFRs) were submitted in a timely manner. Also, the internal control system
  was sufficient, and the auditor’s reports had unqualified opinions and there were no major audit issues.

  However, the project experienced several FM related issues such as incremental operating costs being
  reported incorrectly in the IFRs, and timely reporting of block grant utilization due to weak FM capacity of
  some block grants recipients. The Bank team addressed these issues by ensuring close coordination
  between the recipient’s finance team and the Bank’s FM specialist. Also, the Bank ensured FM training
  and simplified financial report formats to block grant recipients as well as hands-on-support by the
  Samdhana Institute’s finance team. While all outstanding issues in regard to financial reporting were
  sufficiently addressed by the time the project closed, a small financing amount was left undisbursed due to
  those issues.

  At closing, the project’s FM performance was still rated Moderately Satisfactory.

  Procurement:

  According to the ICR (para. 72) the project complied with the legal agreement and followed the Bank’s
  procurement guidelines. Subgrants followed the Bank’s procurement guidelines and preparation grants
  and bank funded or administered projects executed by other CSOs, the NEA was allowed to use its own
  procurement manual and standard procurement forms.

  The ICR (para. 73) stated that the project conducted a procurement assessment (December 2021) which
  identified weaknesses and risks related to the capacity of the NEA (the Samdhana Institute). The Bank
  addressed these issues by providing training on the Bank’s procurement regulations to all staff and by
  hiring a procurement officer. Also, the NEA staff received training in the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges
  in Procurement (STEP) system. Also, the project established an effective tracking system for procurement

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Indigenous Peoples Program and DGM (P156473)



   plan implementation and processing of payments to contractors and suppliers. However, the ICR (para.
   73) stated that the NEA staff found the use of the Bank’s procurement system challenging and
   cumbersome resulting in implementation delays.

   When the project closed, the project’s procurement rating was Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 High relevance of objective,
Outcome                        Highly Satisfactory   Moderately Satisfactory     Substantial efficacy and Modest
                                                                                 efficiency.
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 25-27) included several lessons learned, of which three stood out and were adapted
with some editing by IEG:

      Issues related to land tenure security and land rights in indigenous communities are
       usually complex and require an integrated approach. In this project, indigenous people
       faced several challenges related to land tenure security and land rights, deforestation and
       environmental degradation, lack of representation and participation, discrimination, and
       legal/social marginalization as well as forced evictions and displacement, requiring an
       integrated approach such as legal reforms, participatory decision-making processes,
       capacity building as well as defining community measures to prevent and resolve land
       conflict.
      Sustainable land management practices have the potential to enhance livelihoods
       among indigenous communities as well as protect the environment. This project
       demonstrated the positive impact of engagement of indigenous communities in implementing
       sustainable land management on livelihood enhancing opportunities such as increased


                                                                                                  Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Indigenous Peoples Program and DGM (P156473)



         income, improved food security, and stronger community cohesion as well as environmental
         conservation.
        Engaging with indigenous communities during project appraisal to ensure their buy-
         in as well as use their centuries old knowledge and practices can result in effective,
         sustainable land-use strategies that benefit both, the environment and local
         economies. This project conducted intensive stakeholder consultations with different
         government entities as well as local communities ensuring adequate and successful buy- in
         to project implementation.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate summary of project preparation and implementation. The structure of the ICR
was consistent with OPCS guidelines. It was generally results-oriented, although overly concise. For example,
the ICR could have benefitted from an annex summarizing the sub-projects approved in the project. The ICR
could have also analyzed whether the project's financial resources were used efficiently and explained why
project management, M&E and institutional development absorbed 30 percent of the project's costs. Also,
there were minor inconsistencies in the ICR. For example, in para. 67 it stated that there were initial
weaknesses in M&E design (without providing any details) even though in para. 47, it was stated that the
Results Framework was well designed. Similarly, para 37 in the efficiency section states that all procurement
activities were conducted on time, whereas the procurement section refers to delays. In addition, Table 2 in the
main text included different data for a few indicators compared to the Results Framework in Annex 1.

Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated as Modest.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 14
