     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Educt'n & Skills for Productive Jobs (P152810)



                                                                                   Report Number : ICRR0023630

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Program Name
 P152810                                      TZ-Educt'n & Skills for Productive Jobs

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Tanzania                                     Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)             Total Program Cost (USD)
 IDA-58190                                    30-Jun-2021                                        116,240,165.07

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Jun-2016                                  31-Dec-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            120,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             120,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         116,240,165.07                                               0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Livia Maria Angelica         Judyth L. Twigg               Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
 Benavides Matarazzo                                        Maldonado




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Program Development Objective (PDO) was to strengthen the institutional capacity of the Recipient’s
   skills development system and to promote the expansion and quality of labor market driven skills development
   opportunities in select economic sectors (Financing Agreement, July 28, 2016, p. 5).




                                                                                                    Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Educt'n & Skills for Productive Jobs (P152810)



   The economic sectors selected were: (a) agriculture, agribusiness, and agro-processing, (b) tourism and
   hospitality, (c) transport and logistics, (d) construction, (e) information and communications technology, and (f)
   energy.

   The PDO was not revised throughout the life of the program. There were changes in the targets of two of the
   program development indicators. These changes did not affect the description or the achievement/ratings of
   the PDO; thus, the revisions do not warrant a split rating.



b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during
   implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The Tanzania Education and Skills for Productive Jobs Program (ESPJ) Program for Results (PforR)
   contributed to the Government of Tanzania’s (GOT) National Skills Development Strategy (NSDS) 2016-
   2027 and was aligned with the country’s Development Vision 2025. The NSDS sought to strengthen the
   institutional capacity of the skills development system and to make service delivery more transparent,
   efficient, and equitable.

   Program scope and boundaries. The program was designed to support the whole of the NSDS, except for
   two specific intervention areas: communication and dissemination of the NSDS, and operationalization of
   the National Qualifications Framework (NQF). The two results areas under this program mirrored the results
   areas under the NSDS. The Program was designed to fully disburse through disbursement-linked indicators
   (DLIs) and did not include a separate technical assistance component.

   Results Area 1: Strengthening the Institutional Capacity of the Skills Development System
   (Appraisal estimate: US$54 million; Estimate after restructuring: US$43 million; Actual: Not
   available). This results area aimed to support the first results area of the NSDS, including five intervention
   areas: (a) establishment of the National Skills Council and Secretariat for coordination of skills development
   policies and initiatives, (b) establishment of Sector Skills Councils to promote public-private sector
   cooperation, (c) quality assurance for training programs, (d) “Fit for Business” seal of approval scheme for
   training institutions with significant employer participation, and (e) skills demand and supply information
   management system to inform policies and programs.

   Results Area 2: Promoting the Expansion and Quality of Labor Market Driven Skills Development
   Opportunities in Select Economic Sectors (Appraisal estimate: US$66 million; Estimate after
   restructuring: US$77 million; Actual: Not available). The goal for Results Area 2 was to make service
   delivery more transparent, efficient, and equitable. It also aimed to create a more sustainable resource base
   for skills development. This results area included two funding mechanisms that focused on promoting


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Educt'n & Skills for Productive Jobs (P152810)



   competition among training providers: (a) Skills Development Fund (SDF) for public and private training
   providers, and (b) Trainee Voucher Scheme (TVS) for low-income youth.



e. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   At appraisal, the overall cost of the Program was estimated at US$250 million, of which US$120 million
   would be financed through an IDA credit, and the borrower would finance US$114.9 million, leading to a
   financing gap of US$15.1 million. As explained in the Project Appraisal Document, the government had
   committed to seeking financing from other development partners to fill this gap.

   The program was approved on June 16, 2016, and became effective on January 25, 2017. The original
   closing date was June 30, 2021, but was extended initially for one year to June 30, 2021, and later to
   December 31, 2022.

   The program was restructured twice, as follows:

   The first restructuring (September 15, 2020, US$72.55 million disbursed) addressed issues identified during
   the mid-term review carried out in October 2019. While the PDO was not revised, the targets of two PDO
   indicators were changed, and there were changes made to several DLIs. One DLI was eliminated, another
   DLI was revised, two new DLIs were created, and disbursement-linked results (DLRs) were introduced for
   six of the DLIs. In addition, the restructuring reallocated funds across DLIs. The Program Action Plan (PAP)
   was revised to reflect the changes in DLIs and the addition of DLRs. The Program was extended by one
   year, to June 30, 2022, to compensate for delays caused by challenges with respect to implementation
   capacity and to the COVID-19 shut-down.

   The second restructuring (April 4, 2022, US$91.59 million disbursed) extended the program by six months
   to December 31, 2022. The restructuring was to allow for the completion of four out of nine service delivery-
   level DLIs that had experienced delays in implementation.

   At the time of appraisal, the government had committed to approach development partners to fill the
   US$15.1 million financing gap. At closing, according to data provided by the project team, the overall
   estimated program cost was US$216.9 million, of which the IDA credit financed US$116.2 million, and the
   GOT financed US$100.7 million.




3. Relevance   TBL




a. Relevance of Objectives    New




  Rationale
  Country and Sector Context. At the time of appraisal, Tanzania was making a strong emphasis on
  secondary education, with an expected increase in the flow of students directly seeking jobs or post-
  secondary education opportunities. Projections showed that there would be a transition from unskilled jobs
  mainly in the agriculture sector towards a greater share in services, as well as manufacturing and

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Educt'n & Skills for Productive Jobs (P152810)



mining. This shift would be expected to increase the demand for employees with greater skills. These
projections added to a context where private sector firms were already identifying shortages of workers with
adequate skills as a major constraint for operations, often leading to firm failures. In addition, the informal
sector, which absorbed about fifty percent of non-agriculture workers, suffered from low entrepreneurial
capacity, limiting prospects for workers in the medium and long term.

At the sector level, the skills development sector was highly fragmented. There were multiple institutions,
public and private, offering various levels of training. There were also several informal skills development
systems, including apprenticeships and on-the-job training. At the institutional level, the first challenge was
the lack of an overarching institutional coordination mechanism, resulting in duplication of efforts, low
capacity for quality assurance, and high transaction costs for providers. The other challenge was funding,
which was going mainly to the university level, leaving technical and vocational training seriously
underfunded. At the service delivery level, the overall quality of training opportunities was low and did not
offer the diversity of skills opportunities needed to support projected growth in service and manufacturing
industries. The National Skills Development Strategy (NSDS) 2016-2027 aimed to address these
challenges to developing a skilled workforce in key economic sectors, introducing a new approach to skills
development.

Bank Strategy. The Program was well aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the period
FY2018-FY2022, the latest CPF for Tanzania. The Program was relevant under the Focus Area “Boost
Human Capital and Social Inclusion,” which included a specific objective aiming to “Heighten Job-relevant
Labor Force Skills.” The Program would also contribute to the objective “Promote Social Inclusion,” given its
effort to improve training to vulnerable youth, to help them access better quality jobs.

Previous Bank Experience. The World Bank had already worked in the higher education sector in
Tanzania. The Science and Technology Higher Education Program (STHEP) had already closed by the time
this program was being prepared. The Bank was also implementing the African Regional Centers of
Excellence (ACE II) Project, which included Tanzania as a beneficiary country and financed complementary
activities at the university level. The Bank had also recently launched the Big Results Now in Education
(BRNED) PforR, which covered primary and secondary education and was co-financed with the British
Department for International Development (DFID) and the Swedish International Development Cooperation
(SIDA). The World Bank was also supporting the expansion of quality secondary education through the
Secondary Education Development Program (SEDP II). The ESPJ program was also seen
as providing synergies with other World Bank projects outside of the education sector, such as Trade and
Competitiveness, Urban and Rural, Transport and Information and Communications Technology, and
Agriculture.

Country Capacity and Adequacy of PforR Instrument. Prior to this program, the World Bank had used the
PforR instrument in several sectors in Tanzania, including urban, energy, health, education, skills, and
water. Country systems had been shown to be effective for the implementation of these programs, and the
GOT had found the instrument useful and showed an overall preference for its use. This PforR aimed to
contribute to institutionalization and sustainability of the government’s program. However, the many
institutions involved under the NSDS introduced a very high level of complexity that eventually required an in-
depth restructuring and the cancellation of a critical aspect of the program, that is, the creation and
implementation of the National Skills Council (NSC), the expected lead coordination agency to support the
NSDS.




                                                                                                    Page 4 of 20
                              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                              TZ-Educt'n & Skills for Productive Jobs (P152810)



       Rating Relevance TBL




                       Rating
                       Substantial


b. Relevance of DLIs                            New




DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                DLI 1
                DLI
                National Skills Council and NSC Secretariat operational

                Rationale
                The skills development system was fragmented and included both formal and non-formal public and private
                providers of vocational, technical, and university-level programs. There were several oversight institutions that
                did not coordinate among each other, resulting in duplication of efforts, system inefficiencies, and high
                transaction costs for providers, quality assurance agencies, and employers. The NSC was expected to
                coordinate policies and initiatives on skills development as well as monitor the implementation of the NSDS,
                providing guidance as needed. This DLI was dropped as part of the restructuring of September 2020, i.e., four
                years after approval, because the government had decided that there was no fiscal space to support the
                creation of new administrative structures. Further to this, there was no consensus on the mechanism to
                establish or the mandates for the council. This was partially compensated with the consolidation of the
                vocational component of the skills system through the creation of the National Council of Technical and
                Vocational Education and Training (NACTVET). Funds allocated to this DLI were reallocated to other DLIs.



                Rating
                Not Rated/Not Applicable

                DLI 2
                DLI
                Skills Development Fund (SDF) operational

                Rationale
                At the time of appraisal, much of the funding for training was going to university-level education (23.5 percent
                of total education expenditure), while technical training and non-formal education represented a much smaller
                proportion (0.61 percent of education expenditure). This went counter to the country’s increasing needs of
                technically and vocationally trained workers. The SDF was designed as a competitive fund that would have
                four windows: (a) university, (b) technical education and training, (c) vocational education and training, and
                (d) alternative training (informal). The Fund was expected to provide incentives to expand and improve the
                quality of programs in those sectors where demand for workers was growing. This DLI was not changed in
                scope or amount during restructuring.



                Rating

                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Educt'n & Skills for Productive Jobs (P152810)



Substantial

DLI 3
DLI
Trainee Voucher Scheme (TVS) operational

Rationale
The cost of training was prohibitive for poor youth, with an estimated overall cost that exceeded household
income for forty percent of the population. While students at university and technical education levels had
access to loans and grants, this was not the case for vocational and alternative training that would be
particularly attractive to low-income youth. The TVS would provide vouchers to trainees to choose among
accredited public or private training programs. This would provide the incentive for providers to formalize and
seek accreditation to meet minimum training standards. This DLI was not modified in scope or amount during
the life of the program. As further discussed under DLI 11, the TVS was established under the Higher
Education Students Loans Board (HESLB), which had traditionally provided funding for university-level
students.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 4
DLI
Completion of annual capacity building activities for program institutions as set forth in the Program Operations
Manual (POM)

Rationale
Overall institutional capacity across the skills system was weak. Training programs were not responsive to the
market, interinstitutional coordination was lacking, and quality assurance mechanisms were poor. This DLI
supported capacity building for institutions involved in the ESPJ program. Capacity building plans would be
part of the Program Operations Manual (POM) and would be agreed between the Ministry of Education,
Science, Technology and Vocational Training (MOESTVT) and the Bank annually in alignment with the five-
year Program Implementation Plan. Capacity building was expected to be implemented in both the technical
and operational areas of the program. Two DLRs were added during the 2020 restructuring: (a) DLR 4.1, the
Capacity Building Addendum Plan (CBAP) developed, and (b) DLR 4.2 VTCs and FDCs with at least
six management and technical staff trained on the specified training modules of the CBAP. The latter
DLR aimed to address the fact that previous efforts had gone to the universities through the Tanzania Council
for Universities (TCU). The DLI had an original allocation of SDR 4.26 million (US$6 million) and was
increased to SDR 5.0 million (US$7.04 million) during the 2020 restructuring.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 5
                                                                                                   Page 6 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Educt'n & Skills for Productive Jobs (P152810)




DLI
Agreed allocations of additional sources of funds, including SDL (Skills Development Levy), deposited into SDF
and/or TVS accounts as set forth in the POM (Program Operations Manual)

Rationale
In line with DLIs 2 and 3, there was a need to ensure that the institutions responsible for competitive funding
of training be established, but that they be adequately funded. This DLI committed the government to transfer
funds to both SDF and TVS. A total of SDR 7.1 million (US$10 million) was allocated originally to this DLI. As
part of the 2020 restructuring, the DLI was modified to read "at least Tshs 1 billion in the Recipient’s
FY2020/21 budget has been deposited into the SDF and/or the NACTE accounts," thus setting a specific
quantity to be transferred to SDF and/or NACTE, and ensuring that these institutions were adequately
funded. In addition, a DLR 5.1 was created that was similar to DLI 5 but referred to FY 2021/2022: at least
Tshs 1.1 billion in the Recipient’s FY2021/22 budget has been deposited into the SDF and/or the NACTE
accounts. It should be noted that, while the DLI allocated a total of SDR 5 million (US$7 million), the amount
to be transferred by governments to the training funds would have been at most SDR 600,000 (US$844,800).



Rating
Substantial

DLI 6
DLI
Sector Skills Councils established

Rationale
At the time of preparation, skill development programs were funded based on enrollment and budgets from
earlier years, as they did not have an underlying strategy linked to demand from priority economic sectors
and related skills. This DLI would support the creation of four Sector Skills Councils (SSC) in key economic
sectors as a platform for coordination and collaboration on identifying, prioritizing, and supporting their
operationalization through the development of competency standards, training programs, and curricula.



Rating
High

DLI 7
DLI
Number of training providers submitting complete data set upon agreed list of variables in POM to TCU, VETA
(Vocational Education and Training Authority), NACTE (National Council for Technical Education), and TCU
records/SMIS (Skills Management Information System)

Rationale
A unified information database was not available with respect to training providers, programs offered, and
specific information. This DLI would incentivize capacity building within regulators to work with providers in
collecting information to be submitted initially to the MOESTVT and, once the SMIS system was designed and

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Educt'n & Skills for Productive Jobs (P152810)



made operational, collected in this system. This would allow for coordination within the overall skills system
and to assess in the medium term whether programs were aligned with sector priorities. As part of the 2020
restructuring, DLR 7.1 was added to read “the Recipient’s 2020 TVET (Technical and Vocational Education
and Training) Indicator Report has been produced from the SMIS data and disseminated.” The purpose of
this DLR was to incentivize TVET data dissemination and utilization.



Rating
High

DLI 8
DLI
Number of students benefitting from at least one month internship/apprenticeship or work-based opportunities
relevant to their field

Rationale
Among the issues that had been raised with respect to TVET programs was that graduates lacked practical
experience. This DLI incentivized providers to include internships/apprenticeships as part of their training
program. The restructuring of 2020 included two DLRs under this DLI: DLR 8.1 “trainees who have completed
the Structured Engineers Apprenticeship Program (SEAP)," and DLR 8.2 “trainees who have completed
internship/apprenticeship programs other than SEAP.” This segmentation aimed at focusing the Program on
internships linked to priority programs within Tanzania’s industrial agenda.



Rating
High

DLI 9
DLI
Number of training programs receiving financing from the Skills Development Fund (SDF)

Rationale
This DLI aimed at going beyond the establishment of the SDF, through providing an incentive to operate
effectively. The DLI would be triggered when both a performance agreement was signed with a training
provider and the first payment was disbursed. The 2020 restructuring created a DLR 9.1 “NACTE, VETA, or
industry-certified training programs under the four SDF training windows set forth in the POM.” This DLR
aimed to give clarity that programs to be funded by the SDF had been accredited by NACTE, VETA, or
industry certification programs. This DLR also re-directed SDF funds to TVET rather than to university
providers, as funding had been going primarily to university-level programs.



Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                   Page 8 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Educt'n & Skills for Productive Jobs (P152810)




DLI 10
DLI
Number of trainees enrolled in alternative TVET and university training programs in key economic sectors
funded by the Skills Development Fund or the Trainee Voucher Scheme

Rationale
This DLI aimed at incentivizing the operationalization and generation of results from the two financing
instruments created under the program, the SDF and TVS. As per the 2020 restructuring, two DLRs were
defined: 10.1 “SDF beneficiaries who have completed training program in windows 1-3 set forth in the POM,”
and DLR 10.2 “SDF beneficiaries who have completed innovative/e-learning programs in window 4 set forth
in the POM” (the windows included: W1 – Improvement of quality and relevance of TVET; W2 – Improvement
of skills level of the informal sector; W3 – Employer based training; and W4 – Innovative E-Learning training
(response to COVID-19.) The new DLR 10.2 incentivized the delivery of emergency/COVID-19 responsive
training programs, tracking their beneficiaries.



Rating
High

DLI 11
DLI
Beneficiaries of the SDF bursary scheme for vulnerable youth selected through TASAF (Tanzania Social Action
Fund)

Rationale
This DLI was agreed upon during the September 2020 restructuring. At this time, progress evaluation of the
TVS showed that there were a number of challenges with the institution as originally designed: administrative
costs were high, completion rates were low, targeting was poor, and the offerings to trainings were limited.
The TVS was moved under the SDF and was changed into a bursary scheme, with beneficiaries selected
through TASAF. The DLI would promote implementation of this new scheme.



Rating
High

DLI 12
DLI
Trainees enrolled in Folk Development Centres (FDCs) and VTCs (Vocational Training Centres) that meet
MoEST (Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, formerly MOESTVT) minimum quality standards

Rationale
This DLI was established as part of the 2020 restructuring. At that time, the quality of service delivery and
management systems for the lower-level vocational education institutions had come into question. This was
particularly the case for FDCs and VTCs. This DLI would provide incentives for these two groups to improve


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 20
                                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                  TZ-Educt'n & Skills for Productive Jobs (P152810)



                  the quality of their services through verifiable minimum standards linked to management, enrollment, and
                  quality of programs and infrastructure. These standards were to be included in the POM.



                  Rating
                  High


      OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




                  OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
                  Rationale
                  The relevance of the objectives is rated as Substantial due to strong alignment with country context,
                  government strategy, and World Bank strategy, but some misalignments on the institutional design of the
                  program in light of the intent to focus on TVET in an institutional framework that prioritized funding for
                  university-level programs and students. Relevance of DLIs is rated as Substantial given that six DLIs are
                  rated High and five Substantial. Some of the DLIs were too ambitious, or the intended incentives were not
                  well aligned within the institutional context.



                  Rating
                  Substantial



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                       OBJECTIVE 1
                       Objective
                       Strengthen the institutional capacity of the Recipient’s skills development system

                       Rationale
                       Theory of change

                       The program aimed to address the fragmentation of the skills development system, which resulted in high
                       levels of inefficiency and ineffectiveness. As part of the NSDS, a key priority was to create an institutional
                       framework that could sustain a skills development system and ensure greater coordination and overall
                       effectiveness. As per the theory of change, institutional capacity would be achieved through the creation and
                       funding of several institutions as well as through the improvement of information systems that would
                       aggregate information from relevant parties and consolidate quality assurance mechanisms. Also, DLI 5 was
                       linked to the implementation of capacity building activities, both on the operational and technical sides. The
                       capacity building plan was expected to compensate for the lack of a formal technical assistance component in
                       the program, an assumption that proved not to be valid.



                                                                                                                       Page 10 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Educt'n & Skills for Productive Jobs (P152810)




Outputs and intermediate results

      The NSDS aimed to have a coordination body, the NSC, that would have been responsible for overall
         coordination of the skills development system. This was not accomplished, and eventually this
         intermediate indicator (and DLI) was dropped as part of the first restructuring.
        The SDF was created as a funding mechanism to support training programs through a competitive
         mechanism.
        The TVS was established as a funding mechanism for youth, to provide training costs, transportation,
         and other expenses. The programs' Mid-Term Review (MTR) found that the TVS was not complying
         with its original objective, as beneficiary identification mechanisms and tracking were ineffective. In
         addition, funding was going mainly to university students, when the original expectation was that it
         would fund trainees in TVET programs. The TVS was consolidated with the SDF and the Tanzania
         Social Action Fund (TASAF), and its targeting mechanism was used to select beneficiaries of the new
         bursary scheme.
        Funding of the SDF (including training programs and bursaries) achieved the targeted allocation of
         US$432,291 for FY 2020/2021, but was somewhat under target for FY 2021/2022 with an allocation of
         US$432,291 compared to a target of US$475,520 (that is, 91 percent of the targeted allocation).
        A Capacity Building Addendum Plan (CBAP) was prepared to support the National Council for
         Technical Education (NACTE) to develop capacity for vocational education and to integrate issues
         such as gender and climate change. A total of 128 training modules for VTCs and FDCs training were
         delivered, more than doubling the original target of 60 modules.
        A total of six Sector Skill Councils (SSC) were established, surpassing the target of four SSCs.
        A Skill Management Information System was designed and made operational at the MOESTVT,
         NACTE, VETA, TCU, and training provider levels.
        Training providers submitted 1725 complete data lists upon agreed variables listed in the POM to
         SMIS, almost triple the original target of 600 data lists.
        The Recipient’s 2020 TVET Indicators Report was produced from the SMIS data and disseminated, as
         planned.
        The number of training providers that were fully registered by the relevant regulatory body was 1366
         at program closing, more than four times the original target of 235 institutions. Of the 1366 institutions,
         830 were vocational education and training (VET), 425 were technical education and training, 55 were
         folk development centers, and 52 were universities under the TCU.
        The training programs receiving full accreditation by a relevant regulatory body was 135, from a
         baseline of 0, underachieving significantly the target of 250 programs.

While not part of the formal results framework, the ICR provides information on institutional strengthening that
is relevant to this objective. For example, 3554 teachers and managers of FDC and VTC institutions benefited
from capacity development in areas such as competency-based education and training, labor market
analysis, climate change and sustainability, branding, gender issues, TVET leadership and management, and
entrepreneurship. Also, the quantitative indicators under objective 2 required that institutions develop and
operate their data and information management capacity, thus contributing to strengthening of institutional
capacity.




                                                                                                     Page 11 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Educt'n & Skills for Productive Jobs (P152810)




Outcomes

The overall outcome aimed to achieve a strengthened institutional framework for the NSDS. This implied the
creation of several institutions and information management and coordination mechanisms to support the
implementation of the NSDS. With respect to the institutional component, much of the institutional framework
was established and in some cases surpassed, such as the SSCs. The mid-term restructuring addressed two
key limitations to the original design: first, the lack of consensus among stakeholders on the design and
composition of the NSC; and second, the inefficiency in the funding mechanism that was prioritizing
university-level funding while the original intention was to prioritize TVET. These corrections allowed for
substantial achievement of the objective.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Promote the expansion of labor market-driven skills development opportunities in select economic sectors

Rationale
Theory of change

Results area 2 aimed to achieve both expansion and quality improvement of labor market driven skills. As
acknowledged in the PAD, this results area included two objectives, increasing coverage, on the one hand,
and improving quality, on the other. Therefore, efficacy of these two objectives is assessed separately in this
ICR Review.

Expansion of market driven skills was designed to have two key funding mechanisms, the SDF, which
financed training programs, and the TVS, which would fund trainees. The TVS was absorbed by the SDF
after restructuring but continued to fund trainees under a bursary scheme. The economic sectors selected
were: (a) agriculture, agribusiness, and agro-processing, (b) tourism and hospitality, (c) transport and
logistics, (d) construction, (e) information and communications technology, and (f) energy. The strategy
behind funding of training programs aimed to provide incentives for their accreditation and innovation. The
bursary scheme using the TASAF targeting system aimed to attract poor and vulnerable youth to access
accredited training programs and consequently improve their job prospects.



Outputs and intermediate results

      The SDF financed 135 certified training programs, above the target of 110 programs established
       during the 2020 restructuring. It should be noted that originally this indicator was split into two
       programs: the Vocational Education and Training Authority (VETA) would provide 60 training
       programs, and the National Council for Technical Education (NACTE) would provide 50. During

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Educt'n & Skills for Productive Jobs (P152810)



         program implementation, these institutions were merged into the National Council for Technical and
         Vocational Education and Training (NACTVET), and all programs were reported jointly.
        A total of 42,522 trainees were enrolled in alternative, TVET, and university training in the selected
         sectors supported by TVS and, later, by SDF, above the target of 38,000 trainees. 32 percent of the
         trainees were female, exceeding the target of 45 percent. Of these trainees, 34,966 completed training
         SDF windows 1-3, above the target of 32,000, and 7,556 completed training in under SDF window 4
         (e-learning), exceeding the target of 6,000.
        3,932 beneficiaries were selected using the Tanzania Social Action Fund (TASAF) targeting
         mechanism, essentially meeting the target of 4,000 beneficiaries; 31 percent of these beneficiaries
         were female, against an expected 45 percent. It should be noted that the TASAF targeting system was
         used after the restructuring of 2020.
        28,548 trainees were enrolled in the Folk Development Centers (FDCs) and Vocational Training
         Centers (VTCs) that met MoEST's minimum quality standards, more than doubling the target of
         12,000 trainees.
         5,500 students benefitted from at least a one-month internship/apprenticeship/work-based
         opportunity relevant to their field, exceeding the target of 5,000. Of these, 2,300 completed the
         Structured Engineers Apprenticeship Program (SEAP), exceeding the target of 2,000, and 3,200
         trainees completed other internships/apprenticeships.



Outcomes

The achievement of this objective was measured through three outcome indicators.

      The number of direct beneficiaries of the program, as measured by the number of trainees enrolled in
       alternative, TVET, and university training in key economic sectors funded by SDF or TVS, was 66,710,
       surpassing the target of 44,000. Of these, the percentage of female beneficiaries increased from 36
       percent to 49.2 percent, exceeding the target of 45 percent.
      A total of 45,718 trainees completed alternative, TVET, and university training programs in key sectors
       funded by SDF or TVS, exceeding the original target of 25,500 trainees. Of these, 50.3 percent were
       female, also above the 45 percent target.

It is important to note that these indicators are expressed in numbers (as oppose to percentages), making it
difficult to understand the overall coverage of the program on the overall potential beneficiary population of
the program.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Educt'n & Skills for Productive Jobs (P152810)



Promote the quality of labor market-driven skills development opportunities in select economic sectors

Rationale
Theory of change

The expansion of training programs was to be accompanied by actions to improve their quality in order to
ensure better job opportunities in the same economic sectors as in Objective 2. The program design focused
on private sector participation as a way to improve the labor market relevance of training programs as well as
innovation. Labor market relevance was promoted by requiring programs that were funded through the SDF
to be accredited by NACTVET, with the accreditation process including private sector validation of the
curriculum.



Outputs and intermediate results

5,500 students benefitted from at least a one-month internship/apprenticeship/work-based
opportunity relevant to their field, exceeding the target of 5,000 students. Of these, 2,300 completed the
Structured Engineers Apprenticeship Program (SEAP), exceeding the target of 2,000, and 3,200 trainees
completed other internships/apprenticeships, surpassing the target of 3,000 trainees. While these
apprenticeships and internships aimed to compensate for the lack of graduates' practical experience and
were expected to provide quality learning opportunities to beneficiaries, the project did not measure quality-
related aspects of these learning approaches.

The program design included other outputs that would contribute to improving quality, but these outputs were
dropped during the restructuring of 2020 in response to a change in government stance with respect to the
private sector. These included development of the "Fit for Business" Seal and subsequently the certification of
training providers who met the standards for this recognition, as well as other outputs linked to private sector
collaboration in the provision of training and job opportunities.



Outcomes

The percentage of trainees who did an internship, apprenticeship, or entrepreneurship training and who were
employed or self-employed one year after training completion was 78 percent, above the target of 45 percent.
While this number significantly exceeds the target, it reflects the total number of SDF graduates overall, not
just trainees. The tracer study providing data for this outcome showed that 80 percent of the SDF graduates
were either employed (16 percent) or self-employed (64 percent) in these sectors. The share of female
trainees who were self-employed was similar to that of males; however, a higher share of males was
employed (17.2 percent, compared to 15.0 percent for women) or had continued studies (6.8 percent,
compared to 4.6 percent women). The data for this indicator were made available only during the last year of
the program because there were delays in the reporting process.

There is insufficient evidence that the quality of training programs and labor market-driven skills improved
after trainees completed their program and internship, despite a large proportion of trainees having the
opportunity to do an internship, apprenticeship, or entrepreneurship. While the majority of graduates were
either employed or self-employed, there is no evidence on the employment rates of those who did not benefit

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Educt'n & Skills for Productive Jobs (P152810)



  from the program to establish a clear attribution (other labor market factors may have driven the increased
  employment). Moreover, most of them were self-employed after completing the program, making it
  reasonable to question whether there was any improvement in the quality of skills development
  opportunities or, subsequently, jobs as a result of the training program.



  Rating
  Modest




 OVERALL EFFICACY
 Rationale
 Overall efficacy is rated Substantial, as the operation fully achieved most of its objectives, but with moderate
 shortcomings related to evidence on the objective to improve the quality of labor market-driven skills
 development opportunities.



 Rating
 Substantial


5. Outcome

Relevance is rated Substantial, and overall Efficacy is also rated Substantial, with moderate shortcomings.
According to PforR guidelines, the outcome rating could be rated Moderately Satisfactory or Satisfactory, and in
this case, since Objective 3 on quality was rated modest, the overall project outcome rating is Moderately
Satisfactory.


    Outcome Rating
    Moderately Satisfactory


6. Risk to Development Outcome

The NSDS greatly relied on multiple stakeholders to come together to join forces in its
implementation. These stakeholders included the private sector as well as several ministries and other
publicly owned organizations. The NSC was expected to coordinate these organizations and provide
guidance for processes linked to the achievement of an efficient and effective skills development system. At
program closing, the NSC had not been established, leaving the Ministry of Education, Science and
Technology to coordinate, but with much less leverage capacity. In contrast, several other organizations
were established, notably six SSCs and the NACTVET which brought together technical and vocational


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Educt'n & Skills for Productive Jobs (P152810)



education, with the function of accrediting and advising training institutions. Still, even with these institutions
having been established, the successful implementation of the NSDS is at risk.

The program was highly reliant on advances for its implementation. At the time of the restructuring of
September 2020, 62 percent (US$72 million) had been disbursed, but only 36.4 percent (US$44 million) had
been verified. The total program cost at appraisal was US$250 million, but at closing only US$116.2 million
had reportedly been invested, that is, less than half of what was planned. While on the one hand, this can be
seen as an efficient implementation, there is concern that there was little direct investment on the side of
government to a program that effectively covered most of the NSDS, raising the question of the
government's long-term commitment to its implementation. This would be confirmed by the fact that specific
amounts had to be added as DLR 5.1 and 5.2 to ensure continued funding of the SDF.




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The PforR was well embedded in a national program that reflected government priorities in the skills
  development sector. Given a clear national program, the selection of the PforR as the investment
  instrument was appropriate. The program was designed using international good practice in skills policy
  development working both at the institutional and service provision level. The World Bank had prior and
  ongoing operations in the education sector in Tanzania at the primary, secondary, and higher education
  levels, but this was the first operation specifically targeted to TVET.

  The program faced a number of risks that were identified in the PAD, but which were not considered to
  be high. Government commitment to funding the program was not clear. There was a multiplicity of
  institutions, public and private, linked both to the MOEST and to other sectors, and the expectation that
  they would coordinate was overly ambitious. Institutional capacity was identified as weak, but even in this
  context a technical assistance component was not included in the design. Furthermore, the timing of the
  project, as designed, was not optimal, as the government was distracted by the 2014 introduction of Free
  Basic Education, and changes in government leadership had led to a negative attitude toward the private
  sector (ICR, p. 31).

  The program design depended highly on actions in the Program Operational Manual (POM), some of
  which were not agreed upon at the time of appraisal, for example, allocations to SDF and/or TVS
  accounts, the design of the SMIS, the monitoring system for the SDF, the criteria for “Fit for Business”
  seal, among others. There was no clear targeting system to support training on TVET for poor youth
  through the TVS, and as a result, funding went to students at the university level.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory



                                                                                                        Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Educt'n & Skills for Productive Jobs (P152810)




b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision was largely carried out by a country-based team. According to the ICR, the team was
 overburdened, especially in the period leading to the mid-term review, thus limiting its capacity to provide
 technical assistance to the client.

 The restructuring resulting from the mid-term review was extensive and addressed many of the issues
 identified with program implementation. At that time, the Bank recognized that closer monitoring and
 assistance was needed. As a result, the country-based team was strengthened, and regular monthly
 meetings with implementing entities were established. The Bank made an effort to compensate the need
 for technical assistance by directly hiring consultants to work with the client, particularly on monitoring and
 evaluation.

 During the COVID-19 lockdown, supervision was hampered, also delaying program implementation.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The program design was based on a solid results framework that measured outputs and outcomes both
 through the DLIs and outcome and output indicators, with some shortcomings related to measuring
 quality. The DLIs provided incentives for the design of a SMIS that would connect information systems
 throughout the institutions involved in program implementation. Still, many of the details were left to the
 program's implementation, resulting in a substantial delay in the final design and implementation.



b. M&E Implementation
  There were significant delays in the implementation of the M&E system caused, in part, by the
  postponement of design to the implementation period. This resulted in major delays in the verification of
  the DLIs, and consequent funding limitations for the program. In addition, the ICR indicates that reports
  were submitted with delay and with poor quality. The Bank team adjusted the results framework during
  the restructuring and provided technical assistance in the implementation of the SMIS.



c. M&E Utilization
  Given the delays in the implementation of the M&E system and poor quality of the reports, data
  utilization was poor. For example, the first report on the outcome indicator related to trainees completing

                                                                                                      Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Educt'n & Skills for Productive Jobs (P152810)



  internship, apprenticeships, or entrepreneurship training was made available only a short time before
  program closure and did not report the data as agreed in the results framework.

  Still, the program generated a focus on results, contributing to the publication and dissemination of the
  first national TVET Indicator Report, helping to motivate other development partners to show interest in
  getting involved in the skills development sector.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

9. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   An Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) was developed as part of the preparation
   process. There were two areas that were prioritized: (a) the recognition of environment, health and safety,
   and long-term sustainability in training institutions and programs, particularly in those programs in the
   construction sector; and (b) improving the grievance redressal and consultation mechanisms (GRM). An
   assessment carried out in 2018 indicated that awareness of environmental and social issues was very
   limited. In response, the 2020 restructuring required that training programs include environmental and social
   aspects in their curriculum. On the other hand, there were multiple challenges with grievance
   redressal. Each institution had a GRM, but there was little evidence that they functioned well, and there was
   no mechanism to consolidate information.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Both financial management and procurement risks were rated as high in the PAD. The program faced
   several challenges in fiduciary compliance. There were transfers from MOEST to implementation agencies
   that lacked expenditure reports, and monitoring of expenditures was limited. Supporting documents were
   not filed adequately, leading to audits with observations. The audits also found that procurement
   procedures were not complied with, and that supporting payment documents were missing. Towards the
   end of the program, improvements were observed, and performance was rated as moderately satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   NA


                                                                                                   Page 18 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Educt'n & Skills for Productive Jobs (P152810)




10. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                   There was modest achievement
Outcome                          Satisfactory            Moderately Satisfactory   of outcomes pertaining to
                                                                                   improved quality (Objective 3)..
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                         Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                  Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                     Substantial


11. Lessons

An effective results-based program design will consider the trade-offs between a holistic strategy
and a partial and measured approach. This is particularly important for those new programs that
intend to promote major reforms that are launched in a low-capacity environment. In this case, the
program supported essentially the whole NSDS, which implied the engagement of multiple sectors
and stakeholders. Although the DLIs provided incentives for the reforms, they were not
sufficient. For example, the creation of the NSC was accompanied by a specific DLI, but the political
context did not facilitate the intended reform actions. In addition, the responsible institution for its
design and implementation, the Prime Minister’s office, was not a recipient of funds under the
program. In the case of the Fit for Business seal of approval, one of the areas that was supported by
the program, there was no DLI, and no achievement thereof.

The assessment of institutional capacity to implement a results-based program can contribute in the
design process to determining whether a robust technical assistance component is needed. In the
context of this program, implementation capacity was limited, such that financial incentives were not
sufficient to achieve the ambitious objectives set out in the program design. The ICR describes
several examples where entities had difficulty understanding the program design and
implementation procedures. In addition, monitoring and evaluation systems needed to be fully
developed from scratch, while implementing agencies lacked the appropriate skills for this
endeavor.

Collaboration between public and private institutions is particularly important in the TVET
sector. Industry has a role in defining the skills needed, designing the curricula, and validating
programs, as well as in offering training. The public sector needs to regulate, oversee
implementation, and provide financial incentives to ensure that poor youth benefit from training
programs. The efficient implementation of these roles and responsibilities needs to be carried out in
an environment that allows for dialogue and collaboration.



12. Assessment Recommended?

                                                                                                     Page 19 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Educt'n & Skills for Productive Jobs (P152810)




  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  Given the shortcomings in the evidence provided for the achievement of objective 3 on the quality of labor
  market-driven skills development opportunities and the consequent downgrading in the outcome rating, a
  subsequent field-based project evaluation, through a Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR), will
  provide the opportunity to gather additional evidence.



13. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well written and provided a good analysis of a very complex program. The document provided a
good description of the government program. The theory of change as presented was adequate and provided a
good graphical explanation of the changes made as part of the 2020 restructuring. The ICR could have
provided an institutional analysis, particularly addressing the important changes that occurred during program
implementation, such as the institutionality around the funding mechanisms or the accreditation system for
TVET. In addition, the ICR did not include feedback from the client.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                Page 20 of 20
