     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Higher Education Project (P148291)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023604

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P148291                                   Higher Education Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Tajikistan                                Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-57020,IDA-D0820                       31-Oct-2021                                        14,921,778.22

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Jun-2015                               31-Oct-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           15,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                            15,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                        14,921,778.22                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz         Denise A. Vaillancourt      Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                         Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (page 5), and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 6), the
   project objective was as follows:

           To develop mechanisms that improve and monitor the quality and labor-market relevance of
           higher education.



                                                                                                Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Higher Education Project (P148291)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Original components:

   1. Institutional-Level Improvements (Appraisal: US$ 12.7 million; Actual: US$ 13.1 million): This component
   aimed to support institutional-level improvements in the higher education sector. Activities included:
   provision of just-in-time (JIT) grants to education service providers (universities, colleges, and training
   centers) to develop and deliver short-term programs and courses that align with the skills, sectors and
   competencies in immediate demand in the market place (particularly for returning migrants and secondary
   education graduates who are entering the labor market with limited experience); provision of a competitive
   grant program (CGP) for universities to fund demand-driven initiatives that are one-time investments (such
   as updated curriculum, teacher development, career services, laboratories, equipment, and learning
   materials to improve labor market relevance, as well as support services targeted to female students such
   as residential programs and mentoring, including encouragement of partnering with NGOs already providing
   support to female students).

   2. System-Level Interventions (Appraisal: US$ 1.7 million; Actual: US$ 1.2 million): This component aimed
   to support interventions at the system level to build capacity for quality improvements. Activities included:
   developing standards for graduate tracer studies; developing an institutional accreditation process;
   conducting an employer survey; revising state-defined curriculum standards; and assessing the approach to
   financing higher education.

   3. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (Appraisal: US$ 0.6 million; Actual: US$ 0.6 million):
   This component aimed to support project management and monitoring and evaluation.

   Revised Components (as reported in ICR, page 12)

         Component 1 was revised to include two new activities: (i) provision of information technology, labs
          and equipment to HEIs to improve the quality of the learning environment and teaching, and (ii)
          strengthening distance-learning capacity in at least two selected HEIs to address challenges
          associated with COVID-19 and build resilience, including assessment of needs and provision of
          hardware and software solutions.
         Component 2 was revised to include a study that outlined the steps to align the higher education
          system with the Bologna requirements. The scope of the higher education financing assessment
          was adjusted to developing recommendations to improve the performance-orientation of the HE
          financing system without drafting legislative amendments as the latter would need more
          consultations and reaching a consensus among all key stakeholders including HEIs, central
          government and ministries of education and finance.



                                                                                                   Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Higher Education Project (P148291)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost

         The project cost at appraisal was US$ 15.0 million. The project cost at completion was US$ 14.9
          million.
         The actual cost of Component 1 was $0.4 million more than initially planned, while the actual cost
          of Component 2 was $0.5 million less than initially planned.

   Financing

         The project was financed by an IDA grant of SDR 4.9 million (US$ 6.75 million equivalent) and an
            IDA Credit of SDR 6.0 million (US$ 8.25 million equivalent), for a total financing amount of SDR 10.9
            million (US$ 15.0 million).

   Borrower contribution

         There was no planned Borrower contribution.

   Dates

         June 30, 2015: Project approval.
         February 29, 2016: Project effectiveness.
         July 15, 2019: Mid-term review.
         September 27, 2021: The project was restructured to revise project activities and adjust the results
          framework accordingly. New activities included the provision of information technology equipment to
          improve the learning environment and also enable distance learning, and a study to outline steps to
          align the higher education sector with European agreements on quality assurance standards. The
          indicator to submit draft legislative amendments regarding higher education financing (which would
          require numerous consultations and consensus) was revised as follows: to
          prepare recommendations for more effective performance-oriented financing. The project closing
          date was extended from October 2021 to October 2022 to allow for completion of activities, given
          COVID-19 related implementation delays, and also to fully utilize project savings incurred during the
          project period.
         October 31, 2022: Project closing.



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Relevance to country conditions: Tajikistan is a landlocked country with a population of 8.2 million. It
has experienced steady economic growth since 2011, with poverty rates and wealth disparities
declining during that time. However, the economy is heavily reliant on remittances from abroad (49% of
GDP), and given the deepening economic crisis in Russia (where 90% of Tajikistan's migrants are


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Higher Education Project (P148291)



               employed) remittances from and labor migration to Russia will likely decline. Subsequently, there will be
               increasing competition in the labor market with workers remaining in Tajikistan and youth entering the labor
               market.

               In the higher education sector, the gross enrollment rate is approximately 13%, which is comparable to
               other countries with similar GDP per capita. Employment rates, as well as salary and formal sector
               opportunities, are higher for those with a higher education degree. However, labor market demands have
               shifted from routine manual skills to higher-order analytical and organizational skills. A recent business
               sector survey indicated that approximately one-third of all firms in Tajikistan identify an
               inadequately educated workforce as a constraint. In addition, enrollment of female students is lower than
               males: In 2011/12, females accounted for only 23% of full-time students and 41% part-time students.

               Relevance to country strategy: The country's education sector strategy at the time of project approval,
               the National Strategy of Education Development of the Republic of Tajikistan, was approved in 2012 and
               identified the following priorities in higher education: improving access, quality and relevance of higher
               education, transitioning to a competency-based curriculum, and improving the learning environment in
               education institutions. The current country education strategy for 2021-2030
               focuses on strengthening/developing distance learning and modern technology, establishing new
               standards, curriculum templates, institutional accreditation and quality assurance guidelines, as well as
               partnerships with foreign universities.

               Relevance to Bank's country strategy/ systematic country diagnostic: The Bank's Country Partnership
               Strategy for FY2015-18 identified a key pillar to promote shared prosperity by improving delivery of social
               services that expand opportunities for vulnerable and excluded groups, including focused support on the
               higher education sector. However, the lone indicator on higher education focused on equity ("increased
               share of poor students in the overall higher education institutions’ enrollment"). The Bank's Country
               Partnership Framework for FY2019-23 identified a key objective to enhance education services, including
               support for improved quality and relevance of the higher education sector, although there were no
               indicators to measure outcomes in the higher education sector specifically. The Bank's Systematic Country
               Diagnostic (2018) more explicitly identified the inadequate quality of the higher education sector - in the
               teaching workforce, research capacity, governance structures, and private sector participation - as a key
               factor in low national competitiveness of students.

               Bank's experience/ comparative advantage: The Bank has supported the introduction of competitive higher
               education financing schemes in numerous countries as a way to improve quality and relevance.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1

                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Higher Education Project (P148291)




Objective
To develop mechanisms that improve the quality and labor-market relevance of higher education.

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective was overall sound. The main activities to provide grants for higher
education institutions to make quality improvements (i.e. curricula, teacher training, employment search),
upgrade learning environments, and develop more robust quality assurance tools (i.e. standards,
accreditation process) were likely to lead to the intended outcome to develop mechanisms that improve
quality and relevance of higher education. Increased engagement with employers was also a key element in
the theory of change to increase alignment with labor market demand.

Outputs

      21 "just-in-time" (JIT) grants to higher education institutions (HEIs), colleges, or training centers to
         develop and deliver short-term courses that align with the sector, skills, and competencies in
         immediate demand (industry, construction, agriculture, education, health care, catering, trade,
         services), targeting those currently in the job market (including returning migrants and secondary
         education graduates entering the labor market with limited experience). The second round of JIT
         grants was not conducted as the program had exceeded its targets under the first round (the
         remaining US$0.5 million was reallocated for other activities.
        49 competitive (CGP) grants to 26 higher education institutions, in two windows: labor market
         relevance (29 subprojects) and female student support (20 sub-projects). For the prior window,
         activities included: revised curricula for 76 academic specialties, capacity building through
         partnerships with 26 foreign universities and 40 local employers’ associations, training centers, public
         and NGOs, upgraded equipment and technology. For the latter window, activities included: support in
         preparing for admission to HEIs, transition to work, career development centers, mentoring
         programs, lectures and master classes on gender and personal development. Also with the latter
         window, seven NGOs (target: three NGOs) were engaged to participate in the planning and
         implementation of the activities.
        Support to 3,822 female students through residential programs, psychological support, mentoring
         programs, speaker series, career development, and job search workshops (target: 2,000).
        Curriculum revision guidelines which incorporated the European standards, with clear learning
         outcomes and increased academic autonomy and employer engagement.
        Employer survey of 400 enterprises and organizations operating in the related sectors to identify
         specialties, skills, and competencies that are most important to the country's economy in the near- and
         medium-term.
        Engagement of 80 employers (target: 30) in revising curriculum, arranging internships, inviting
         employer lectures, creating centers for innovative technologies, and career development.
        Development of institutional accreditation standards and guidelines (with clear requirements related to
         transparency and accountability) and training of staff on conducting assessments. These included
         requirements for self-assessment reporting, creation of an expert group, coordination of
         the accreditation process.
        Provision of lab and information technology equipment in 30 HEIs, including for distance learning.
        Report on higher education financing, including recommendations for a more effective and
         performance-based orientation of the financing system.



                                                                                                     Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Higher Education Project (P148291)



Outcomes

        Curricula was updated and modernized, including incorporating employer feedback, in seven clusters
         of academic specialties, surpassing the target of five clusters. These included Economics and
         Statistics; Finance, Credit and Accounting; Business Administration and Management; Tourism;
         Energy; and Construction. Curricula for 18 pedagogical specialties were also redesigned. Starting in
         September 2021, all pedagogical faculties in Tajikistan have begun teaching students according to the
         revised curriculum.
              o 2,850 teachers received training to upgrade their skills (new curriculum development and
                  teaching and learning methods) or attended seminars/ study visits to foreign partner
                  universities.
              o 3,499 people participated in short-term training programs to up-skill/re-tool for current labor
                  market demands, surpassing the target of 1,200 people. According to the beneficiary survey
                  reported in the ICR (page 15), there was "high satisfaction" with the JIT program among both
                  participants and the educational institutions.
        Quality assurance standards and guidelines were approved by the Agency for Supervision in the
         Sphere of Education and Science and piloted in the following three HEIs: (i) Tajik State Pedagogical
         University; (ii) Dangara State University; and (iii) Tajik State Financial and Economic University.
        100% of the CGP grants were peer reviewed and assessed to have improved quality and relevance,
         surpassing the target of 65%. Of these 77% were rated as “highly successful” and 23% as
         “successful.”

Regarding actual improvements in quality and labor market relevance:

        For the JIT courses, 30 participants of the education courses provided by Tajik Pedagogical University
         were employed in kindergartens or became private nannies in Tajikistan and abroad, and 220
         participants opened their own business in sewing, baking, industry. The ICR (page 15) did not provide
         more detailed information on these data, such as the total number of participants in this survey who
         were seeking employment.

Achievement is rated High due to evidence of updated academic offerings in the higher education sector
and increased engagement with employers/ labor market. Targets were exceeded for several outcome
indicators.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To develop mechanisms that monitor the quality and labor-market relevance of higher education.

Rationale



                                                                                                  Page 6 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Higher Education Project (P148291)



                            The theory of change for this objective was overall sound. The main activities to implement quality assurance
                            tools and to develop graduate tracer study (GTS) guidelines and institutionalize the practice were likely to
                            lead to the intended outcome to develop mechanisms to monitor quality and relevance of higher education.

                            Outputs

                                    Development of peer review instrument for CGPs, to assess improved quality and relevance. The ex-
                                     post peer reviews were conducted by an independent team of consultants in March 2022.
                                    Development, piloting and implementation of four rounds of graduate tracer surveys (online, phone
                                     call, in-person interviews), which tracked transition to the labor market for 12 months after
                                     graduation. Staff also received training on conducting GTS and analyzing GTS data.
                                    Establishment of Graduate Tracing Center.
                                    Assessment of Tajikistan’s approach to higher education financing, with recommendations for a more
                                     effective and performance-based allocation method that supports key policy objectives.

                            Outcomes

                                    100% of the CGP grants were peer reviewed and assessed to have improved quality and relevance,
                                     surpassing the target of 65%. Of these, 77% were rated as "highly successful" and 23% as
                                     "successful". Also reported under Objective 1 to demonstrate improved quality and relevance, this
                                     outcome indicator also provides evidence of a mechanism established under the project to monitor
                                     quality and relevance, although it is not clear from the ICR whether the CGP grants program will be
                                     continued by MOES.
                                    By the third and fourth rounds of the GTS, all 34 eligible HEIs, or 100%, were participating in the
                                     studies, surpassing the target of 40%. The establishment of a Graduate Training Center, with project
                                     support, its staffing and financing provides strong indication of the institutionalization of this monitoring
                                     mechanism/practice.
                                    National GTS reports were produced for the pilot round and first and second rounds of the graduate
                                     tracer studies. As reported by the project team, the last national GTS report (2021) covered the 2019
                                     graduates, therefore the survey would not be able to capture any improvement in quality which could
                                     be attributed to the project because key project activities (curriculum revision, teachers training,
                                     provision of equipment, etc.) were only completed in 2021-2022.

                            Achievement is rated High due to evidence of regular tracking of the careers of graduates (in order to monitor
                            quality of HEIs). Targets for key indicators were exceeded.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale

                                                                                                                                    Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Higher Education Project (P148291)



  Achievement of the first objective is rated High due to evidence of updated academic offerings in the higher
  education sector and increased engagement with employers/ labor market. Achievement of the second
  objective is rated High due to evidence of regular tracking of the careers of graduates (in order to monitor
  quality of HEIs). Several targets for key outcome indicators were exceeded. Therefore, overall Efficacy is
  rated High.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  High



 5. Efficiency
The economic analysis at appraisal (PAD, Annex 5) provided an economic rationale for investment in higher
education (increased income and economic growth) and also a cost-benefit analysis. For the latter, costs were
calculated as project costs and recurrent costs of activities; benefits were estimated as increased wage
premiums for graduates due to increased qualifications, reduced employer transaction costs due to shorter
training period and faster start for new hires, and increased qualifications of returning migrants due to up-skilling
programs. The benefit:cost ratio was calculated as 4.3, and the net present value was US$44.5 million.

At completion (ICR, Annex 4), the cost-benefit analysis was updated using actual figures, such as the number of
graduates. The benefit:cost ratio was 4.2, and the net present value was US$73.9, the latter being significantly
higher than appraised due in large part to exceeding the targeted number of beneficiaries.

In addition, there were indications of positive implementation efficiency. At the time of project restructuring, the
project had US$3.9 million in project savings due to the following: unused funds from the second round of JIT
grants, substantially reduced travel and operational expenses originally planned for face-to-face workshops,
training and study tours, due to COVID-19, elimination of a procurement package for curriculum modernization
for non-pedagogical clusters, and exchange rate fluctuations The savings were used to finance additional
activities, most notably the provision of technology and distance learning equipment. Although there was a one-
year project closing date extension due to the COVID-19 pandemic and initial implementation delays due to lack
of implementation readiness (leading to delays in project effectiveness) and lack of experience/ commitment of
the ministry and education staff, activities were largely implemented as planned, with output targets met and
exceeded in certain areas.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)


                                                                                                        Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Higher Education Project (P148291)



                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance is rated High due to strong alignment with country conditions, country education strategy, and Bank
country strategy. Achievement of the first objective is rated High due to evidence of updated academic offerings
in the higher education sector and increased engagement with employers/ labor market. Achievement of the
second objective is rated High due to evidence of regular tracking of the careers of graduates (in order to
monitor quality of HEIs). Several targets for key outcome indicators were exceeded. Therefore, overall Efficacy
is rated High. Efficiency is rated Substantial due to favorable benefit:cost ratio and indications of positive
implementation efficiency.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The government is strongly committed to the project activities, as reflected by the embedding of numerous
project-related outputs in the recent National Strategy for Education Development (2021-2030), such as the
institutional accreditation standards, distance learning, curriculum templates, quality assurance guidelines,
and partnerships. The Graduate Tracing Center was established, with the capacity to implement multiple
rounds of tracer studies. The recommendations for more effective financing of higher education will likely
contribute to sustained outcomes in the various higher education institutions.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project’s objectives and design drew upon previous analytic work by the Bank, including "The Skills
  Road: Skills for Employability in Tajikistan" (2014), which found that employment outcomes were stronger
  for workers with better skills and better cognitive and non-cognitive skills and encouraged a shift from
  providing access to education institutions to providing the skills students need to succeed as adults; and
  "Tajikistan: Higher Education Study" (2014), which assessed numerous aspects of the higher education
  sector. The project also drew upon lessons from previous Bank education projects in the country,
  including that an education project is most effective and sustainable if the implementing agency, rather
  than a separate project unit, implements the project. Hence, the project’s implementation arrangements


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Higher Education Project (P148291)



  were designed such that Ministry of Education's senior management was fully responsible for its overall
  oversight, while various departments and relevant institutions were responsible for day-to-day
  implementation.

  The results framework was clear and realistic, although the project development objective was largely
  framed as a process outcome. The risk level was assessed as overall Substantial, with macroeconomic
  risk assessed as High, and political/governance, sector strategies/ policies, institutional and fiduciary
  capacity assessed as Substantial. Mitigation measures included stakeholder engagement and
  transparency, and capacity building.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team was supportive and proactive in supervision, given the limited experience of the Ministry of
 Education in implementing higher education projects, both in terms of implementation capacity and
 technical capacity, as this was the first Bank project of its kind in the country. These challenges were
 noted in the Mid-Term Review, highlighting limited availability and ineffective use of external technical
 assistance, particularly in the areas of curriculum reform and higher education financing. The Bank team
 provided continuous implementation support while also focusing efforts on securing external technical
 consultants. As reported in the ICR (page 24), while the MTR identified specific actions to address the
 implementation lags and possible restructuring, progress on those agreed-upon actions was sufficient by
 early 2020 (also taking into account the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic) and instead, the team used the
 project savings to restructure the project and finance additional activities and broaden the scope of the
 project.

 Fiduciary and safeguards performance were satisfactory, and monitoring and evaluation activities were
 carried out largely as planned. However, a clear transition to post-project continuation of activities, given
 the absence of a follow up Bank operation, was not identified.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E framework was straightforward, with clear indicators, baseline and targets. The project objective
 was not outcome-oriented, as the project was not expected to show significant results given the lag

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Higher Education Project (P148291)



 between introducing systemic improvement and producing actual results in terms of labor market outcomes
 during its implementation period (ICR, page 17). However, given that graduate tracer studies were
 expected to be completed during the project period, some intermediate outcomes could have been
 included in the results framework. Also, targets were set conservatively given that this was the first project
 of its kind in the country and experience was limited.

 Monitoring arrangements included regular data collection such as surveys, reports prepared by the HEIs
 on subprojects, and an independent technical audit for CGP sub-projects.




b. M&E Implementation
  During project restructuring, one intermediate results indicator to "submit draft legislative amendments to
  improve the performance-orientation of the HE financing system" was revised to "prepare
  an assessment of HE financing, with recommendations for a more effective and performance-
  oriented allocation." This was due to the lengthy time necessary for consultations and consensus.

  The ICR (page 26) stated that M&E data was regularly reported by the implementing agencies, albeit
  delayed on occasion. The planned evaluative activities were also carried out, including the peer review
  of CGP sub-projects and a Third-Party Verification of Goods (TPVG),



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (page 26), regular project monitoring was utilized to monitor implementation
  progress and to identify bottlenecks. It was also used to supervise HEIs’ progress on sub-projects
  helping keep their implementation on track. Based on monitoring of implementation progress, several
  proactivity plans were agreed during implementation support missions. The peer review of CGP sub-
  projects drew lessons learned, in order to facilitate the creation and transfer of knowledge and best
  practices, and provide recommendations, both strategic and operational, to improve implementation and
  transferability to other contexts. The graduate tracer studies were utilized to assess quality of activities,
  according to feedback from participants.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environmental Category "B" project due to potential small-scale civil works
   at HEIs. An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was prepared, which included general
   anticipated environmental risks and impacts and associated mitigation measures, a Checklist Environmental
   Management Plan (EMP) and site-specific EMPs, and institutional responsibilities. The project was staffed

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Higher Education Project (P148291)



  by an Environmental Specialist who had experience with implementing environmental safeguards under
  another Bank education project.

  During implementation, eighteen sub-projects carried out minor repairs of education and laboratory
  premises, as well as repairs of rooms in women’s dormitories, all of which were within the existing education
  buildings and laboratory premises. For each of these sub-projects, an EMP was developed and approved,
  which was then attached to contracts, requiring the contractors to follow all identified measures. All
  eighteen sub-projects fully implemented their EMPs, including precautionary and safety
  measures, measures to prevent air pollution, noise and to control water quality and waste management at
  the sub-project sites. According to the ICR (page 28), no complaints were filed during implementation.

  No other safeguard policies were triggered.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management: Financial management functions were carried out by the Ministry of Education
  fiduciary staff, who had prior experience with Bank education projects. The financial management
  assessment carried out during appraisal had identified three actions that were needed to reduce the risk
  rating from Substantial to Moderate: finalize the FM chapter of the project operations manual, install
  accounting software, and hire a FM consultant. The Bank supervision team reported weak overall planning
  and budgeting capacity within the FM staff and, therefore, worked regularly with them to develop and
  monitor dated action plans. The Financial Audit was increased for coverage of CGP sub-projects from the
  standard 5% to 20% to complement the peer review and the TPVG, providing feedback on the delivered
  goods, their utilization and the opinion of users about their quality. Audit reports were timely and
  unqualified, although the auditor’s Management Letters invariably contained recommendations on measure
  to strengthen financial management.

  Procurement: The Ministry of Education procurement staff also had previous Bank procurement
  experience. The overall project risk for procurement was rated High but was reduced to Substantial
  through implementation of mitigation measures identified in the procurement capacity assessment. These
  included: a timeline to finalize tenders and preparing and monitoring a related procurement plan; a contract
  management system and training on contract management, dissemination of procurement knowledge to
  HEI officials. According to the ICR (page 29), procurement processes were mostly carried out in
  accordance with approved procurement plans with no incidences of non-compliance, although some
  limitations were noted with respect to the quality including: (i) poor quality of technical documents; (ii)
  limited coordination between the procurement staff and the project team; and (iii) long selection processes,
  especially for consultants. Procurement ratings that had been mostly Moderately Satisfactory through
  implementation were upgraded to Satisfactory by completion.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other

                                                                                                 Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Higher Education Project (P148291)



    ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                           Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance                  Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (pages 31-32), adapted by IEG:

        Major sector reforms, while unlikely to be fully completed within one project cycle, can still be
         significantly moved forward through project support. In the case of this project, quality
         assurance and higher education financing reforms required a lengthy and wide consultation
         process among key stakeholders to achieve consensus. However, building on prior analytic
         work and project preparation grant support, the project was still able to contribute to sector
         reforms through the production of guidelines, assessments, and recommendations, which
         can be implemented and scaled up with follow up support.
        Deferring the measurement of project impact to the final phase of the project period can lead
         to delays in recognizing that a project is off-track to achieve targets; therefore, other
         intermediate measurements are necessary. In the case of this project, measuring improved
         quality of higher education could only realistically take place at the end of the project period
         given the need to implement all project activities before seeing improvements. Therefore,
         the project's M&E design included percentage of grants that are peer reviewed for quality
         and relevance, and percentage of HEIs conducting graduate tracer studies. This ensured
         that other measurements of intended outcomes could be tracked throughout project
         implementation.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was concise and internally consistent. Lessons were well-drawn from project experience. The ICR
followed guidelines and focused on evidence that the project had developed mechanisms (given the wording of
the PDO statement), but less so on any evidence related to increased employability. The task team reported

                                                                                                      Page 13 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Higher Education Project (P148291)



that the graduate tracer studies primarily interviewed the graduates on i) reasons for pursuing higher education
and selecting particular HEIs, ii) satisfaction with quality, structure and effectiveness of HE curriculum, and iii)
employment opportunities. Moreover, the last national GTS report (2021) covered the 2019 graduates,
therefore the survey would not be able to capture any improvement in quality which could be attributed to the
project because key project activities (curriculum revision, teachers training, provision of equipment, etc.) were
only completed in 2021-2022. Lastly, given the numerous changes and revisions to the project design and
financing allocations, a paragraph with a description of the entirety of the scope of changes would have been
helpful.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 14 of 14
