     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)



                                                                             Report Number: ICRR0023477

1. Program Information



 Country                                 Practice Area (Lead)
 Bangladesh                              Social Protection & Jobs

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                       Approved Operations
 0                                        0

 Operation ID                             Operation Name
 P167190                                  Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC




 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-63490                               27-Jun-2019                                       251,384,068.01

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 12-Dec-2018                             27-Jun-2019
                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                          250,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Revised Commitment                           250,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Actual                                       251,384,068.01                                           0.00




P168724_TBL
 Country                                 Practice Area (Lead)
 Bangladesh                              Social Protection & Jobs

 Operation ID                            Operation Name
 P168724                                 Bangladesh Jobs DPC 2 ( P168724 )




                                                                                              Page 1 of 32
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-63490,IDA-66900                     15-Dec-2020                                          252073351.53

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Jun-2020                             15-Dec-2020

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                         250,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                          250,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                      252,073,351.53                                             0.00



 P168725_TBL
 Country                                 Practice Area (Lead)
 Bangladesh                              Social Protection & Jobs

 Operation ID                            Operation Name
 P168725                                 Bangladesh Jobs DPC3 ( P168725 )


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-66900,IDA-68490                     30-Apr-2022                                          248695888.00

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Mar-2021                             30-Apr-2022

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                         250,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                          250,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                      248,695,888.00                                             0.00



 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Rashmi Shankar            Judyth L. Twigg             Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL

                                                                                               Page 2 of 32
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)



a. Objectives

The Bangladesh Jobs Development Policy Credit (DPC) had the following Program Development Objective
(PDO): to address the country's jobs challenges by 1) modernizing the trade and investment environment; 2)
strengthening systems that protect workers and build resilience; and 3) improving policies and programs that
enhance access to jobs for vulnerable populations. The PDO statements are identical across the Program
Document (PD), legal documents, and ICR.

For the purposes of this ICR Review, the objectives of the operation (against which outcomes will be assessed)
are taken to be the following:

      PDO 1: Modernizing the trade and investment environment;
      PDO 2: Strengthening systems that protect workers and build resilience;
      PDO 3: Improving policies and programs that enhance access to jobs for vulnerable populations.




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The Jobs DPC's objectives were supported by 29 prior actions (PAs) under three pillars/policy areas that
corresponded directly to the three objectives:

      Pillar 1: Modernizing the trade and investment environment;
      Pillar 2: Strengthening systems that protect workers and build resilience;
      Pillar 3: Improving policies and programs that enhance access to jobs for vulnerable populations.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Actual disbursements exceeded the approved amount in USD by US$2.15 million because of exchange rate
movements. While the program was adjusted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, there was no significant
change in timeline. The three operations in this programmatic series were approved over a four-year period as
follows:

      P167190 – Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC, approved in the amount of $250 million on December
       12, 2018 and closed as planned on June 27, 2019.
      P168724 - Bangladesh Second Programmatic Jobs DPC, approved in the amount of $250 million on
       June 19, 2020 and closed as planned on December 15, 2020.
      P168725 - Bangladesh Third Programmatic Jobs DPC, approved in the amount of $250 million on
       March 26, 2021 and closed as planned on April 30, 2022.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)




The objectives were relevant to the country context at the time of appraisal.

At the time of appraisal in 2018, Bangladesh had experienced two decades of rapid growth, but job creation
and poverty reduction had slowed. Employment growth was driven by the ready-made-garment (RMG) sector
in the first half of the 2000s, which contributed to rising female labor force participation and a sharp decline in
extreme poverty from 48.9 to 24.3 percent between 2000 and 2016. However, only one out of five workers
were wage-employed, and both formal and informal workers experienced vulnerability and poor work
conditions. Gender disparities were acute, with only 36 percent of women in the workforce compared to 82
percent of men, and unemployment among women and youth was rising. Job growth in the RMG sector
came to a halt after 2010 following the Rana Plaza tragedy, which led to sector scrutiny and improvements in
wages and working conditions even as the country struggled to compete with higher-productivity apparel
sectors in other countries such as Vietnam and Cambodia. The economy failed to create enough jobs to keep
up with the growth of the working age population, and informality has increased. Limited job prospects
accelerated migration, with nearly one million workers migrating overseas each year, typically for shorter-term
contracts. Bangladesh also faces a high level of vulnerability to climate change. At the time of appraisal, it
was estimated that Bangladesh would have 13.3 million internal climate migrants by 2050, with significant
economic and labor market consequences. The Jobs Diagnostic undertaken in 2017 suggested that reforms
to modernize trade and investment, protect workers, and enhance access to jobs were the priority. The three
objectives of the Jobs DPC were therefore relevant to country context and underpinned by country
diagnostics (ICR, p. 5).

These reforms remained relevant when the COVID-19 crisis presented new challenges. As a result of
prolonged movement restrictions and a sharp decline in demand for apparel exports, gross domestic product
(GDP) growth decelerated to 3.5 percent in FY20. An April 2020 rapid assessment found that 71 percent of
workers in slums had lost jobs, and that household incomes had dropped by 60 percent in rural areas and 75
percent among the poor. In July 2020, 94 percent of businesses reported a sharp drop in sales, 83 percent
had losses, and 33 percent were unable to service debts. According to the PD, millions of Bangladeshis were
pushed back into poverty.

The overall structure of the program and of the PDOs was conducive to accommodating new prior actions
and triggers supporting the government's COVID-19 response. These measures were introduced into the
second DPC (DPC2) and aimed to protect workers and preserve productive capacity in the manufacturing
sector (ICR, p. 7).

The objectives were aligned to the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 2016-20 and the Seventh Five
Year Plan (2016-20) and were underpinned by country diagnostics.

The overall DPC program, through its three operations, was initially structured to address a broad set of
constraints and thereby support the government's jobs objectives: (1) structural reforms to remove constraints
to investment and trade; (2) reforms to improve the quality of jobs; and (3) reforms to make labor
markets more inclusive for women, youth, and migrants. To address the COVID-19 crisis, the DPC series
introduced new elements to mitigate impact and facilitate recovery. The COVID-19 crisis, starting in the early
months of 2020, affected businesses and workers, migrants, and vulnerable households. The DPC series
pivoted to focus on protecting workers and firms, within the structure of the original program.

The Jobs DPC was anchored in the FY16-20 CPF, which had the overarching objective to support the
creation of "more and better jobs.” The CPF aligned with the government's 7th Plan in emphasizing the need


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 32
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)



to deliver large-scale job creation to absorb the growing youth population and climate-induced rural-urban
migration, create opportunities for women to benefit from economic growth, and generate earnings
opportunities to lift more Bangladeshis out of poverty. The reforms under the three pillars of the Jobs
DPC align with the CPF focus areas, which were: Enhanced Business Environment and Trade Facilitation;
Social Inclusion; and Climate and Environmental Management (PD3, Annex 6).

The constraints addressed by the program were underpinned by the 2017 Jobs Diagnostic, which identified
key policy reforms to address core challenges. To boost job creation, the Jobs Diagnostic recommended that
Bangladesh diversify its manufacturing and services sectors (with a focus on increasing exports and foreign
direct investment), accelerate productivity growth, and facilitate urbanization. To raise the quality of jobs,
policies need to address barriers to firm and worker productivity, expand access to worker protection, and
facilitate labor mobility. Finally, to connect vulnerable workers to jobs, the Jobs Diagnostic recommended
addressing specific needs of the targeted population, for instance, reducing barriers to female labor force
participation, facilitating school-to-labor market transitions for youth, and lowering the costs of international
migration. The DPC series was designed to focus on selected policies that act both on the demand and
supply sides and were critical to the broad reform and investment agenda. Other critical reforms and
investments, such as those related to urbanization, were supported by other programs (ICR, p. 5).


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Table 1: Objectives and Prior Actions (PAs) under the Bangladesh Programmatic Jobs DPC (ICR, pp.
7-10):

 DPC1                         DPC2                              DPC3
 Pillar 1: Modernizing the Trade and Investment Environment
                              PA2: (i) The Prime Minister’s
                              Office has issued the “One
                              Stop Service (Bangladesh
                                                                PA3: The Bangladesh
                              Investment Development
                                                                Investment Development
 PA1: The Recipient, through Authority) Rules, 2020” and
                                                                Authority (“BIDA”) has made
 its Parliament, has enacted published them in the Official
                                                                available online streamlined
 the One Stop Shop Act 2018 Gazette; and, (ii) The Cabinet
                                                                processes for at least thirty-
 (Act No. 10 of 2018) and     has approved draft
                                                                five (35) key regulatory
 published it in the Official amendments to the Companies
                                                                services required by investors
 Gazette.                     Act, including provisions to
                                                                for starting and operating a
                              allow for single-person
                                                                business.
                              companies, speed business
                              registration, and strengthen
                              corporate governance.
 PA4: The Ministry of         PA5: The National Board of        PA6: The Recipient, through
 Finance has submitted the Revenue (NBR) has: (i) Issued        its Parliament, has approved,
 Customs Act 2018 (Bill No. a set of rules and directives to    through the Finance Act 2020,
 58 of 2018) to the           support ongoing customs           legal provisions authorizing

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)



Recipient’s Parliament for  modernization initiatives; and,    the establishment and
approval.                   (ii) Received approval from the    governance structure of the
                            Ministry of Public                 Bangladesh Single Window,
                            Administration (MoPA) for          and published them in the
                            establishment of a risk            Official Gazette.
                            management approach across
                            customs.
                            PA8: The NBR has: (i)
                            Approved operational policies
PA7: The NBR has made       and processes to improve
publicly available on its   efficiency and transparency of
website a comprehensive     the bonded warehouse regime,
set of rules and procedures including licensing, audit,
for Bonded Warehouse        management, and
business licensing and      reconciliation; and (ii) Issued
operation.                  guidelines on the application of
                            risk management principles to
                            the bonded warehouse regime.
                                                               PA11: The Ministry of
PA9: (i) The Ministry of    PA10: The Ministry of
                                                               Environment, Forests and
Finance has rolled out      Commerce has published
                                                               Climate Change has
Climate Budgeting across 20 guidelines for compliance of
                                                               approved the Updated EIA
ministries with climate     social and environmental
                                                               Guidelines for Industries,
relevant expenditures; and, (including energy and water
                                                               incorporating occupational
(ii) The Cabinet has        consumption) standards for the
                                                               health and safety and
approved the National       leather and the light
                                                               community health and safety
Environmental Policy 2018. engineering/plastics sectors.
                                                               issues.
Pillar 2: Strengthening Systems that Protect Workers and Build Resilience
PA12: The Ministry of
Finance has integrated the
management of the
Government Service
Pension Fund and the
General Provident Fund of
civil servants through the
establishment of the Central
Accounts Office for Pension
and Fund Management.
                               PA13: The Recipient’s central PA14: (i) The Ministry of
                               bank (Bangladesh Bank), has Finance has taken the step
                               initiated the roll-out of a    necessary to roll out the
                               financing scheme to enable     second phase of a
                               employers in export industries Bangladesh Bank working
                               to maintain wage and           capital facility that enables
                               allowance payments to workers employers in export industries
                                                              to maintain wage and


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)



                              affected by the COVID-19         allowance payments to
                              crisis.                          workers affected by the
                                                               COVID-19 crisis; and (ii) The
                                                               Ministry of Labor and
                                                               Employment (MoLE) has
                                                               approved the implementation
                                                               guidelines of a new social
                                                               security program titled “Social
                                                               Security Program for the
                                                               Unemployed and Destitute
                                                               Workers of Export-Oriented
                                                               Garments, Leather and
                                                               Footwear Industries”.
                                                               PA16: The Palli Karma-
                              PA15: Recipient has              Sahayak Foundation (“PKSF”)
                              established a new cash transfer has adopted the policy for
                              scheme targeted to informal      PKSF’s special loan program
                              workers whose earnings have titled “Livelihood Restoration
                              been affected by the COVID-19 Loan” to provide microfinance
                              crisis.                          stimulus to COVID-affected
                                                               informal microenterprises
                                                               PA17: The National Disaster
                                                               Management Council
                                                               (“NDMC”) has revised and
                                                               published the Revised
                                                               Standing Orders on Disaster
                                                               to increase its ability to
                                                               respond to climate and
                                                               disaster events.
                                                               PA18: The Ministry of
                                                               Disaster Management and
                                                               Relief has approved and
                                                               published the guidelines for
                                                               implementation of EGPP+.
PA19: The Recipient,          PA20: MoLE has launched          PA21: The MoLE has
through its Parliament, has   nationally and across sectors strengthened its capacity to
passed the Bangladesh         the Labor Inspection             monitor and remediate
Labor Act (Amendment)         Management Application           violations of labor and safety
2018 (Act No. 48 of 2018).    (LIMA), including mechanisms regulations by: (i) Deploying
                              for feedback from workers and the Labor Inspection
                              'online reporting' of inspection Management Application
                              results.                         (“LIMA”) to all regional offices
                                                               of the Department of
                                                               Inspection for Factories and
                                                               Establishment (“DIFE”), (ii)
                                                               Strengthening the financial
                                                               resources of DIFE to carry out


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)



                                                             its functions, and (iii)
                                                             Strengthening the human
                                                             resources of the Recipient’s
                                                             labor courts to adjudicate as
                                                             needed.




Pillar 3: Improving Policies and Programs that Enhance Job Opportunities for
Vulnerable Populations
                              PA23: The Ministry of
                              Expatriates Welfare and
PA22: The Recipient,
                              Overseas Employment
through its Parliament, has
                              (MoEWOE) has issued the
enacted the Wage Earners
                              “Recruitment Agency Licensing
Welfare Board Act 2018 (Act
                              and Code of Conduct Rule” and
No. 30 of 2018) and
                              the “Recruitment Agency
published it in the Official
                              Classification Rule” and
Gazette.
                              published them in the Official
                              Gazette.
                              PA25: The Recipient has put in
                              place the necessary legal and
                              institutional measures to enable
PA24: The Recipient,
                              the NSDA to operate, including
through its Parliament, has                                    PA26: The National Skills
                              (i) An approved staffing
enacted the National Skills                                    Development Authority
                              organogram; (ii) The NSDA
Development Authority Act                                      (“NSDA”) has approved the
                              Rule; and, (iii) Guidelines for
2018 (Act No. 45 of 2018)                                      National Skills Development
                              registration of training
and published it in the                                        Policy.
                              institutions and for
Official Gazette.
                              management of the National
                              Human Resource Development
                              Fund.
                                                               PA29: The Child Daycare Act
PA27: The Ministry of
                                                               has been approved by
Women and Children Affairs
                              PA28: The Cabinet has            Cabinet, to be submitted to
has submitted the draft Child
                              approved the draft Child         the President for
Daycare Act to the Scrutiny
                              Daycare Act.                     recommendation as a money
Committee of the Recipient’s
                                                               bill before its onward
Cabinet of Ministers.
                                                               submission to Parliament.

PDO 1: "Modernizing the trade and investment environment," was supported by 11 prior actions.

PA1-PA2-PA3 aimed to facilitate business registration and make it easier to start a business.

PA1 supported the enactment of the One Stop Shop Act 2018. PA2 issued the implementing regulations for
the One Stop Shop Act and further amended the Companies Act to modernize and streamline business

                                                                                                 Page 8 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)



registration. PA3 build on these regulatory reforms to support the digitization of 35 key regulatory services
needed by investors starting or operating a business. These three actions complemented each other and
directly and credibly supported the objective of modernizing the investment environment.

Rationale: Integration with the apparel global value chain had led to rapid growth in Bangladesh's RMG
exports (which accounted for 82 percent of the total in 2016, almost all to the United States [US]and
European Union [EU]). However, the RMG sector's growth started slowing down after this period. With the

loss of preferential access to apparel markets in the US and the EU imminent due to Bangladesh’s
graduation from low-income status, policy attention turned to product and export diversification with a view to
finding new sources of growth. This would entail improved ability to attract investment, including in sectors
other than RMG. Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) was relatively low in Bangladesh. In 2017 for example,
Vietnam, an aspirational peer, attracted 11 times as much FDI as Bangladesh in per capita terms, while lower
middle-income countries (LMICs) attracted more than thrice as much, also in per capita terms (PD1, p. 19).

According to PD1, the weak performance on attracting FDI was attributed to investors needing to navigate
complex regulations and accessing services delivered by 34 different line agencies. Bangladesh was ranked
at 177th out of 190 in the Doing Business rankings in 2016. Female-owned businesses faced
disproportionate challenges in this context, including additional barriers to access information; greater
financial, time, and mobility constraints; and exposure to harassment through existing procedures. In the
context of COVID-19, outdated insolvency procedures emerged as a critical issue, once distressed firms
sought to restructure operations to avoid insolvency and liquidation.

The Jobs DPC therefore set out to support reforms in these areas with a view to streamlining procedures
underpinning business start-up, operation, and liquidation/restructuring. PA1 and PA2 supported reforms to
facilitate investment and accelerate company formation. In 2018, the One-Stop Service (OSS) Act provided
the basis for the “virtual” OSS for investment establishment. In 2019, actions were taken to reduce the cost
and duration of new business registrations (reduction of incorporation fees, elimination of physical inspection
to issue value-added tax (VAT) registration certificates, elimination of pre-inspection to issue trade licenses).
In 2020, new OSS Rules defined the procedures for bound service delivery, while the Companies (2nd
Amendment) Bill allowed for the formation of sole-member companies as part of its efforts to promote
domestic and foreign investment. PA3 built on PA1 and PA2 to support the operationalization of 35 key
regulatory services in the OSS online platform.

Rating: Satisfactory

PA4-PA5-PA6 aimed to improve customs efficiency through institutional and regulatory modernization.

PA4 supported the submission to Parliament of a new Customs Act that would be the legislative basis for
critical reforms, such as risk management and a National Single Window (NSW), essential to support more
efficient trading. PA5 supported the implementation of the Customs Act as well as the institutional
arrangements for a risk management approach. PA6 implemented the risk management approach and
supported the introduction of a NSW through legislation approved by Parliament.

Rationale: Modernizing customs was recognized as critical to support global value chain integration, improve
trade logistics performance, and facilitate a trade-led recovery. Female exporters were (and remain)
especially vulnerable to delays in clearing procedures and non-procedural harassment, according to evidence
cited in the PD and findings from consultations with stakeholders such as the Bangladesh Women Chamber
of Commerce and Industry (PD1, p. 21). This is important because female-owned businesses are more likely

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)



to export than male-owned businesses in Bangladesh (World Bank Enterprise Survey 2013). Despite the
temporary decline in global trade due to the COVID-19 crisis, trade expansion anchored in scaled-up labor-
intensive manufacturing remained fundamental to the government's plans over the medium-term.
However, Bangladesh ranked 176th of 190 economies in the 2020 Doing Business "trading across
borders" indicator, remaining by far the worst-performing country in South Asia. There is significant global
evidence that for a given trade policy, trade logistics are the significant driver of trading costs. Bangladesh’s
customs regime, which failed to exploit the opportunities of automation and risk-based approaches,
was increasingly seen as a binding constraint to the expansion of export-oriented industry. The measures
supported by the Jobs DPC would modernize customs and therefore directly reduce procedural and
coordination costs, while reducing scope of discretionary controls, especially important for female traders.

The program was adjusted when new customs legislation was delayed due to the pandemic. Instead, ten
measures were introduced either through amendments to existing legislation or through the Statutory
Regulatory Orders (SRO) to ensure compliance with the World Trade Organization Trade Facilitation
Agreement. Under PA5, administrative approvals were obtained to establish the risk management system
(DPC2). DPC2 also supported the establishment of a Customs Risk Management Unit in the National Board
of Revenue (NBR), which was to be responsible for consignment, conveyance, and passengers, including
crew targeting intelligence, data analytics, financial risk management, and international coordination, risk
profiling, and other risk management activities (PD2, p. 26; PD3, p. 16).

Customs Act amendments supported by PA6 established the legal provisions for the NSW (DPC3). The
NSW was expected to connect 39 agencies and 6 private sector associations to provide approximately 208
services related to trade, an initiative supported also through technical assistance (TA) provided by the
Bangladesh Regional Connectivity Project 1. The legal provisions were approved through the Finance
Bill 2020, which established the governance and operational structure for the NSW. This legislation
established the legal basis for a Commissionerate to operate the Single Window, with supervision from a
Standing Committee comprising representatives from the NBR and the agencies and bodies providing
certificate, license, and permit issuance. This was an essential step towards the institutionalization and
governance of the Single Window.

These three prior actions were complementary and had a strong, direct, and credible link with the objective of
modernizing trade, backed by both global and country-specific evidence.

Rating: Satisfactory

PA7-PA8 supported the expansion of bonded warehouse licensing beyond the RMG sector with a view to
supporting export diversification.

PA7 introduced transparency into the system through the publication of a comprehensive set of rules and
procedures for bonded warehousing and operations, while PA8 supported improved efficiency of the regime
and issued guidelines for the application of risk management principles.

Rationale: As noted above, export diversification was a priority in the given country context. Bonded
warehousing reduces import costs by allowing for deferment of import duties and secure storage of goods
near or at port facilities. Bangladesh’s special bonded warehouse (SBW) regime was a catalyst for the
development of the RMG sector, and it was therefore seen as critical to expand it to other export sectors.
Enterprises used the SBW facility to import inputs duty-free along with imports of inputs under back-to-back
letters of credit (a facility to pay for imported inputs from export proceeds). The RMG sector accounted for 90


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)



percent of all SBW licenses. While no legal provisions restricted the use of the facility, in practice other
sectors faced barriers (shorter audit cycles, inability to bond multiple premises on one license, and a
requirement to finance an on-site staff). Limited transparency and inefficiencies in SBW procedures also
imposed barriers on new firms. Finally, the authorities exercised 100 percent transaction-by-transaction
control, rather than relying on risk-based management systems, making the process burdensome for
licensees and for Customs officials.

PA7 supported the provision of information to strengthen the SBW regime, complementing the government-
financed SBW automation and business process reform project. The NBR published SBW processes and
rules on its website to provide greater transparency to firms interested in SBWs, particularly from outside the
RMG sector. In parallel, the NBR began implementation of a US$10 million government-financed project to
improve efficiency and automate SBW processes, including bond license issuance, audit, management,
reconciliation, and renewal. Building on a review of business processes, PA8 supported the establishment of
new policies, procedures, and guidelines to improve access and efficiency of the program, including
simplification of the bond license, audit, management, and reconciliation system and adoption of guidelines to
implement risk management practices.

The prior actions were relevant a critical factor in the success of the RMG export sector and an important
step towards export diversification, though operationalization of the reformed policy was not be supported as
originally planned.

Rating: Moderately Satisfactory

PA9-PA10-PA11 supported improved social and environmental standards compliance in exporting industries
backed by increased public spending on climate-relevant expenditures and a new National Environmental
Policy.

PA9 and PA10 focused on strengthened environmental policy with greater consideration for climate change,
and PA11 supported the inclusion of occupational health and safety (OHS) and community health and safety
(CHS) in environmental management systems.

Rationale: While prioritizing the expansion of labor-intensive manufacturing to support job growth, the
government recognized that the environmental, social, and health implications of such manufacturing could
be adverse in the absence of active mitigation. For example, while manufacturing job creation facilitates
adaptation to climate change, it can also raise electricity consumption, put pressure on water resources,
increase solid waste, and increase demand for transport. There was an opportunity for Bangladeshi industry
to adopt international standards for energy efficiency and environmental management. The COVID-19 crisis
underscored the importance of managing and mitigating potential health impacts on workers and
communities. For example, high labor intensity put workers in relatively crowded spaces at high risk of
transmission. More generally, the health and safety management performance in the manufacturing and
construction sectors was characterized by high fatality and accident rates (PD3, p. 19). The prior actions
therefore supported improved budgeting for climate-relevant expenditures, the approval of the National
Environmental Policy 2018, and the publication of guidelines both for compliance with social and
environmental standards in the leather and light manufacturing sectors and for the incorporation of OHS and
CHS in guidelines for industries.

Overall, in the absence of actions supporting implementation, rating is moderately satisfactory.



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)



Rating: Moderately Satisfactory

PDO 2: "Strengthening systems that protect workers and build resilience," was supported by 10 PAs.

PA12 was originally meant to the first of three actions that would undertake deep pension reform.

Rationale: Establishing a sustainable and comprehensive pension system would have represented
significantly improved security and resilience for workers outside the public sector. A functional
pension system for the private sector was seen as critical for labor mobility and social protection. PA12
supported a pilot electronic funds transfer for Ministry of Finance pensions, which was established in
February 2018. This was rolled out to other line ministries covering all pensioners in a single consolidated
central management fund, under the Controller General of Accounts.

The triggers initially planned for DPC2 and DPC3 on a pension strategy and regulatory body were dropped,
as this agenda proved to be overambitious considering the political economy surrounding pension reforms.
The pandemic also contributed to a delay in consultations. On its own the PA supported improved accounting
without establishing an improved pension system. The design of the PA never accounted for potential political
economy issues.

Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory

PA13-PA14-PA15-PA16 supported the government’s crisis response aimed at protecting workers and
firms. PA13 supported a financing scheme for employers to maintain wage and allowance payments to
workers. PA14 and PA15 continued the rollout, and PA15 also supported approval of the implementation
guidelines of a new social security program for "Unemployed and Destitute Workers of Export-Oriented
Garments, Leather and Footwear Industries.” PA16 supported the provision of a microfinance stimulus to
COVID-affected informal microenterprises.

Rationale: The pandemic led to significant disruptions in the RMG supply chain, putting at risk workers,
especially women, who dominate sector employment. PA13-14 supported measures to buffer the impact of
COVID-19 on workers in the formal and informal sectors. PA13 supported the establishment of a fund to
temporarily pay wages in active export-oriented industries during a period of pandemic restrictions. BDT 50
billion was provided from the government's budget and BDT 25 billion from a Bangladesh Bank refinancing
facility. The facility allowed scheduled banks to access the Bangladesh Bank facility with a one-time service
charge of 2 percent, interest-free. Funds were used to pay wages and salaries for the months of April and
May 2020 for approximately 3.8 million people (53 percent female workers) in export-oriented industries. An
additional BDT 25 billion was disbursed from a Bangladesh Bank facility for the month of June 2020. The
program required identifying affected workers and setting up mobile banking accounts for payment directly to
workers. PA13 supported the establishment of an emergency cash transfer scheme for informal workers in
March 2020. The scheme was coordinated by the Prime Minister’s Office, and transfers were made to
beneficiaries through mobile financial services (ICR, p. 17).

PA15 and PA16 expanded the scope and coverage of COVID-19 response programs, with a view to
strengthening resilience to future shocks. Additional resources were allocated to a program supporting the
payment of wages and allowances for one month in July 2020 (an initial BDT 30 billion from Bangladesh
Bank, later increased by BDT 70 billion to include the information technology sector). The government
provided a subsidy for half of the 9 percent interest on this facility. PA16 also supported reforms that allowed
the Palli Karma-Sahayak Foundation (PKSF), a public microcredit organization, to establish the Livelihood
Restoration Loan, a specialized and flexible loan program with funding of BDT 5 billion complemented by

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)



BDT 1 billion of PKSF’s funds. The program would provide revolving loans for self-employed groups affected
by COVID-19, including agriculture and related entrepreneurs, small and cottage industry-related
entrepreneurs, and youth in training (ICR, p. 17).

The prior actions were relevant, short-term pandemic responses with adequate sector-level targeting, and
appropriate leverage on existing institutions and ongoing Bank engagement.

Rating: Satisfactory

PA17-PA18 supported the government's efforts to strengthen crisis response capacity. PA17 supported the
National Disaster Management Council (NDMC), which published the Revised Standing Orders on Disaster,
aligned with global and national frameworks and development plans. PA18 supported the Ministry of Disaster
Management and Relief, which approved and published the guidelines for implementation of EGPP+
(Employment Generation Program for the Poor) (ICR, p. 18; PD3, para 55). These actions were expected to
make the government's core social safety net program more flexible to allow for faster and better targeted
response in the event of future crises.

Rationale: In addition to supporting the response to the ongoing pandemic, DPC3 added two PAs aimed at
supporting Bangladesh’s ability to respond to shocks in a coordinated manner in order to reach the poor and
vulnerable rapidly. A swift response was seen as essential to protect the productive assets of the poor and
vulnerable, protect community infrastructure critical to livelihoods and mitigation of climate change impacts,
and protect major infrastructure to promote continuity of business activities.

First, given that coordination and well-defined and demarcated roles and responsibilities across multiple
agencies would be necessary to deploy the multi-staged interventions required to minimize the impacts of
climate and disaster events, the Standing Orders on Disaster (SOD) was revised to establish the same. The
SOD is a key part of the disaster regulatory framework in the country and addresses needs for both disaster
preparedness and disaster risk reduction. There were gaps in intra-agency communications and knowledge
sharing. The revised SOD was better aligned with updated global and national frameworks and development
plans, and was expected to play a crucial role in reducing these gaps and improving implementation.

The EGPP+ broadened the type of sub-projects that could be supported beyond community asset-based
work, to incorporate community services as well as an unconditional modality. This flexibilization is expected
to expand access to the most vulnerable groups (PD, p. 23). The adoption of the EGPP “Plus” (EGPP+)
supported the government’s capacity to deploy the program in response to shocks in a timely manner with
flexibility across target beneficiaries, type of support, and delivery mechanisms. These shocks would include
extreme climate events and natural disasters (storms, floods, earthquake, droughts, and landslides), human-
induced shocks (flow of displaced people, economic or financial crisis), health shocks (epidemic or pandemic)
and biological shocks (e.g. locust plagues).

PA17 and PA18 supported the strengthening of crisis-response systems and related institution building and
credibly contributed towards the objective by addressing constraints on implementation and expanding
coverage of the SOD. The Standing Orders and their institutional setup are operational and were activated to
support populations affected by flooding and Cyclone Amphan in 2020 (ICR, p. 18).

Rating: Satisfactory

PA19-20-21 strengthened worker protections, including from gender-based violence and sexual harassment.


                                                                                                  Page 13 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)



PA19 focused on upstream policies through amendments to the Labor Act (2018), and DPC 2 (PA20) and
DPC 3 (PA21) aimed to strengthen institutional capacity to implement and enforce these regulations. The
sequence of reforms as ultimately supported included legislative changes under PA19 and the establishment
and roll-out of the Labor Inspection Management Application (LIMA) – facilitating labor complaints (including
on sexual harassment and gender-based violence, GBV) and their publication – and improved resources and
capacity to adjudicate these complaints under PAs 20 and 21 respectively (ICR, p. 12). Legislative
amendments under PA19 addressed issues related to, among others, child labor, unions, maternity leave,
injury / death compensation, and standards pertaining to congestion, conduct, climate risks, and disaster
response plans. PA20 supported the national launch of LIMA, while PA21 supported the roll-out of LIMA
through the Department for Inspection of Factories and Establishments (DIFE). PA 21 also increased
financial resources for DIFE to strengthen its monitoring function and supported strengthened human
resources for labor courts (ICR, pp. 18, 19).

Rationale:

The establishment of legal protections of workers and the enforcement of labor laws were seen as critical to
improving job quality in Bangladesh. Three out of five women in Bangladesh faced physical or sexual
violence, with working women especially vulnerable to harassment, an important barrier to higher female
labor force participation rates. Additionally, the 2013 Rana Plaza tragedy illustrated major gaps in workplace
safety and the lack of mechanisms to compensate workers.

In addition to broad labor standards including on sexual harassment, PA21 and PA22 also covered
regulations on workers’ rights in terms of physical and financial safety as a result of natural disasters;
establishment of safety committees to review progress of implementation of emergency disaster plans; the
organization of regular trainings and drills on natural disasters; and the provision of resilient housing facilities
for workers of teagardens (to be at a safe distance from marsh and wetlands and sufficiently elevated to
address flood risks).

The three PAs in this results chain were highly relevant, both on the legislative and regulatory front as well as
on operationalization of key systems. It is commendable that the Bank used broad labor reform to support
further protections against sexual harassment and gender-based violence, thereby mainstreaming important
protections for female workers.

Rating: Highly Satisfactory

Objective 3, "Access to jobs for the vulnerable," was supported by 8 prior actions.

PA22-PA23 supported efforts to protect migrant workers. The expansion of labor regulatory services to
overseas migrants was supported through the establishment of a Wage Earners Welfare Board (WEWB) in
2018 under PA22. DPC2 supported modest reforms on regulation of recruitment agencies through while the
trigger originally envisaged under DPC3 on regulating these agencies was dropped.

Rationale:

Overseas migration has been a key channel for Bangladeshis, increasingly including women, to access job
opportunities in recent years, with around one million Bangladeshis going abroad for temporary employment
each year. Remittances averaged 8 percent of GDP over the 2010-20 decade, playing an important role in
poverty reduction. However, migrant workers from Bangladesh face some of the highest costs – based on the


                                                                                                       Page 14 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)



KNOMAD-ILO Cost of Migration Survey (ILO, 2015) – at about 9 months of wages. 70 percent of these costs
go to intermediaries.

The Jobs DPC sought to support overseas migration by expanding services to migrants. Establishment of the
WEWB as a statutory body was a significant first step. DPC2 supported operationalization of two rules
supporting licensing and conduct of recruitment agencies, which were expected to lower the long-term costs
of migration through enhanced performance monitoring of intermediaries. While the two PAs were relevant,
the primary constraint on migration costs was the lack of regulation of intermediary and recruitment
agencies, which was only partly addressed (ICR, p. 19). Limited availability of data on recruitment agencies
should have been foreseen at the stage of design of prior action. The adjustment in the PAs did reflect
shifting national priorities, however. Once migrant workers returned to Bangladesh following the onset of the
pandemic, the focus shifted from reducing migration costs to supporting re-integration of returning workers in
the COVID-impacted economy (Bank team interviews, ICR, p. 19, 20).

Rating: Moderately Satisfactory

PA24-PA25-PA26 supported improved skills for workers, including through reforms targeting training
institutions. PAs 24 and 25 supported the establishment of the National Skills Development Authority through
the enactment of formal legislation, and the preparation of a new Skills Policy.

Rationale: Skills shortages and mismatches were seen as a constraint on the growth of better-quality jobs,
particularly among youth and women, based on the 2017 Jobs Diagnostic. This was seen as partly due to the
gap between the skills of many school-leavers and the needs of employers. For women, social norms and
sex segregation in choice of educational stream contributed to the pursuit of less marketable skills. In
addition, many young people living in areas impacted by climate change found that, as internal migrants in
urban labor markets, they would need to reorient their skills to new demand. The ability of existing skills
development programs to address these mismatches was challenged by the scale of the problem (driven by
demographics) and by rapidly changing technologies in manufacturing. It was also constrained by a poorly
coordinated national system; at the time of appraisal of DPC1, 23 ministries administered skills training
programs, and poor coordination with the private sector limited the ability of programs to respond to
employers’ needs (PD3, p. 27).

The prior action supported transforming the National Skills Development Council (NSDC) into the National
Skills Development Authority (NSDA), as well as its operationalization (PAs 24 and 25). While the NSDC fell
under the Ministry of Labor and Employment, the NSDA was placed under the Prime Minister’s Office, giving
it a high-level leadership role across multiple sectors. This would support improved coordination between the
NSDA and the Board, which was a gap that needed to be addressed to ensure smooth implementation of
skills development. The program supported NSDA approval of the National Skills Development Policy
(NSDP) in 2021 under PA 26, which targeted increased labor market relevance of training programs, and
also targeted climate change refugees. The NSDP prioritized the development of training programs on green
skills, given Bangladesh’s vulnerability to climate change, which has already displaced a large population as
noted above. Measures for gender mainstreaming included in the NSDP were: (i) offering a broader range of
traditional and non-traditional skills training programs for women, (ii) reviewing programs and their delivery
modes to make them gender friendly, (iii) setting up hostel facilities or stipends, (iv) providing separate
facilities, (v) employing female instructors; (vi) implementing a workplace harassment prevention policy in
training institutions, and (vii) promoting access to counseling services. These were expected to contribute to
lowering gender gaps in labor markets (ICR, p. 12, 21; PD3, p. 28).



                                                                                                  Page 15 of 32
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)



 The prior actions were relevant and credibly supported the objective by helping support consolidation of skills
 policy, development, and institutionalization and by setting the stage for improving market relevance of skills.
 The PAs were also designed to improve inter-agency coordination by placing the NSDA directly under the
 Prime Minister’s office.

 Rating: Satisfactory

 PA27-PA28-PA29 supported efforts to improve provision of childcare aimed at supporting female labor force
 participation. The prior actions aimed to support the preparation of the Childcare Act, extensive stakeholder
 consultations that are seen as critical to ensuring smooth passage by Parliament and approval by the
 President.

 Rationale: Limited access to quality and affordable childcare services was identified as a barrier to women’s
 labor force participation in Bangladesh in the Jobs Diagnostic of 2017. Women’s labor force participation in
 urban areas in Bangladesh was found to drop dramatically upon marriage and still further with the presence
 of young children. 77 percent of inactive women (versus 13 percent of inactive men) reported housework and
 care of family responsibilities as the primary reason for inactivity (Jobs Diagnostic, based on 2016 Labor
 Survey Data). Even among working women, the average hours in work tended to be significantly lower for
 married women with children compared to single women. Among vulnerable households in Dhaka and
 Chittagong, 41 percent of women reported that difficulty in finding childcare was one reason for not working
 or looking for work outside their homes. Just over 20 percent of women working in firms with 250 or more
 workers and 10 percent working in smaller firms reported having access to childcare services. While there
 were financial and cultural barriers to using daycare services, legal and institutional restrictions also existed,
 including absence of policies for licensing and regulating childcare service standards.

 The draft Act supported by PA27 provided the framework for establishing common licensing and regulatory
 standards for public and private daycare centers, including protocols for standard operating procedures.
 PA28 and PA29 were originally aimed at enactment of the law and establishment of new daycare centers
 under the necessary institutional framework (PD1, p. 31; PD2, p. 36).

 PD1 suggests that the planned roll-out of services included a significant increase in public daycares while the
 regulatory reform attempted to establish standards for private daycares. These reforms were a noteworthy
 move towards establishing an institutional foundation for childcare and daycare facilities that would be
 appropriately regulated and provide a safe environment conducive to early childhood learning. Given the very
 low – 12 percent – labor force participation rate among women, it is also likely that the provision of services
 even to a relatively small segment of the population could generate positive impacts. Given the ambition of
 the reform and its importance potentially to supporting working women, the rating is satisfactory.

 Rating: Satisfactory



Rating

Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators



                                                                                                      Page 16 of 32
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)




Rationale

Progress against the three objectives of the Jobs DPC, “modernizing trade and investment,” “protecting workers
and building resilience,” and “supporting access to jobs for the vulnerable,” was measured by 15 results
indicators (RIs), three of which were gender-disaggregated.

PDO 1: Modernizing Trade and Investment

RI1 and RI2 are associated with PAs 1, 2 and 3.

RI1(i) Time (in days) for and cost of setting up a new business

Rationale: RI1(i) captured progress against the objective of modernizing and streamlining the investment
climate, which was supported by PA1-2-3. Data were available, and baselines and targets were well defined.
The RI measured reduced time and cost of business registration driven by streamlining of procedures and partial
automation of trade licensing and VAT registration.

Rating: Satisfactory

RI1(ii) Time to and cost to set up a new business (female)

Rationale: Data were not collected or available. No meaningful establishment of baselines or targets was
possible.

Rating: Moderately unsatisfactory

RI2(i) Annual growth in new business registrations

Rationale: RI2(i) captured progress against the objective of modernizing and streamlining the investment
climate, which was supported by PA1-2-3. This RI complemented RI1. Data were available, and baselines and
targets were well defined. The RI measured the impact of the modernization of the investment climate on actual
business growth.

Rating: Satisfactory

RI2(ii) Annual growth in new business registrations (female)

Rationale: Data were not collected or available. No meaningful establishment of baselines or targets was
possible.

Rating: Moderately unsatisfactory

RI3 and RI4 are associated with PAs 4, 5, and 6.

RI3 Share of import shipments inspected by border agencies.

Rationale: The adoption of a risk-based approach would be expected to reduce the number of physical
inspections necessary at the border. The data sources were well defined, and clear baselines and targets were

                                                                                                 Page 17 of 32
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)



defined. The RI captured progress against the objective, given that the reduction in physical inspections would
be largely attributable to the introduction of risk-based inspections.

RI3 Rating: Moderately Satisfactory

RI4 Import clearance time (days)

Rationale: The modernization and streamlining of customs processes would be expected to reduce the time
taken to secure clearances. This RI therefore captured the expected impact of the introduction of the NSW on
trade facilitation. Data sources, baseline, and target were all well-defined.

RI4 Rating: Satisfactory

RI5 is associated with PAs 7 and 8.

RI5 Number of active bond license holders outside RMG sector

Rationale: The enhanced transparency of policies and regulations pertaining to licensing of bonded warehousing
was aimed at extending the benefits of the SBW scheme to sectors outside of the RMG industry. SBW was
widely held to have contributed significantly to the export success of the RMG sector. This RI captured impact of
the PAs 7 and 8 on the objective. Data, baseline, and target were well defined.

RI5 Rating: Satisfactory

RI6 is associated with PA9.

RI6 Total of ministry budgets allocated to “climate change capacity building and institutional strengthening”

Rationale: As noted in the discussion of relevance of PAs, PA9-10-11 supported higher climate budgeting and
upstream support to environmental and social policies. This was expected to ensure strengthened standards
and safeguards during a period when the country intended to accelerate manufacturing and growth. While RI6
measured progress towards the objective, it mainly captured enhanced financial allocations, not how they were
used. Data sources, baseline, and targets were well defined.

RI6 Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory

RI7 is associated with PAs 10 and 11.

RI7 Number of firms reached through trainings/assessments of ESQ and OSH guidelines

Rationale: This RI measured the rollout of capacity building activities to support implementation of strengthened
policies. It did capture progress against the objective, but the number of firms reached did not indicate the
quality or sustainability of the training itself.

RI7 Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory

PDO 2: Protecting workers and building resilience



                                                                                                    Page 18 of 32
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)



RI8 is associated with PAs 13, 14, 15, and 16.

RI8 Number of individuals supported by COVID-19 response programs

Rationale: This RI measured fully progress against the short-run objective of protecting workers from the
economic impact of the pandemic. Data sources, baseline, and target were well-defined.

RI8 Rating: Satisfactory

RI9 is associated with PAs 17 and 18.

RI9 Adoption of national disaster risk management strategy that strengthens government coordination for
climate resilience and disaster risk management

Rationale: The national disaster risk management strategy aimed to support better-targeted and faster crisis
response, including through better coordination across multiple agencies. Data sources, baseline and target
were well defined. While the RI did capture contribution towards the objective of resilience since the strategy
strengthened Government’s coordination, ability to utilize core social safety nets, and aligned response to
international standards, it is not clear that the adoption of a strategy guaranteed effective implementation. Taking
into account that the RI itself was not a good measure of operationalization, the RI relevance is rated as
Moderately Satisfactory.

RI9 Rating: Moderately Satisfactory

RI10 is associated with PAs 19, 20, and 21.

RI10 Number of labor and safety complaints addressed by DIFE (of which percent pertaining to Sexual
Harassment/GBV) (quarterly average)

Rationale: The Jobs DPC supported the adoption of the amended Labor Act, the operationalization of LIMA, and
capacity building to support the implementation of the Labor Act. Other development partners supported the
preparation and rollout of road maps and implementation strategies. Addressing concerns arising from the Rana
Plaza tragedy of 2013 and persistent worker safety issues, including sexual harassment and GBV, was a
primary objective of the new labor protections. RI10 captured the actual impact of the prior action in terms of
supporting complaint, feedback, and redressal mechanisms. However, the RI is deemed moderately
unsatisfactory since no data was available and no baseline identifiable on percentage of complaints by workers
that pertained to sexual harassment or gender-based violence. In addition, the number of complaints addressed
doesn’t in itself attest to the adequacy of the response and redress.

RI10 Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory

PDO 3: Access to jobs for the vulnerable

RI11 and RI12 are associated with PAs 22 and 23.

RI11i Average cost of migration through formal channels (males)

RI11ii Average cost of migration through formal channels (females)


                                                                                                     Page 19 of 32
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)



Rationale: The PAs in this results chain had been initially designed to support temporary migrants, who faced
exploitative recruitment practices, generating very high costs to them. The PAs were modified after the
pandemic to focus on reintegration of returning workers. While RI11 was measurable and had well-defined
baselines and targets, the ICR notes that attribution was problematic. The costs of migration could be driven by
a number of factors, especially given that the reform was never completed.

RI11i Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory

RI11ii Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory

RI12 Budget allocation for supporting the protection of expatriate workers.

Rationale: This RI was calculated to reflect all expenditures relating to the protection of expatriate workers.
Since the WEWB is self-sustaining and fee-based, the use of the word “budget” was misleading, as it implied a
fiscal allocation that was not necessary. This RI fully captures the expenditures of the WEWB in supposedly
protecting and supporting expatriate workers and had well defined data sources, baseline, and target. However,
the RI does not capture how well spent the funds were and what the impact was.

RI12 Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory

RI13 and RI14 are associated with PAs 24, 25, and 26.

RI13 Number of workers trained in partnership with private industries with support from the NSDA/Industry Skills
Councils (by gender).

Rationale: In conjunction with RI14, RI13 fully captured progress towards the objective of improving access to
jobs through strengthened relevance and quality of skills training. RI13 measured the number of beneficiaries of
the program, and had well defined data sources, baseline, and target associated with it. RI13 was designed to
measure progress on improving the private sector relevance of training, an important constraint that had been
identified in the 2017 Jobs Diagnostic.

RI13 Rating: Satisfactory

RI14 Number of competency standards (by occupation and level) developed and introduced in at least one
training center.

Rationale: In conjunction with RI13, RI14 captured some progress towards the objective of improving access to
jobs through strengthened relevance and quality of skills training at one training center. RI14 was a measure of
standardization of skills training and of improved quality and consistency and had well defined data sources,
baseline, and target associated with it. However the number of competency standards introduced in one
training center does not translate into strengthened quality and relevance of skills training overall, which would
depend on other factors as well.

RI14 Rating: Moderately Satisfactory

RI15 is associated with PAs 27, 28 and 29.

RI15 Licensing and regulatory framework for child daycare centers adopted for use


                                                                                                    Page 20 of 32
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)



       Rationale: The PAs in this results chain had originally aimed to support the operationalization of the Childcare
       Act with a view to relieving an important constraint on female labor force participation as highlighted in country-
       specific analytics. This RI would have captured progress towards the objective. While the phrase “adopted for
       use” implies that framework was to be operationalized, progress on implementation is not captured.

       RI15 Rating: Moderately Satisfactory

       After applying guidelines and averaging across numerical scores, the overall rating on relevance of RIs is
       Moderately Satisfactory

       Table 2: Results Indicators: Relevance and Achievement Ratings

                                                                                                         Actual
                                                                                         Actual
                                                                                                         change in
                                                             Baseline      Target        achieved at                 RI
                                    Prior                                                                RI relative
Objective   Results Indicator               RI relevance                                 completion                  Achieveme
                                    Actions                                                              to targeted
                                                             (2018)        (2022)                                    Rating
                                                                                                         change (in
                                                                                         (Date)
                                                                                                         percent)
                                  PA1,                                                   Time: 9.5
            RI1i Time to and cost PA2,      Satisfactory                                 days; Cost:   200%           High
            to set up a new       PA3                                                    7.1% of
                                                                         Time: 14.6
            business                                       Time: 19.5                    income/capita
                                                                         days; Cost:
                                                           days; Cost:
                                                                         16.7% of
                                                           22.3% of                    Gender
                                                                         income/capita
                                   PA1,                    income/capita               disaggregated
            RI1ii Time to and cost PA2,                                  (25%
                                            Moderately     (no gender                  data not      N/A              Negligible
            to set up a new                                              reduction)
                                   PA3      unsatisfactory difference)                 available
            business (female)                                                          (end-2021)

                                                                                         14.9% per
                                                                           5% per
                                                             0.4%                        annum
            RI2i Annual growth in                                          annum
                                                             (average over
Modernizing
            new business          PA1,      Satisfactory     last 5 years)
trade and                                                                                                300%         High
            registrations         PA2,
investment
                                  PA3                        (no gender
                                                             difference)
                                                                                         Gender
                                                                           10% per
            RI2ii Annual growth                                                          disaggregated
                                            Moderately                     annum
            in new business        PA1,                                                  data not
            registrations (female) PA2,     unsatisfactory                               available     N/A            Negligible
                                   PA3                                                   (June 2021)
            RI3 Share of import PA4,        Moderately       100% import 70% import      Physical      266%           High
            shipments inspected PA5,        Satisfactory     inspection  inspection      inspections
            by border agencies     PA6                                                   are
                                                                                         implemented
                                                                                         for 20% of
                                                                                         imports in



                                                                                                            Page 21 of 32
           Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
           Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)



                                                                                         Chattagram
                                                                                         and Benapole

                                                                                         (April 2022)



                                                                                          Chittagong:
           RI4 Import clearance            Satisfactory     Chittagong: 8- Chittagong: 6; 11.3 days
           time (days)                                      9; Dhaka: 6-7 Dhaka: 3        (approx.);
                                   PA4,                                                   Dhaka: 7.5    Chittagong: Negligible
                                   PA5,                                                   days          -77%
                                   PA6                                                    (approx..).
                                                                                                        Dhaka:
                                                                                         (April 2022)
                                                                                                      -125%
                                                                                         1,832 (Dhaka
           RI5 Number of active                             594 (Dhaka 891(Dhaka         and
                                PA7,
           bond license holders            Satisfactory     and         and              Chattogram 416%             High
                                PA8
           outside RMG sector                               Chattogram) Chattogram)
                                                                                         (April 2022)
           RI6 Total of ministry PA9       Moderately
           budgets allocated to            unsatisfactory                                               185%         [High]
                                                            BDT 9.7       10% increase 17.3%
           ‘climate change                                  billion       p.a          increase p.a
           capacity building and
           institutional                                    (FY19)        (FY19-22)      (FY19-22)
           strengthening’ (linked
           to DPC1 PA)

           RI7 Number of firms
           reached through
           trainings/assessments           Moderately
Protecting                                 Unsatisfactory
workers and of ESQ and OSH         PA10,                    0             500            460
                                                                                                        92%          [Substantia
building    guidelines             PA11
resilience                                                                                                           N/A

                                                                                                                     Delayed du
                                                                                                                     to COVID
                                                                                                                     and new
           N/A                     PA12    N/A
                                                                                                                     emergency
                                                                                                                     response
                                                                                                                     PAs;
                                                                                                                     progress
                                                                                                                     ongoing
           RI8 Number of         PA13, Satisfactory         0             5 million      7.6 million    152%         High
           individuals supported PA14,

                                                                                                           Page 22 of 32
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)



by COVID-19              PA15,                (March 2020) (2022)        (April 2022)
response programs        PA16
                                                                         This includes
                                                                         3.8 million by
                                                                         the wage
                                                                         support for
                                                                         export
                                                                         industry
                                                                         workers
                                                                         program, 3.5
                                                                         million by the
                                                                         cash transfer
                                                                         for informal
                                                                         workers
                                                                         program;
                                                                         9,000 by the
                                                                         support for the
                                                                         destitute
                                                                         export-
                                                                         oriented RMG
                                                                         and leather
                                                                         sector
                                                                         program, and
                                                                         0.33 million by
                                                                         the PKSF LRL
                                                                         program.
RI9 Adoption of
national disaster risk
management strategy
that strengthens
                         PA17, Moderately
government                                    No            Yes          Yes               100%        High
                         PA18 Satisfactory
coordination for
climate resilience and
disaster risk
management
RI10 Number of labor     PA19, Moderately     500 (Q4       1,000 (2022 1309 (FY21 162%                Modest
and safety complaints    PA20, Unsatisfactory 2017); [no    quarterly      quarterly
addressed by DIFE        PA21                 baseline on   average), with average); the
(quarterly average),                          sexual        at least 50    number of
                                              harassment    related to     sexual
of which number                               or GBV]       sexual         harassment or
related to sexual                                           harassment GBV
harassment or GBV                                           or GBV         complaints
                                                                           resolved by
                                                            Status at      DIFE could
                                                            completion     not be
                                                            (April 2022): evaluated due
                                                                           to

                                                                                             Page 23 of 32
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)



                                                                                    unavailability
                                                                                    of information
            RI11i Average cost of
            migration through                         BDT 418,455
            formal channels                                                               -4%                    Negligible
                                  PA22, Moderately    (male);
                                                                  BDT 313,841 BDT 422,637
            (males)               PA23 Unsatisfactory
                                                                  (male);     (male);


            RI11ii Average cost of
            migration through                          BDT 253,078
            formal channels        PA22, Moderately    (female)
                                                                   BDT 189,809 BDT 89,696            258%        [High]
            (males)                PA23 Unsatisfactory
                                                                   (female)    (females)


            RI12 Budget
            allocation for                            BDT 19.2
            supporting the        PA22, Moderately    million
                                                                      30%           55.6%
            protection of         PA23 Unsatisfactory
                                                                                                     185%        [High]
            expatriate workers
            (real increase)
             RI13 Number of                                            29,500
Access to workers trained in             Satisfactory                  (male);
                                   PA24,                 9,117 (male);
jobs for the partnership with                                          20,500
                                   PA25,                 4,096                      25,980 (male);
vulnerable private industries with PA26                                (female)                    83%
                                                         (female)                   11,672
             support from the
                                                                                    (female). Data (male);
             NSDA/Industry Skills
                                                                                    as of end-
             Councils (by gender)                                                                  46%           Modest
                                                                                    2019, as the
                                                                                                   (female)
                                                                                    program was
                                                                                    suspended
                                                                                    since 2020
                                                                                    because of
                                                                                    COVID

                                                                                    (end-2019)



            RI14 Number of
            competency
            standards (by                                                           569                          High
            occupation and level) PA24,                  294                                         133%
                                   PA25,                                            (April, 2022)
            developed and                Moderately                   500
            introduced in at least PA26 Satisfactory
            one training center


                                                                                                       Page 24 of 32
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)



                 RI15 Licensing and
                                                                                             No,
                 regulatory framework
                                                                                             Consultations
                 for child daycare    PA27,                     No            Yes
                                            Moderately                                       on draft      Not
                 centers adopted for PA28,                                                                                 Negligible
                                            Satisfactory                                     ongoing       achieved
                 use                  PA29
                                                                                             (April 2022)

  Note: RI achievement ratings note achievement of the targeted change for the RI. RI achievement ratings in
  brackets reflect ratings that may have been adjusted based on weak relevance of the results indicator
  (discussed in efficacy section).



  Rating

  Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Modernizing the trade and investment environment

               Rationale
               This objective was supported PAs 1 through 11. Measures supported improved business registration with
               focus on women-owned businesses, customs modernization, and trade facilitation through expanded bonded
               warehousing provisions.

               Progress against this objective was captured by 7 RIs.

               RI1i, with satisfactory relevance, was rated as High.

               RI1ii, with moderately unsatisfactory relevance, was not achieved, and was rated as negligible.

               RI2i, with satisfactory relevance, was rated as High.

               RI2ii, with moderately unsatisfactory relevance, was not achieved and was rated as negligible.

               RI3, with moderately satisfactory relevance, was rated as High.

               RI4, with satisfactory relevance, was not achieved – in effect the RIs showed deterioration rather than
               improvement – and was rated as negligible.




                                                                                                                 Page 25 of 32
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)



RI5, with satisfactory relevance, was rated as High.

Overall, with over a third of RIs rated as negligible, achievement of Objective 1 is rated as Moderately
Unsatisfactory



Rating
Moderately Unsatisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthening systems that protect workers and build resilience

Rationale
This objective was supported by PAs 9 through 21. Measures supported strengthened environmental
guidelines for industries and corresponding climate budgeting, assistance to workers during the COVID-19
emergency, adoption of a better coordinated and standardized disaster response strategy, and mechanisms
to address labor and safety complaints. Triggers relating to developing a fiscally sustainable and
comprehensive pension system – corresponding to PA12 from DPC1 – were dropped in order to introduce
the COVID-response measures. PAs 19, 20, and 21 were meant to support progress also on addressing
complaints relating to Sexual Harassment and Gender-based Violence (SH/GBV) highlighted in country
analytics as a priority – however the corresponding RI10 failed to gather this data.

Progress against this objective was captured by 5 RIs.

RI6, with moderately unsatisfactory relevance, was rated as Substantial.

RI7, with moderately unsatisfactory relevance, was downgraded to Modest.

RI8, with satisfactory relevance, was rated as High.

RI9, with moderately satisfactory relevance, was downgraded to Substantial.

RI10, with moderately unsatisfactory relevance, failed to gather data on complaints relating to SH/GBV, and
was rated as Modest, given the high priority of addressing issues relating to SH/GBV in the Bangladesh
context.

Overall, with most ratings at Substantial or higher, and no rating of negligible, the achievement of Objective 2
is rated as Satisfactory.



Rating


                                                                                                  Page 26 of 32
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)



                  Satisfactory



                  OBJECTIVE 3
                  Objective
                  Improving policies and programs that enhance access to jobs for vulnerable populations

                  Rationale
                  Objective 3 was supported by PAs 22 through 29, spanning measures to support reduced costs of migration,
                  especially for women, strengthen the relevance and quality of skills training, and regulate the provision of
                  childcare services to support working women.

                  RI11i, with moderately unsatisfactory relevance, was rated as negligible.

                  RI11ii, with moderately unsatisfactory relevance, was rated as Substantial.

                  RI12, with moderately unsatisfactory relevance, was rated as Substantial.

                  RI13, with satisfactory relevance, was rated as Modest.

                  RI14, with moderately satisfactory relevance, was rated as High.

                  RI15, with moderately satisfactory relevance, was rated as negligible.

                  Overall, with two RIs rated as negligible and half of RIs rated at Modest or lower, achievement of Objective 3
                  is rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory.




                  Rating
                  Moderately Unsatisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The overall efficacy rating is moderately satisfactory. Some progress was made towards the PDOs of this
programmatic DPC series. While the pandemic disrupted reform progress, particularly where the reform was



                                                                                                                  Page 27 of 32
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)



ambitious and called for extensive stakeholder consultations, even at the time of ICR preparation it was clear
that reform efforts were being sustained in some areas.



Overall Efficacy Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

With Moderately Satisfactory relevance of PAs and Moderately Satisfactory efficacy, overall outcome is rated as
Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

The main risks to sustainability stem from stakeholder risks, evident in adjustments to reforms around bonded
warehousing, effluent plant treatment in the leather sector, and delays in operationalization of child care
legislation. Political economy considerations also delayed the Companies Act, Insolvency Act, and Customs Act.

There was limited mitigation specifically targeted at sustainability of outcomes, though stakeholder consultations
and the need to mitigate risks from entrenched interests were highlighted in the PDs. In this context, stakeholder
risks were rated as substantial but should have been high.

The legislative and policy reforms adopted under this program are likely to have a low likelihood of direct
reversal, as they reflect widely accepted long-term development objectives. However, continued reform
implementation will be contingent on provision of adequate financial and human resources, even against
a backdrop of continued fiscal pressures. Reforms that are supported by other Bank projects and technical
assistance have a lower probability of implementation risk. Risks are also mitigated by continued support under
the Recovery and Resilience DPC series, which includes financial sector, social protection, and climate
measures that build on this program. These risks are aggravated by recent external developments that have
created pressure for fiscal consolidation in Bangladesh, including higher commodity prices and rising global
interest rates.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

                                                                                                   Page 28 of 32
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)




Rationale

The Bank team effectively leveraged country-specific analytical work in preparation of the series, including the
2017 Jobs Diagnostic. Coordination with other development partners was adequate. The Bank closely
coordinated the DPC with ongoing development partner technical assistance. The International Labor
Organization was a key development partner for labor, migrant, and child daycare reforms. the Foreign,
Commonwealth & Development Office was a key partner in many reforms under the first objective, particularly
on the investment climate.

The ICR reports that there was significant technical assistance under the broader Bank program, and that this
TA was partially helpful in mitigating capacity and institutional risks (ICR, p. 24; PD3, Annex 5).

The ex-ante description of risks was comprehensive, though the Bank underestimated stakeholder risks. In
terms of risk mitigation, the Bank was more focused on institutional capacity than sustainability. While the PDs
highlighted the need to be economical on the number of reforms and the number of implementation agencies,
the program was complex, including 29 PAs and covering 13 implementing agencies while creating two
additional entities.

The reforms undertaken were ambitious and important and strongly targeted at well-identified constraints.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The Bank showed flexibility in adjusting the program in response to the evolving pandemic and in adjusting the
number of PAs as capacity constraints emerged, with the government having to simultaneously manage new
and shifting priorities in addition to the structural reform program. The Bank adjusted PAs and RIs during
implementation to accommodate new needs introduced by the pandemic. Risks were well identified and
adjusted in response to a changing situation. While needs for mitigation were highlighted in successive PDs,
mitigation had mixed impact. While the Bank demonstrated flexibility during the pandemic, the crisis led to
delays as government priorities shifted. In addition, significant risks stemmed from stakeholder interests. It is not
clear that the Bank’s approach, a mix of dialogue, ex ante identification, and TA, was effective, but efforts were
made to monitor and engage at every stage (ICR, p. 25, TTL interviews). Finally, there were shortcomings in
data collection where there had been a commitment to gender disaggregation. It is noted that the pandemic
limited face-to-face meetings and reduced the number of supervision missions that were feasible.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

                                                                                                      Page 29 of 32
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)




c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Based on a satisfactory and moderately satisfactory rating for the Bank's performance on design and
implementation respectively, the overall rating of Bank performance is in line with that of the ICR, and is
Moderately Satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

No evidence was reported.



b. Environmental

No evidence was reported.



c. Gender

No evidence was reported



d. Other

The Jobs DPC provided an important boost to the policy dialogue; this was the first budget support engagement
in decades. The sweep and ambition of the legislative agenda underscored the potential of strong partnership
between the Bank and Bangladesh.



10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR was well written, adequately captured progress on reforms at the time of preparation, and had a clear
description of results chains, relevance, and efficacy. The exposition on risks and mitigation and on Bank

                                                                                                     Page 30 of 32
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)



performance was also clear. The ICR presented a strong discussion on context, both macroeconomic and
sectoral, and motivated the outcome ratings – that IEG is in agreement with – clearly and credibly, with careful
analysis of evidence. The lessons were well presented and rationalized, and the ICR was concise.


a. Rating

High

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreement/Comments
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                   High


12. Lessons

The description of lessons learned in the ICR is well grounded in evidence, concise, and coherent. These can be
summarized as follows:

Parallel investment and technical assistance programs in areas of WBG comparative advantage can be critical
to preparing and operationalizing key policy reforms. In this case, investment projects and advisory services and
analytics provided by the World Bank and IFC provided significant upstream and downstream support for
several reforms under the first objective (such as the OSS), which strengthened program quality. On the
contrary, some reforms that faced implementation challenges did not benefit from parallel support (such as the
Labor Act). Even when other development partners are engaged in these areas (for instance, the ILO for the
Labor Act), a lack of engagement and comparative advantage of the WBG can undermine dialogue and
supervision.

A narrower program focus with a limited number of counterpart ministries may streamline implementation and
limit complexity. The Jobs DPC series aimed to support several ambitious legislative reforms spanning multiple
agencies and ministries at the same time, which was challenging, despite strong inter-governmental
coordination by the Ministry of Finance. Inter-governmental coordination for reform implementation and
monitoring was challenging, posing risks to sustainability of outcomes from implementation. A narrower focus,
with stronger political economy analysis and coordinated technical assistance, may have allowed for deeper
engagement in key areas during program implementation.

The Bank should carefully consider the tradeoffs of adapting DPCs focused on long-term structural reforms to
respond to urgent needs. The pivot of the program to the COVID-19 response provided urgently needed support
that appropriately responded to a changing country strategy and an emerging global crisis.
However, repurposing this program came at the cost of weakening or dropping some reforms that would have

                                                                                                   Page 31 of 32
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bangladesh Jobs Programmatic DPC (P167190)



supported growth, competitiveness, and jobs over the longer term (though this trade-off disappeared
subsequently, as key reforms were later implemented). As an alternative, the country team could have
considered a stand-alone DPC focused exclusively on COVID-19 recovery, while continuing with the originally
planned reform program on a more accommodative implementation timeline.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

Yes
ASSESSMENT_TABLE
Please explain
Yes. This innovative DPC represents a first, systematic attempt to support a jobs agenda grounded in country
analytics. A deeper assessment of these reforms have progressed, what lessons emerge in terms of what
worked and what didn’t work, how the DPC balanced structural reform needs with pandemic response and
whether the strategy adopted came at the expense of impact, and which of the jobs prior actions could
potentially be replicable in similar contexts, is warranted.




                                                                                               Page 32 of 32
