     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Public Service Reform and Rejuv (P122229)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023534

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P122229                                    DRC Public Service Reform and Rejuv

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Congo, Democratic Republic of              Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D1850,IDA-H8970                        30-Apr-2019                                            86,362,606.98

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 12-Dec-2013                                31-Dec-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            77,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                             91,629,141.13                                                 0.00

 Actual                                         86,362,606.98                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Nils Junge                  Judyth L. Twigg              Jennifer L. Keller               IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA), the project objectives were: “To improve the human resource
   management capacity of the Recipient’s Targeted Ministries and Agencies and rejuvenate their workforce”
   (FA, p. 5).

   In April 2017 the objectives were revised, expanding the project’s geographical coverage as part of an
   Additional Financing (AF), as follows: “To strengthen and rejuvenate the civil service in selected ministries


                                                                                                     Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Public Service Reform and Rejuv (P122229)



   at the central and provincial levels.” The meaning of the revised objectives was not materially changed at the
   time, and neither was the scope of outcome targets.

   However, key indicator targets were revised as part of a 2020 restructuring. Although the ICR did not use a
   split rating, a split rating is applied here, given the change in targets and consequent change in project scope
   at the time of the 2020 restructuring. These changes involved expanding the young professionals program
   and reducing the retirement program.

   At the time of the 2020 restructuring, US$73.2 million, or 85 percent of Bank financing, had been disbursed.

   This review will assess achievement of the following objectives, with achievements assessed separately
   under the original and revised outcome targets.

          PDO 1: Improve the human resource management capacity of selected ministries / strengthen the civil
           service in selected ministries at the central and provincial levels.
          PDO 2: Rejuvenate the workforce of selected ministries / rejuvenate the civil service in selected
           ministries at the central and provincial levels.[1]



   [1] According to the TTL, there is no functional difference between the terms “workforce” as used in the
   original PDO and “civil service”, as used in the revised PDO.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  06-Oct-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Supporting Public Service Reform in Selected Ministries and Agencies. (Appraisal:
   US$39.7 million; Additional Financing: US$16.8 million; Actual: US$60.9 million). Component activities
   related to coordinating, implementing, and monitoring public administration reforms, and funding a young
   professionals (YP) program to promote entry of qualified young workers into the civil service. Activities and
   sub-components included capacity building for human resources (HR) and training for new recruits and mid-
   career staff. At the restructurings, the component was scaled up “to respond to new realities and expand the
   positive impact of the YP program," and then in 2020 to add a cohort of YPs to be recruited for provincial
   administrations. A data dashboard platform for the purpose of planning, coordinating, and
   building consensus on public administration reform was also added as part of the AF restructuring. An


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DRC Public Service Reform and Rejuv (P122229)



  impact evaluation (IE) in partnership with the Bank's Development Impact Evaluation Initiative was also
  included.

  Component 2: Supporting the Retirement Process through Payment of Retirement Benefits.
  (Appraisal: US$30.3 million; Additional Financing: US$1.4 million; Actual: US$11.4 million). The bulk of the
  component ($27.5 million) was to pay retirement benefits to an estimated 5,979 civil servants. It also
  included an independent verification of the formulae underpinning the benefits, and verification of benefits
  paid. Additional financing of US$1.4 million was added for technical assistance during the first twelve
  months of the operation of the public sector pension fund, as well as rehabilitation of the public pension
  fund building (ICR, p. 9). The project team noted that “rehabilitation and equipment provision and upgrades
  for government facilities was a significant need that the government could not meet, leading to the request
  for support in this area under the project.

  The following components were added through project restructurings:

  Component 3: Building Capacity through an Infrastructure of Training Centers (Appraisal: n/a;
  Additional Financing: US$10.9 million; Actual: US$5.0 million) was added as part of the AF, effectively
  transferring incomplete activities from the separate Establishing Capacity for Core Public Management
  Project (PRCGAP). The component supported strengthening and expanding training centers in Kinshasa
  and the provinces, as well as the development of a second national capacity building program (Programme
  Nationale de Renforcement de Capacités, PRONAREC 2). The component also supported the National
  Secretariat for Capacity Building (Secrétariat National de Renforcement des Capacités, SENAREC) in the
  Ministry of Planning. The overall aim was “to further strengthen its institutional mandate as the DRC’s one-
  stop-shop for capacity development” (AF paper, p. 39). Activities targeted better identification of training
  needs; improving training quality; and strengthening the capacity of civil servants (ICR, p. 9).

  Component 4: Supporting Public Service Reform at the Provincial Level (Appraisal: n/a; Additional
  Financing: US$7.9 million; Actual: US$1.0 million), added during AF, aimed to expand organizational
  reforms to the provincial level. It was to provide assistance to the newly formed provincial governments to
  establish formal structures and accountability mechanisms. Activities were designed to help to coordinate
  and monitor the decentralization process and included finalizing the legal framework governing the
  decentralization process, technical assistance to the new provincial governments, and improving
  coordination and monitoring of the decentralization process.

  Component 5: Project Management and Core Support to Government Agencies in Charge of
  Steering the Reform (Appraisal: n/a; Appraisal: US$8.0 million; Actual: US$8.1 million), also added under
  the AF, split project management into a separate component, to better manage a more complex project
  resulting from the restructuring and addition of many new activities. It provided core support to the Public
  Administration Reform Implementation Unit (Cellule de Mise en oeuvre de la Réforme de l’Administration
  Publique, CMRAP), acting as the Project Management Unit (PMU). The component also financed core staff
  within the SENAREC to facilitate the activities that were merged with the project following the closure of
  PRCGAP.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The project's original cost at appraisal was US$77 million. Actual disbursal was US$86 million,
  following US$45 million in additional financing and two partial cancelations under the October 2020

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Public Service Reform and Rejuv (P122229)



   and December 2021 restructurings. (Note that only the final two restructurings involved cancelations.)
   According to the project team, the project costs (Actuals) reflect final client financial reporting and the loan
   administration system after account closing.

   Financing. Two International Development Association (IDA) credits, of US$77 million at the time of
   appraisal and US$45 million at the time of additional financing, financed the project.

   Borrower contribution. No Borrower contribution was planned or made.

   Dates.

        o The project was approved on December 12, 2013, and became effective on May 26, 2014. The
          World Bank held the mid-term review on March 25, 2020. The original closing date for the project
          was April 30, 2019. The actual closing date of the project was December 31, 2021.
        o May 16, 2017. Additional Financing of US$45 million was approved. The AF added activities that
          had not been completed under another Bank project that had recently closed (Establishing Capacity
          for Core Public Management Project, or PRCGAP (P117382)).
        o October 6, 2020. The purpose of the second restructuring was to change the results framework,
          change components and costs, and drop activities, among other things.
        o December 17, 2021. The purpose of the final restructuring was to cancel financing, change
          components and costs, and reallocate between disbursement categories. Project suspension over
          ineligible expenses and the COVID-19 pandemic contributed to implementation delays.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
This review finds that the objectives of strengthening and rejuvenating the civil service in selected ministries
at the central and provincial levels were highly relevant both to core challenges facing DRC and to
government goals as outlined in key strategy and partnership documents. The ICR notes that improving
public sector capacity was “a commitment at the highest political level of government” (ICR, p. 13). It was
articulated by a Public Sector Reform Strategy, which was adopted by the Public Administration
Modernization Steering Committee chaired by the Prime Minister (ICR, p. 6).

The objectives were based on the assumption that economic growth and shared prosperity in DRC were
heavily dependent “on improvements in state effectiveness” (PAD, p. 1) and that the peace dividends from
the recently concluded war would not be sustainable without a functioning public administration that was, in
turn, linked to the quality and capacity of civil servants. The project team indicated that the ministries.
(Finance, Budget, Planning, Public Services, and Portfolio) were selected because of their cross-cutting
nature that focused on core public administration functions. The activities of a previous World Bank
governance project (Establishing Capacity for Core Public Management project (P117382)) supported
essentially the same ministries.

The second Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP II) (2011) and follow-on Government Development
Program (2012) set out a roadmap outlining targets for delivering on the government’s development
agenda. Of the seven targets, two were explicitly linked to the project objectives: strengthening public

                                                                                                       Page 4 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      DRC Public Service Reform and Rejuv (P122229)



               finance management, and promoting a modern public administration better able to deliver services. The
               Bank considered “an effective public service that can show commitment, leadership, capacity to implement,
               and integrity” a requirement for delivering on the government’s “ambitious agenda” (PAD, p. 1).

               At the time of project appraisal, the DRC civil service had suffered from years of neglect and become
               dysfunctional, preventing it from performing as intended. Its staff was aging, with 55-60 percent of civil
               servants past the mandatory retirement age of 55 years (PAD, p. 4). It also lacked an HR management
               system, while its wage system was “opaque and inequitable” and had become a source of patronage (PAD,
               p. 2). All this had implications both for fiscal sustainability, given that the wage bill represented 45 percent of
               total expenses, and for delivering services to citizens (PAD, p. 1). Given these pressing challenges,
               improving public service management and capacity became a key government priority, as reflected in its
               Strategy for the Public Sector Reform (2013), implemented by the Ministry of Public Services. Another key
               document, the Strategic Framework for the Reform and Modernization of Public Administration, was also
               highly relevant. It centered around the following pillars: (a) the revision of the regulatory framework; (b)
               clarification and modernization of ministerial mandates and organizational structures; (c) improved HR data
               management; (d) rejuvenation of the civil service; and (e) establishment of an adequate pension system
               (PAD, p. 2).

               By addressing problems of quality and “seniority” in the civil service, the project objectives spoke directly to
               several of these issues. Public service reform was one of three core areas (as well as fiscal and
               administrative decentralization and public financial management reform) on which the government
               requested the Bank’s assistance (PAD, p. 5).

               In recognition that public administration reforms were especially critical at the provincial levels, the Bank
               expanded the project objectives in 2017 to include support to provincial governments. This reflected
               capacity building needs arising from the territorial division reform (découpage) in 2016 whereby the number
               of provinces was expanded from 11 to 26. The AF added a component to support new provincial
               governments to establish formal structures and accountability mechanisms (ICR, p. 10).

               The rationale for the Bank’s engagement was predicated on its technical capacity, convening power, and
               role as a lead development partner.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve the human resource management capacity of selected ministries / strengthen the civil service in
                             selected ministries at the central and provincial levels (original outcome targets).


                                                                                                                            Page 5 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DRC Public Service Reform and Rejuv (P122229)




Rationale
The theory of change for this objective was sound: better HR management and HR systems, as well as
improved planning and training in capacity to manage resources and adapt to the evolving needs of the
country, would lead to better management of the civil service, and that this would increase the efficiency and
capacity of ministries.

Outputs

Key outputs supporting Objective 1 included:

      A digital civil servants database was established for the first time in DRC, covering an estimated
         800,000 staff of the “Regime General." The database cleaning process was begun for Kinshasa but
         has not been completed. The activity was transferred to the Enhancing Collection of Revenue and
         Expenditure Management (ENCORE) project, approved in December 2021.
        8,489 public administration officials and staff were trained in subject matters relevant to strengthening
         civil service capacity, from a baseline of 8,000 (achievement below the original target of 9,000).
        New Human Resources Management (HRM) Directorates were introduced and strengthened in all 72
         line ministries and entities, and central human resources management capacity was reinforced
         through technical assistance to review organizational and business processes, staff training,
         information technology equipment, and rehabilitation of main offices (considered a significant need by
         the Government).
        A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was established and began to review and process all
         retirement-related complaints.
        A nationwide network of eight government training centers was equipped and reinforced, and two new
         training centers were added to the network.
        Eight new training modules (relevant to strengthening civil service capacity) were certified and added
         to the 22 already available for curricula;125 local trainers were trained and certified to administer the
         new modules. 489 civil servants (mid-career) were trained by the eight centers.
        An institutional strengthening strategy and action plan was drafted and adopted for two provinces.
        Line Ministries civil servants' files (Listes Declaratives) were consolidated in the HRM database.
        Support for public service reform targeting the provincial administrations (under Component 4) was
         not provided.
        The ICR finds that “core pilot administrative units were not established, nor were the provincial level
         dashboards. Most importantly, the HRM and payroll system, which was to be rolled out by the end of
         the project, proved to be extremely ambitious for the proposed time of implementation and was not
         completed" (ICR, p. 16).

Outcomes

The above outputs and intermediate outcomes constitute only modest evidence that the project achieved its
objective of strengthening HR capacity in the civil service.

The ICR reports that while the groundwork was laid, “the civil service has yet to see an efficient management
of civil servants through improved digitalization at the time the project closed.” In order to not lose momentum,
the rollout of the HRM and payroll database was included in the new ENCORE project.



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DRC Public Service Reform and Rejuv (P122229)



The original outcome indicator, “recruitment of civil servants in the targeted ministries is based on the new
organizational norms and procedures,” had an original target of 100 percent of civil servants. Its achievement
was not reported, and it was dropped during the 2017 AF.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improve the human resource management capacity of selected ministries / strengthen the civil service in
selected ministries at the central and provincial levels (revised outcome targets).

Revised Rationale
The theory of change underpinning the revised objective and outcome targets was moderately sound. It
envisioned support to provincial administrations, technical assistance, and training centers in select provinces
that would improve coordination and decentralization efforts, resulting in a roadmap and legal texts supporting
devolution in four sectors. The theory of change did not provide details, however, on how the training
activities would improve performance, or what they consisted of.

The new components would extend the capacity building at the Ministry level to some newly created
provinces, since, according to the AF Project Paper, “addressing the shortcomings of the current state of
decentralization, while at the same time establishing entirely new provinces from the start, creates significant
challenges relating to the viability, accountability, and effectiveness of both old and newly created provinces”
(Project Paper for the AF, p. 4).

The previous PDO indicator (recruitment of civil servants in the targeted ministries based on the new
organizational norms and procedures) was dropped as part of the additional financing restructuring.

Outputs

In addition to the outputs under the original objective and outcome targets, none of the five pilot provinces
achieved “core administrative functions (Finance, Budget, Civil Service, and Planning) established and
operational,” as per the indicator target.

Outcomes

Most of the intermediate and outcome indicators and targets were the same as under the original project.
Those revised or added were:

The target of 50 percent of civil servants working in core public administrations managed by the new HRM
and payroll systems was not achieved, with an actual achievement of zero percent.

The IRI target for “percentage of line ministries civil servants' files (Listes Declaratives) consolidated in the
HRM database” was revised from 25 to 80 percent, and it was achieved at 100 percent.


                                                                                                      Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DRC Public Service Reform and Rejuv (P122229)




Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Rejuvenate the workforce of selected ministries / rejuvenate the civil service in selected ministries at the
central and provincial levels (original outcome targets)

Rationale
Rationale

The theory of change for this objective was sound. It expected an influx of young, trained professionals and
the retirement of older workers, motivated by benefits packages and the creation of a pension fund, to lead to
a younger workforce. The AF Project Paper notes that the “Congolese civil service was aging and lacked a
credible retirement process” (p. 3), an issue that this objective would address.

Outputs

      More than 900 civil servants eligible for retirement were properly identified through a biometric
         process and retired in the five pilot ministries, with effective payment of their full retirement benefits
         package. The separation package was paid to 917 out of 2,865 civil servants eligible for retirement, for
         a rate of 32 percent (compared to the original target of 100 percent).
        A manual was developed to help the government manage the retirement processes going forward.
        A Pension Fund, which is regularly servicing pension payments for the newly retired, was set up and
         made operational. At project end, the Pension Fund was collecting regular contributions from 171,185
         active staff and managing US$44.8 million in bank deposits and savings.
        An independent agency to facilitate payment of retirement benefits was established.
        The majority of the last YP group recruited in 2020 (625 out of 1,000) were trained and integrated into
         the 25 provincial civil services (outside of Kinshasa).

Outcomes

Although the project exceeded its target of bringing in young recruits into the civil service, the expected
rejuvenation at the central and provincial levels did not materialize. At project closure, the problem of the
aging workforce remains, and without donor financing to fund their retirement, on top of the opaque and
politicized nature of the retirement program, there appears to be little prospect that the problem will be
resolved and the civil service will be rejuvenated.

With 32 percent of civil servants eligible for retirement having done so with payment of the established
benefits package, the original target of 100 percent was not met.




                                                                                                     Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DRC Public Service Reform and Rejuv (P122229)



The ICR notes the “political and financial non-viability” of the retirement program and absence of government
support. The retirement program, which initially accounted for half of the project cost allocation, was
suspended when ineligible expenditures were discovered as the government decided “to pay separation
benefits exceeding the agreed package without informing the World Bank, putting the reform and the project
on an unsustainable path.” It was later found that “terms and conditions set for the benefits package by the
government were prone to future legal action by retirees” (ICR, p. 16). The retirement program was scaled
down and then dropped in 2020.

The Bank had previously supported a retirement program in 2005 through budget support, which had failed
when the funds were allocated to other areas and the retirement benefits went unpaid. The Bank was well
aware of significant corruption risks, which were outlined in that program's Project Appraisal Document, p. 62.
As a result, the PDO for that program was not achieved, as only 923 civil servants from the five pilot
ministries in Kinshasa (out of the estimated 5,979 who were eligible) were retired.

If only the retirement element is considered, then the rating would be negligible, However, as described
above, the young professionals program was a success, bringing rating up to modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Rejuvenate the workforce of selected ministries / rejuvenate the civil service in selected ministries at the
central and provincial levels (revised outcome targets).

Revised Rationale
As per the ICR, the rationale for the revisions at AF and restructurings was “to adapt the project to changes in
the sectoral engagement and to address bottlenecks that emerged during project implementation” (ICR, p.
12). This included the scope reduction and suspension of some elements, such as the retirement program,
which was seen as politically unfeasible and ambitious. On the other hand, programs that were working well,
such as the YP program, were scaled up.

Outputs

A total of 1,543 young professionals were trained and recruited, including 275 women. Training was provided
to 1,700 YPs at the central level and in the provinces.

A scaled-down retirement program was implemented, before the program was dropped in 2020, based on the
high risks identified in 2019, including political, legal, and financial sustainability risks.

Outcomes

The PDO indicator “young professionals employed in the public administration, after completing their training
program (percent)” was overachieved, at 94 percent compared with a target of 70 percent. This reflected the
retention of 1,455 out of 1,523 YPs retained by the civil service after completing their training. Of this group,

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 20
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 DRC Public Service Reform and Rejuv (P122229)



                              600 were deployed to the provinces. However, the goal of 25 percent female YPs was not achieved, with the
                              final share at 18.2 percent.

                              The revised target on provision of retirement packages to civil servants was exceeded, with the payment of
                              separation package to 917 out of 2,865 eligible. The achieved rate (32 percent) exceeded the target of 30
                              percent set in 2019. However as noted above, the retirement program was suspended when ineligible
                              expenditures were discovered as the government decided “to pay separation benefits exceeding the agreed
                              package without informing the World Bank, putting the reform and the project on an unsustainable path.” It
                              was later found that “terms and conditions set for the benefits package by the government were prone to
                              future legal action by retirees”.



                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            With modest achievement of both objectives under the original indicators and outcome targets, efficacy is
                            rated Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                     Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                      Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Achievement of the first objective under the revised indicators and targets was Modest, as the HRM system
                            was not achieved as planned. Achievement of the second objective under the revised indicators and targets
                            was Substantial, as the project was successful in rolling out the YP program and strengthening 10 training
                            centers. According to the project team, the client ICR noted that the building renovations and equipment
                            contributed to improving the working conditions, and consequently contributed to achieving the outcome of
                            strengthening the civil service It was also good at setting up the contributory pension scheme and pension
                            fund, and the significantly reduced target for provision of retirement packages to eligible civil servants. (It is
                            noted that the problems with the retirement scheme fall under the original objective.) Overall efficacy under
                            the revised indicators and targets is therefore rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



                                                                                                                                 Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DRC Public Service Reform and Rejuv (P122229)




 5. Efficiency
The Bank conducted a cost-benefit analysis of the YP program and the retirement program at appraisal and
again for the ICR. These two components were projected to account for US$51 million (US$29 million for the
retirement program and US$22 million for the YP program) out of the total US$77 million in IDA grant funds,
representing 66.2 percent of the total project.

The retirement program benefits would take the form of fiscal savings after pension payments to 5,975 civil
servants, and the net present value (NPV) was estimated at US$28 million over 10 years. The YP program was
projected to increase productivity, since younger workers are assumed to be more productive, and to become
more so over time, peaking at 40 years of age, and combined with the retirement program, would lead to cost
savings. The YP program, based on three cohorts totaling 500 YPs entering the civil service, was expected to
generate an NPV of US$26.2 million over 10 years. A 6 percent discount rate was used. An internal rate of
return (IRR) was not calculated.

At project closure, the ICR estimated an NPV of US$807,472 (discounted at 11 percent) and an IRR of 12
percent for the retirement program that saw pensions paid out to 923 civil servants who reached 62 years of
age. For the YP program, which at project closure had 1,455 employed, an NPV of US$2.3 million
was calculated (discounted at 11 percent), and an economic IRR of 17 percent was estimated. The ex-post NPV
for both components was significantly below the ex-ante estimates.

The ICR notes that US$5.4 million in projected yearly savings, as per the AF restructuring paper, were no longer
valid because the retirement program was discontinued (ICR, pp. 18-19). The HRM was not completed under
this project and was instead added to the ENCORE project. This project also failed to use funds allocated for
M&E, as the M&E system was weakly implemented and poorly utilized, highlighting inefficiencies in this
area (see Section 9). Project efficiency was further weakened by what the ICR reported as “long delays in
contract processes, poor evaluation of consultant qualifications, as well as delays and the sub-optimal quality of
the project archiving systems” (ICR, p. 24).

Project implementation delays and an 18-month suspension of all project activities (related to ineligible pension
expenditures) also reduced overall efficiency. The project took two years longer to implement than planned, and
its costs were higher, even as it failed to achieve four out of 11 indicators, in particular the retirement program—
the signature project component accounting for 37 percent of the original total project costs. Slow start and
suspension plus non-achievement of the retirement program reduced overall efficiency.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DRC Public Service Reform and Rejuv (P122229)



                                                                                      0
ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project made good progress with the training and recruitment for the YP program, by bringing in 1,455 YPs
into the civil service, and by using the strengthened training centers to rejuvenate the civil service. A
contributory pension scheme and new pension fund are also expected to have lasting positive impacts.
However, the project’s overarching rejuvenation goals were significantly undermined by only retiring 15.4
percent of the planned 5,975 civil servants. The ICR notes that as part of restructuring, non-performing
component activities and associated costs (i.e. the retirement program) were dropped. On the other hand,
support and funding was increased to well-performing project activities at the time, such as the YP program.
Support to provincial administrations for institutional strengthening was delayed by the project suspension until
2019. Support resumed in mid-2020 but did not progress as expected because of COVID-19 restrictions and
weak capacity and leadership at the implementing entity (Decentralization Unit).

Overall, the project only partially achieved improved accountability (i.e., via the number of civil servants under a
new HRM and Payroll System) and a sustainable retirement system for civil servants, but it did lead to capacity
building and improved skills of younger civil servants as a cohort, at the central and provincial levels, which was
an important achievement.

Under the original objectives and outcome indicators/targets, relevance was rated High, efficacy Modest, and
efficiency Modest, leading to an overall outcome rating of Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Under the revised objectives and outcome indicators/targets, relevance was rated High, efficacy Substantial,
and efficiency Modest, leading to an overall outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.

85 percent of funds (US$73.2 million out of US$86.3 million) were disbursed before the outcome targets were
revised in October 2020, and 15 percent thereafter. Using a weighting according to the percentage of Bank
funds disbursed under each set of outcome targets, the overall outcome rating is Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Moderately Unsatisfactory (3) * 0.85 = 2.55

Moderately Satisfactory (4) * 0.15 = 0.6

2.55 + 0.6 = 3.15, Moderately Unsatisfactory, reflecting significant shortcomings in the project's preparation,
implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DRC Public Service Reform and Rejuv (P122229)



The ICR points to positive outcomes including the YP program, the network of ten public sector training
centers, and training programs implementation, but also assesses the risks to development outcomes as
high. It assesses that the new HRM system, although not completed under this project, will likely be
completed under the ENCORE project. It expects that new retirement procedures and tools, including the
new contributory pension scheme pension fund, will be drawn upon by the government in the future (ICR, p.
26).

The core program goal of rejuvenating the public service was not achieved during the life of the project,
given the failure to retire 83 percent of eligible civil servants in the five targeted ministries. There is little
reason to expect the government to move forward with the rejuvenation agenda using its own budget when it
failed to do so with Bank support. Although the YP program was a success, again, it depended on the Bank’s
management and financial support, and the likelihood of its continuation is thus also low. There are high risks
to sustaining the outcomes that were achieved. The ICR highlights the deficiencies in public administration
that may pose risks to sustainability, including DRC’s (i) outdated and fragmented legal framework; (ii) lack of
a Human Resource Management system for civil servants; (iii) over-aged public service; and (iv) opaque and
inequitable wage system (ICR, p. 5).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Strategic relevance and approach

  The project's objectives were closely aligned with the government’s national development priorities,
  specifically addressing key elements outlined in two core documents, the Strategy for the Implementation
  of the Public Service Reform (2012) and the Strategic Framework for the Reform and Modernization of
  Public Administration. The Project Appraisal Document made a strong case for the broader fiscal and
  economic relevance of the civil service reforms.

  Recognizing the challenging environment in which project activities would be implemented, the project's
  approach did two things. First, it decided to pilot the reforms within five key ministries instead of rolling
  them out across the entire civil service, taking, as the ICR notes, an “incremental approach to reform.”
  Second, the Bank framed the project as part of a sustained, ongoing effort to which two other Bank
  projects were contributing as well: (1) PRCGAP (P117382), which closed before this project. Several
  unfinished PRCGAP components related to training were merged into this project under its second
  restructuring; and (2) ENCORE (P171762), which, in turn, ended up taking over some of this
  project's components.

  The preparation period was unusually long (3.5 years), in part because interruptions related to elections
  in 2011, and yet the ICR notes that “far too many activities for project preparation were left to the
  implementation stage,” which meant that the project failed to reach any of its targets during the first 18
  months of implementation.

  Policy and institutional aspects



                                                                                                      Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Public Service Reform and Rejuv (P122229)



  The ICR reports that the project drew on lessons from past reforms and that “there was a recognition of
  the political-economy challenges.” The retirement component and severance payments were "politically
  and financially challenging” (ICR, p. 25). According to the ICR, “given the huge challenges involved, the
  long project preparation period, and the tight fiscal situation faced by the government,” sustainability of a
  World Bank-financed program would be a challenge to sustain following project closure. The ICR also
  found that establishing the pension fund and independent agency were “the right steps in this direction”
  but doubted they would be sufficient on their own (ICR, p. 25).

  Risk assessments

  The project was implemented in a “fragile political and institutional environment,” creating uncertainty in a
  situation of low capacity (PAD, p. 31). The ICR describes the objectives as ambitious while noting that in
  tackling such a complex reform, careful political economy analysis, a financial feasibility study, and a
  thorough review of the legal and regulatory framework governing such reforms is essential (ICR, p.
  26).The ICR found, however, that the Bank failed to “incorporate a robust strategy to implement [reforms]
  systematically“ and did not carry out sufficient assessment of risks associated with the political and
  financial viability of the reforms (ICR, p. 26).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Engagement

 The project suffered from inadequate supervision, which is especially problematic for a project being
 implemented in a complex environment with known political economy risks. The ICR notes that only one
 Implementation Status and Results Report (ISR) was prepared during first two years and only one during
 last two years of implementation, suggesting a hands-off approach. Furthermore, the last ISR suggested
 that the final restructuring would help the government meet its objectives, which “downplayed the
 challenges to completion of the remaining activities” (ICR, p. 26). The ICR is also critical of the project’s
 additional financing, which burdened a complex project already behind on its targets with new components.

 Fiduciary

 Discovery of ineligible expenditures in January 2018 in the amount of US$4,848,575 (which were paid
 back), following an in-depth organizational and financial management review, highlights, on the one hand,
 that action was taken on concerns that were raised. On the other hand, more rigorous supervision would
 not have allowed the ineligible expenses to be made in the first place, or would have identified the problem
 earlier.

 Restructuring

 Frequent changing of PDO indicators (as part of restructuring) suggested that the Bank was not clear on
 what the project's goals were or at least what was achievable. Some were added that could not be
 measured (training) or that were unrealistic to achieve within the project's remaining time frame. For

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Public Service Reform and Rejuv (P122229)



 example, PDO1 (recruitment of civil servants in the targeted ministries is based on the new organizational
 norms and procedures) was replaced by PDO2 (related to training received by staff), but then it was
 dropped. During the AF, “three new components and six new intermediate indicators were introduced. All
 of these were not achieved and were subsequently deleted during the 2020 restructuring” (ICR, pp. 25-26).
 The decision to implement additional financing just one year before project closure, with little time to meet
 new targets, also raises questions about the quality of supervision.

 Based on the ICR, restructuring appears to have weakened project implementation: “Even during this
 restructuring, some activities like training were pushed while bigger reforms and ambitious reforms like a
 functional HRM system were left unfinished” (ICR, p. 8).

 While it is true that the COVID-19 pandemic (which began in March 2020) caused disruptions,
 this occurred six years after project launch (and following the original project closure date), and thus cannot
 be used as a strong justification for low achievements of key indicators.

 IEG concurs with the ICR assessment that, while it is well recognized that governance reforms are
 challenging in fragile environments, the shortcomings supervision were major.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The ICR notes the adequacy of the results framework, which “linked intermediate indicators to the PDO
 and components, and included definitions, baselines, end targets, data sources, and responsible agencies”
 (ICR, p. 23). M&E responsibility was assigned to the CMRAP, which was to recruit a dedicated international
 M&E expert.

 Two PDO indicators were relevant to the rejuvenation objective, encompassing the replacement of older
 workers (who would retire with benefits/packages) with freshly trained graduates. The value of the
 original PDO indicator to recruitment of civil servants based on the new organizational norms and
 procedures, however, was less clear, since recruitment from the YP program would already substantially
 improve the quality of civil servants. Furthermore, there is no mention, in the PAD, the AF paper, or the
 ICR, of what the new norms and procedures were, or whether they were ever developed. The ICR merely
 notes that the indicator was dropped at the time of the AF (ICR, p. 15). The PAD states that 5,979 civil
 servants were expected to be retired from the five target ministries under the project (p. 14), but it did not
 put this figure in context, i.e. by referring to what percentage of the said ministries’ workforce that
 number represented.




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Public Service Reform and Rejuv (P122229)



 The ICR points out that the AF targets were ambitious and poorly defined. The AF introduced a new PDO
 indicator, “percentage of staff who state that they have used the training that they received on the job,” a
 subjective measure not clearly linked to the PDO. The planned tracer studies to measure achievement of
 this indicator were not implemented, and the indicator was dropped during the 2020 restructuring. Another
 PDO indicator, “civil servants working in core public administrations managed through the new HRM and
 payroll system,” was added at the AF, but there were zero achievements, raising questions about the
 advisability of including the indicator.

 Numerous outputs included in the theory of change did not have indicators linked to them and were never
 mentioned in the ICR. They include draft legal texts relating to decentralization, training of HR staff, and a
 roadmap of sector programs and results for six ministries.

 A “rigorous impact evaluation” was planned under Component 1 as “a means of testing alternative
 approaches to reform and rejuvenate the public service in the targeted ministries, with a view to adopt and
 scale up those proven to be most effective” (PAD, p. 11). The proposal, which would have involved giving
 different civil servants different benefit packages to “assess whether the project's benefits outweigh any
 intended or unintended costs” appeared to carry risks relating to unequal treatment of retirees, and be
 open to dispute by those affected. Since rigorous impact evaluations normally take several years to
 implement and yield findings, the idea that the planned IE would contribute to design of a retirement
 program may have been unrealistic.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation suffered from weak follow-through and challenges with data collection. Slow
  recruitment of an international M&E officer by CMRAP negatively affected establishment of M&E
  arrangements. In addition, several studies listed in the PAD or AF document were never implemented,
  including the tracer survey to follow-up on training impacts, periodic surveys on public perceptions of the
  reform progress, and the IE. No reason is given in the ICR for their non-implementation.

  The ICR noted that only 11 ISRs were conducted in the course of eight years and further assessed that
  project reporting “lacked the regularity and candor required to adequately monitor status, particularly
  considering the complexity of the project environment” (ICR, p. 25). The ICR further pointed out that the
  “M&E team was unable to update project indicators and targets due to difficulties in obtaining data from
  relevant stakeholders” (ICR, p. 23).

  The midterm review (MTR), which finally addressed issues with the RF, took place in 2020, six years after
  project effectiveness (and one year after the original project closing date).



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR describes utilization of the M&E system as “sub-optimal” and highlights the project’s struggles
  to use M&E as a management tool throughout implementation (ICR, p. 23), which is why M&E was rated
  moderately unsatisfactory for most of the project period. The ICR does note some improvement
  following the MTR and final restructuring in 2020, and an upgrade to a moderately satisfactory rating.




                                                                                                     Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Public Service Reform and Rejuv (P122229)



  Given that numerous planned M&E activities were not implemented, they clearly could not be used to
  inform project management. This represents a missed opportunity for the project. The lack of focus on
  monitoring likely weakened project achievements, since, as the saying goes, ““If you cannot measure it,
  you cannot improve it."



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environment Category C. It did not trigger any safeguard policies or require
   an environmental impact assessment.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The ICR (p. 24) reports that financial management arrangements were adequate but that performance
   fluctuated. An in-depth organizational and financial management review led to the declaration of ineligible
   expenditures in January 2018 for an amount of US$4,848,575, which reflects a serious fiduciary problem.
   The ICR also reports on “serious issues beyond [project control], with its commercial bank in 2021, which
   led to significant payment delays with suppliers and service providers." The ICR describes serious
   procurement issues, specifically “long delays in contract processes, poor evaluation of consultant
   qualifications, as well as delays and the sub-optimal quality of the project archiving systems” (p. 24). The
   borrower also failed to use the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement tool for procurement
   management, because the tool was not updated.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None identified.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                                Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC Public Service Reform and Rejuv (P122229)



                                 Moderately                                        Major shortcomings in Bank
Bank Performance                                       Unsatisfactory
                                 Unsatisfactory                                    Supervision.
Quality of M&E                   Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 27) presents several insightful lessons, some of which are summarized and expanded
upon here:

It is risky to burden a project that is struggling to make progress with new components. The
ICR cautions that “careful consideration is needed before adding components and complexity to a
project in a difficult country, sector and project environment.” The project had not made progress in
its first 18 months. However, instead of restructuring it by reducing complexity, the scope was
expanded, and additional components and activities were added. This was largely done out of
expedience, as another Bank project was closing, and unfinished activities were merged with this
project. The ICR concludes that “the implications of the AF in this project were not fully assessed,”
arguing that it would have been better to drop or reallocate some activities and narrow the scope.

Multiple, weakly justified changes to a project can weaken its focus and ability to achieve its
objectives. The ICR highlights the frequent changes through what it refers to as “ad-hoc additions
and quick deletions” of components and activities. It found there was no “compelling
explanation" driving the changes. The changes were especially questionable given that they were
not linked to the original PDO or tied to an expansion of the PDO (with the exception of adding
provincial administrations to the rejuvenation dimension).

When governance and political economy issues present high risks, as with this project, more
rather than less attention and resources should be given to supervision and monitoring.
Political economy and governance risks that are not proactively addressed through rigorous
mitigation measures can derail a project from achieving its outcomes. The Bank was clearly aware
of these risks at appraisal, incorporating multiple mitigation and monitoring activities. However, these
oversight and monitoring activities were implemented weakly or not at all. Although the Bank
recognized serious political economy and governance issues at appraisal—indeed, addressing weak
governance was a rationale for strengthening the civil service—only one ISR was conducted during
the first two years of implementation and only one during the final two years. An MTR was
conducted six years after effectiveness. It is almost no surprise that the Bank found the government
had made ineligible payments worth close to US$5 million, leading to an 18-month suspension of
project activities.

If gender targets are to be met, they need to be supported with gender-specific activities. The
project’s sub-indicator that set a target for 25 percent of trained YP recruits to be women was
laudable. However, the project's failure to reach the target (it hit 18 percent) was linked to the lack of
specific activities to help reach the target. A belated attempt to rectify this (180 out of the last group
of 220 potential YP recruits were women) was stymied by COVID-19, and the cohort was not trained




                                                                                                      Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       DRC Public Service Reform and Rejuv (P122229)



or recruited. If gender targets are taken seriously, serious efforts need to be made at the start rather
than at the end of a project.

Excessive project preparation time should be considered a warning sign that the targeted
reforms are high risk. The project was 3.5 years under preparation, in part related to a pause in
activity related to elections in November 2022, but also due to persistent political economy issues.
Even so, the lengthy preparation proved to be inadequate—many activities that are normally
addressed during project preparation were left to the implementation stage. And, as per the ICR, the
project team was still working on preparatory planning and conceptualization over a year and a half
after effectiveness. All this contributed to the project getting off to an extremely slow start with
“minimal progress toward achievement of the indicators” as of February 2016 (ICR p. 25) which
could have been flagged as an early indicator (or warning) that it would be a troubled endeavor. The
Bank could introduce an accountability mechanism for assessing reasons behind project preparation
delays, in cases where preparation has lasted for more than a certain period. This might offer an
institutionally acceptable way for the Bank to cut its losses and accept sunk costs, without the
pressure to move forward toward implementation of highly risky projects, such as this one.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The overall quality of the ICR is good. It provides a candid and objective assessment of project challenges and
shortcomings while providing evidence of its achievements. The ICR does a good job of summarizing the
frequent changes in indicators that accompanied the three project restructurings. At the same time, it leaves
some questions unanswered, for example, why the many assessments and monitoring tools described in the
PAD and AF paper were never conducted. On some occasions, the narrative and rating are not closely aligned.
For example, the discussion of risks under the Risk to Development section is relatively positive, but then the
overall risk to development rating is “high." Also, while recognizing that the theory of change had to be
constructed for the ICR after the fact (as it was not a requirement at the time of the PAD), the ICR did not
always clearly link the inputs (primary activities) with the outputs, and some of the inputs were near identical to
outputs (e.g. recruitment and training of YPs, setting up a grievance mechanism).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 19 of 20
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
DRC Public Service Reform and Rejuv (P122229)




                                                                             Page 20 of 20
