     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Sehatmandi (P160615)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023304

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P160615                                     Afghanistan Sehatmandi

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Afghanistan                                 Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D2850,TF-A7113,TF-A7314                30-Jun-2021                                           407,635,471.26

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Mar-2018                                30-Jun-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           465,000,000.00                                    325,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            414,746,730.29                                    274,746,730.29

 Actual                                        407,635,471.26                                    274,309,926.78




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Joy Antoinette De Beyer     Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez                IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective was to increase the utilization and quality of health, nutrition, and family
   planning services. The PDO was identical in all key documents (Project Appraisal Document [PAD], p. 1;
   Financing Agreement [FA], p. 4; Grant Agreement [GA], p. 5).

   The PDO was not revised.



                                                                                                     Page 1 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Sehatmandi (P160615)



   For the purposes of this ICR review, the objective will be assessed as follows:

   PDO1: to increase the utilization of health, nutrition, and family planning services; and

   PDO2: to increase the quality of health, nutrition, and family planning services.

   Split Evaluation. Due to the collapse of the government in Afghanistan, this evaluation will undertake a split
   evaluation approach as approved by OPCS.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  05-Nov-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Improving Service Delivery. (Appraised at US$570 million, disbursed amount at
   project closing not available.)

   This component would finance performance-based contracts with non-governmental Service Providers
   (SPs) to deliver the Basic Package of Health Services (BPHS) at lower-level facilities, and the Essential
   Package of Hospital Services (EPHS) in 31 out of 34 provinces of Afghanistan. The project would also
   finance firms to assist the government’s efforts in direct delivery of BPHS and EPHS in the remaining three
   provinces (known as MOPH-SM), including a firm that would assist the Ministry of Public Health (MOPH) in
   implementing an urban version of the BPHS in Kabul City. This component would also finance innovations
   to be implemented by the SPs in areas identified as priorities by the MOPH, namely: (a) increasing access
   to services, (b) increasing utilization of services, (c) working with households to improve the health of the
   population, and (d) improving quality of services.

   SP contracts would be financed in two parts: (a) a fee-for-service (FFS) aspect in which service providers
   would be paid a fixed tariff for 11 services, and (b) a lump-sum part that would cover overheads and
   services that are hard to quantify or define precisely (for example, emergency preparedness or participating
   in national immunization days). Service providers would be invited to bid on the lump-sum aspect of the
   contracts. The FFS tariffs would be set by the MOPH and focus on high-priority services including
   immunization, skilled birth attendance, contraception, growth monitoring and promotion, and caesarean
   sections. For each payment-linked service, a province-specific minimum volume of services would be set.
   Service providers would be at risk of sanctions if service delivery fell below this minimum. A province-
   specific cap for the number of services that would be paid for by the project would also be set to keep the
   project within its budget. This financing approach would have the advantages of (1) increasing the focus on


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Afghanistan Sehatmandi (P160615)



  performance management, and (2) encouraging expansion of key services through financial rewards to
  service providers.

  Component 2: Strengthening the Health System and its Performance. (Appraised at US$20 million,
  disbursed amount at project close not available.)

  This component aimed to support a performance management culture in the MOPH and among
  stakeholders. This was to be achieved through: (a) technical assistance to support implementation of the
  recommendations arising from a functional review of the MOPH conducted in 2018; (b) contracting of a
  third-party monitoring agency to assess the performance of the project; (c) technical assistance to help
  strengthen the capacity of the MOPH in performance management and analysis of data for decision
  making, and to strengthen the Health Management Information System (HMIS); and (d) financing for system
  development and stewardship functions of the MOPH to manage the program effectively.

  Component 3: Strengthening Demand and Community Accountability for Key Health Services.
  (Appraised at US$10 million, disbursed amount at project close not available.)

  Coverage of maternal health, family planning, and nutrition services would be enhanced using the potential
  of the Citizen’s Charter Afghanistan Program and the Community Development Councils - including their
  female members - to build demand for, and increase utilization of, services, and to strengthen accountability
  mechanisms for critical health and nutrition services, especially for maternal health and family planning.
  This would be complemented by (a) inclusion of these services in the semi-annual assessments of SP
  performance carried out by the third-party monitoring (TPM), (b) increased use of community health workers
  (CHWs) to provide information and supplies to families in the community, and (c) strengthened monitoring
  of nutrition and family planning results by introducing additional indicators in the HMIS and collection of
  more nutrition-related data in nationwide household surveys. Component 3 also planned to finance
  communication campaigns to raise awareness of health rights, promote specific health behaviors, and
  support strengthening of the Grievance Response Mechanism and implementation of the MOPH’s anti-
  corruption strategy.

  Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF) tranches: In order to facilitate the transition to performance
  management of the BPHS/EPHS contracts, the World Bank agreed with the MOPH to include tranche
  release conditions that would be applied to the transfers from the ARTF to the project. The ARTF funds
  were to be disbursed in three tranches: (a) on approval of the project in 2018; (b) in 2019 on completion of
  year 1 of implementation; and (c) in 2020 on completion of year 2 of implementation, subject to the MOPH
  meeting tranche release conditions. The provisional amounts of these three tranches were US$130 million,
  US$160 million, and US$135 million, respectively.

  There were no changes in components during implementation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Costs: Total project costs were estimated at appraisal at US$600 million over five years. Between
  appraisal and approval, the project duration was shortened to three years and the total cost reduced in
  order to remain within the amount that would be available at that time from the ARTF, the major financing




                                                                                                  Page 3 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Sehatmandi (P160615)



   source (71 percent of the original total). The total financing expected for the three years was US$465
   million. Additional Financing was being processed when the fall of the government occurred.

   The final disbursements at closing were US$407.6 million, 87.7 percent of the amount committed at
   appraisal. Information on the disbursements for each component was not available.

   Project Financing: The project was financed by an IDA grant of US$140 million (IDA-D2850), a US$35
   million grant from the Global Financing Facility (GFF), and a grant of US$290 million from the ARTF.

   Borrower/Recipient Contribution: No financial contribution was expected from the Borrower (PAD, p. 2).

   Changes in project financing during implementation: Following the takeover of the government on August
   15, 2021, the Bank suspended all project disbursements. At the time, total disbursements were US$390.6
   million. US$17 million of reimbursements owed to SPs and already approved were paid after the
   government fell. On March 8, 2022, the Bank canceled US$50.2 million from proceeds of the ARTF grant
   for the project, and a small amount (US$0.026 million) of the total GFF grant of US$35 million, reducing
   total project financing to US$414.7 million from the original amount of US$465 million. The IDA grant was
   disbursed in full. (Details of cancellation provided by project team member by email on 10/4/23.)

   Dates: The project was approved on March 28, 2018, and became effective two weeks later on April 10,
   2018. A mid-term review was held in June 2020, and a project restructuring was approved on November 5,
   2020, under which (a) the closing date was extended by one year to June 30, 2022; (b) the Results
   Framework (RF) baselines and targets were updated to reflect the latest available data and the disruptions
   caused by the COVID-19 pandemic; and (c) disbursement estimates were adjusted. At the time of the
   Restructuring Paper, total disbursement was US$279.58 million, 60.1 percent of the original allocation. The
   restructuring retained the original PDO and activities. The project was suspended (with the rest of the
   country portfolio) after the Taliban takeover in August 2021. The original closing date was June 30, 2021,
   which was extended by one year during the restructuring; the actual closing date was June 30, 2022.

   A split rating will be used to deal with the unusual circumstance of the collapse of the government in
   August 2021. As agreed between IEG and the region, the evaluation will consider the period from the
   Taliban takeover until the intended project closing date separately (August 2021 to June 2022). The ICR
   also applied a split rating to take account of the changes in the baselines and targets agreed in the
   restructuring, which would be appropriate if the project's level of ambition had been reduced. Four of the
   PDO indicators retained the same level of ambition (percentage increase between the baseline and final
   target); the two PDO targets relating to reproductive health services were reduced in scope. All of the
   Intermediate Results Indicator targets remained at the same or a higher level of ambition. This review
   judges that the overall efficacy rating would be the same whether or not a split rating was used, and
   therefore the additional split is not applied, but the original and revised targets are discussed in the efficacy
   section for the indicators for which the ambition level changed.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale



                                                                                                       Page 4 of 23
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Afghanistan Sehatmandi (P160615)



               The project PDO, package of services, and design remained fully relevant to the most pressing health
               needs of the country throughout the project. Despite Afghanistan’s substantial improvements in various
               health indicators in recent decades, adverse health outcomes including in maternal and child mortality
               and malnutrition were high during project implementation. The project design built on the successful
               experience of the World Bank’s engagement in the health sector since 2003. The project continued to
               finance the BPHS and EPHS packages of services through a performance-based contracting model of
               service delivery.

               Full alignment with national priorities and World Bank assistance strategy. The project’s PDO was
               fully aligned with the focus on health and education in the World Bank County Partnership Framework
               (CPF) for FY17-FY20, which was extended to FY2022 through the Performance and Learning Review
               (PLR), and with Afghanistan’s national health and development strategies at approval. The project
               remained aligned and highly relevant to the Approach Paper 2.0 approved by the World Bank Board of
               Executive Directors on March 1, 2022: “Options for the World Bank Engagement to Support the Afghan
               People," which aims to protect the vulnerable, help preserve human capital and key economic and social
               institutions, reduce the need for future humanitarian assistance, and improve gender equality outcomes.
               Providing health care is crucial to preserving human capital, and the focus on basic, essential health care
               services helps protect women and children and other vulnerable groups. Delivering maternal and
               reproductive health services helps improve gender equality. Funding the health service preserves a
               crucial social institution.
               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase the utilization of health, nutrition, and family planning services.

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change for the PDO of increasing the utilization of health, nutrition, and family planning
                             services was as follows: Contracting with SPs and supporting the MOPH to deliver the BPHS and the EPHS
                             in facilities in all 34 provinces would enable the entire population to access health services. The payment
                             mechanism -- a lump sum to cover fixed costs, and activities whose costs are difficult to separately estimate,
                             plus a performance-based fee that paid for verified volumes of services delivered for selected high-priority,
                             high-need services -- was expected to provide incentives to providers to expand service availability and
                             encourage increased utilization, and also ensure that providers had the funding to purchase the inputs
                             needed to deliver the services. Utilization would be further increased through engaging with community
                             groups to enhance demand for health services and communication campaigns to raise awareness of the
                             availability and benefits of those services.

                             Outputs and Intermediate Results (ICR, pp. 23-24):


                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Afghanistan Sehatmandi (P160615)




      SPs were contracted to provide defined essential primary and secondary care services free of cost to
         the entire population, including maternal health, immunizations, treatment for malnutrition and
         infectious diseases, family planning, surgical care, and other services.
        Contractors were paid a fixed cost (on the basis of their bids), plus a performance-based amount,
         calculated using agreed fixed fees for a list of eleven priority services, multiplied by verified service
         volumes.
        SPs were given increased managerial autonomy in hiring and finding ways to increase service
         delivery.
        An independent Third-Party Monitoring agency was hired to verify services volumes reported by SPs
         through the HMIS, and to administer the Balanced Score Card that assessed aspects of SP quality
         and the readiness to provide services.
        Additional female staff were hired; by April 2021, 99 percent of health facilities had at least one female
         health staff member.
        By February 2021, 1,949 nutrition counselors (close to the target of 2,000) had been recruited and
         trained.
        Technical assistance was provided to the MOPH to strengthen the ability to provide services in three
         provinces.
        The project financed and provided technical assistance to the MOPH to establish a Performance
         Management Office (PMO) to oversee SP performance. A firm was hired to support MOPH with the
         analysis of health system data and to train MOPH staff in data analysis and performance
         management. Twenty MOPH staff were certified by the firm in performance management.
        Learning events were arranged between the World Bank and MOPH officers on the subjects of
         financial management, social accountability, gender safeguards, and procurement.
        Standard Operating Procedures were developed for managing the performance of SP contracts (IRI
         achieved)
        All BPHS/EPHS service providers were subject to semi-annual performance reviews (IRI achieved).
        The MOPH website provided key program (household survey & BSC by province) and financial data
         (allocation and expenditure data of all sources) (IRI achieved).
        The percentage of facilities where communities were reported to have been involved in program
         planning and decision making (in the BSC reporting) increased from the baseline of 88 percent to 93
         percent at the end of the project, exceeding the 90 percent target (IRI achieved).
        The percentage of BPHS/EPHS service providers who had received timely and complete payments as
         per contractual obligations was 47 percent in August 2021 (IRI target of 100 percent not achieved).
         The ICR author explained that this had varied, but a key reason was that after the verification report
         was submitted, various approvals for the performance-linked part of payment sometimes delayed
         payment. The project team tried to change the process to be faster, but it proved difficult to expedite
         the various approvals (conversation with ICR author on September 21, 2023).

Outcomes

Note on data for PDO indicators: The ICR noted that four of the six PDO indicators were to have been
assessed through a nationwide household survey, which could not be completed due to the government’s
collapse. Therefore, data from the HMIS had to be used to estimate coverage levels. The annual volume of
services reported through the HMIS in the base year (2018 where data were available, else 2019), were
compared to the volumes reported in the HMIS in the 12 months preceding the fall of the government in
August 2021. This enabled percentage changes in service volumes to be calculated. The 2018 household

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Afghanistan Sehatmandi (P160615)



survey had estimated that 81.5 percent of all institutional deliveries took place at facilities included in the
project; this percentage was assumed to be similar for all other services, and 81.5 percent of total service
volumes were attributed to Sehatmandi facilities.

Five PDO indicators assessed utilization of health services: one for all services, two for women’s reproductive
health services, and two for services to young children: (1) health facility visits per capita per year to
BPHS/EPHS facilities; (2) births attended by skilled health personnel; (3) prevalence of use of modern
contraceptives; (4) pentavalent vaccines for children between 12 and 23 months old; and (5) a measure of
nutritional adequacy. The discussion that follows refers to the period between effectiveness and the Taliban
takeover as “the project period” or “during implementation."

Health facility visits per capita per year to BPHS/EPHS facilities: The project aimed to expand the average
number of health facility visits from 2.1 to 2.5 per year. (These are the revised data and aim for a 19 percent
increase, similar to the original level of ambition of increasing visits from 1.9 to 2.3 per capita, or by 21
percent.) The ICR reported that 150 million health facility visits were financed during the project, but that the
total number of visits in the 12 months before the Taliban takeover amounted to only 1.91 per capita, so this
target was not met (ICR, Table 1, p. 18). The ICR noted that despite the failure to make progress against this
target, the health system did well to maintain service delivery at a relatively stable level despite the COVID-19
pandemic and increasing violence in the country.

A related IRI counted the total number of people who received essential health, nutrition, and population
services through the project. The reported total of 4,799,496 partially achieved (75 percent) both the original
target number of 6.4 million, and the upwardly revised target number of 6,979,808 (69 percent), and likely
would have been on track to achieve the target had project implementation continued for the expected final
year.

Services utilization by women

Percentage of births attended by skilled health personnel: These had to be estimated from the number of
births occurring in Sehatmandi-financed health facilities, since the planned end-project population-
representative household survey was not able to be carried out. During 2018, 577,294 births occurred at
BPHS/EPHS facilities; this number increased significantly to 816,616 for the 12 months before the
government collapse, which the ICR estimated would have accounted for 78.7 percent of all births, well above
the original project target of 66 percent. The baseline had been revised from 55.1 to 58.8 percent, and the
target from 66 to 64.5 percent at restructuring, but these changes do not affect the conclusion that this goal
was exceeded by the project by a substantial amount. The ICR suggested that this significant increase in
institutional deliveries during the project could have been because the fee paid for deliveries was relatively
high compared to the other 10 performance-based service payments, giving SPs a strong incentive to
prioritize efforts to expand this service.

Proportion of women of reproductive age (or their partner) using a modern contraceptive method. The ICR
noted that lacking household survey data on the prevalence of contraceptive use, an estimate could be
derived from HMIS data on the volume and type of contraceptives administered at health facilities. The type
of contraceptives can be matched to a weight derived from the average duration of contraception provided by
the method (weights are sourced from U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) methodology) to
calculate total “couple years of protection” (CYPs). Verified HMIS data indicate that the number of CPYs
provided by the contraceptives delivered at BPHS/EPHS facilities increased from 445,654 CYPs in 2019 to
500,626 during the 12 months before the government’s fall. The original goal was to increase the

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Afghanistan Sehatmandi (P160615)



contraceptive prevalence rate from 16.3 to 21 percent, a very ambitious 29 percent increase. When the
baseline was updated to 17.4 percent, the goal was scaled down to 19.2 percent, for a more modest 10.3
percent increase. The ICR reported that the 500,626 CYPs implied a rate of 18.6 percent prevalence, an
increase of 6.9 percent over the revised baseline, far short of the original large increase hoped for, but
partially achieving the revised project goal.

Two IRIs captured services utilization by women. The number of women who received essential health,
nutrition, and population services through the project was reported at 2,399,748, which failed to reach the
revised target of 4,858,830, or the lower original target of 3.85 million (49 and 62 percent of the targets
respectively). The IRI added at restructuring for the number of deliveries attended by skilled personnel
partially achieved the target, with a reported 1,999,242 achieved against the goal of 2,737,852 (73 percent of
target).

Services for young children

Pentavalent dose 3 vaccination coverage: The number of pentavalent dose 3 vaccinations administered by
BPHS/EPHS facilities in Afghanistan increased during the project period. During the year in which
implementation began, 2018, 1,148,990 vaccinations were administered; this increased to 1,249,270 during
the 12 months before the government collapsed. Using these reported HMIS numbers, the ICR estimated the
prevalence of pentavalent dose 3 vaccination among children at 65.1 percent compared to a revised end-
project target of 67.9 percent, a 10.7 percent increase over the revised baseline of 60.8 percent, close to the
(revised) target increase of 11.7 percent (the original target increase was 11.1 percent). This target can be
judged as substantially met.

A related IRI, the number of children immunized, was added to the RF at restructuring. The reported project
achievement of 3,209,763 partially achieved (76 percent) the goal of 4,241,956 (and likely would have been
on track to achieve the goal had project implementation continued for the final year.

The utilization of nutrition services indicator was the percentage of children aged 6 to 23 months who
received food from at least four food groups, a measure of “minimum dietary diversity." The household survey
that was planned to collect these data could not be carried out due to the collapse of the government. In 2019
the HMIS system had introduced an indicator for the number of children whose mothers received counseling
on infant and child feeding (IYCF). IYCF counseling sessions included information on dietary diversity for
children. There was a large (32 percent) increase in the number of IYCF counseling sessions: from 5,660,723
sessions delivered between in calendar year 2019, to 7,483,068 sessions during the 12 months before the
Taliban takeover. Of course, dietary counseling does not automatically or necessarily improve child diet
diversity: families must be willing and able to act on the information, and food affordability is an important
obstacle in Afghanistan. It is not possible to assess whether the substantial increase in delivery of this
nutritional service achieved any improvement in dietary diversity.

Additional evidence on increased utilization of HNP services: The ICR referred to two academic papers
that used two different robust methodological approaches, both of which concluded that the project
accelerated the utilization of key health services in Afghanistan (Andersen et. al., Journal of Global Health,
2021; Samad et. al., forthcoming). They found that the increase in service volume under Sehatmandi was
higher for 8 out of the 11 payment-linked services (with a median increase in the rate of change of 10
percent) and 23 percent more in the provinces that used the project pay-for-performance contracts than in the
three provinces where the MOPH was responsible for services delivery (and where pay-for-performance


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Afghanistan Sehatmandi (P160615)



incentives were not introduced). Improvements also were observed for services that were not directly
compensated for by the pay-for-performance approach.

With outcome targets reached or nearly reached for most indicators, but only partial achievement of targets
for some indicators, achievement is rated Substantial, but with caveats.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The objective was not revised.

Revised Rationale
Since the Taliban takeover on August 15, 2021, there has been no official relationship between the World
Bank and the government. However, the HMIS data remain accessible on-line, and the ICR used the data to
rate project performance during this period.

There was no disbursement of funds from the project during this period, but the health delivery system –
which had been maintained and strengthened by Sehatmandi – continued to perform, with interim funding
from the global community. In October 2021 the Global Fund mobilized one month of financial support for
continued health service delivery through Sehatmandi SPs, followed by three months of support by the UN
Central Emergency Response Fund (UN CERF). On November 30, 2021, following a decision by ARTF
donors, the World Bank Board of Executive Directors approved Approach Paper 1.0 under which the WB and
ARTF partners approved a transfer-out financing package to UNICEF for US$100 million to sustain basic
health service delivery until June 2022 through a contracting-out model. This enabled the health system to
continue operating.

Despite the Taliban’s restrictions on the movement of women, and the other difficult circumstances in the
country, in the 12 months before the project closed, pentavalent dose 3 vaccinations covered an estimated
61.4 percent of eligible children (3.7 percent less than the previous year, and not meeting the target); births
attended by skilled personnel fell one percent to an estimated 77.6 percent, still well above the 64.5 percent
target; and 483,255 couple-years of contraceptive protection (CYPs) were delivered, with an estimated use of
modern contraceptives falling just half of one percent to an estimated 18.6 percent, below the target of 19.2
percent.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase the quality of health, nutrition, and family planning services.

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Afghanistan Sehatmandi (P160615)




Rationale
The theory of change for the PDO of increasing the quality of health, nutrition, and family planning services
was that several project activities would enhance the quality of services: service standards set for providers,
technical assistance to the MOPH to help meet and support those standards, and especially the assessment
of health facility quality and population health outcomes, coupled with performance-based payment and
incentives to providers. In addition, efforts and incentives to increase community participation in planning and
decision-making at facilities, and access to a grievance redress mechanism at facilities, was expected to
enhance accountability to patients and their communities, providing added encouragement for good quality
services.

Activities and Outputs (ICR, p. 29)

      The TPM conducted “minimum standard of services” assessments at health facilities (when doing
         HMIS verifications), in which the availability of staffing, equipment, and drugs, and facility governance
         were assessed, as part of the evaluation of SP performance.
        Three rounds of the Balanced Scorecard (BSC) quality assessment were conducted. In each round,
         about 25 health facilities were sampled in each of the 34 provinces, making a total sample size of over
         800 health facilities. The BSC was a comprehensive assessment of health service quality.
        The TPM also conducted two rounds of drug quality assessments (DQA); the first round focused on
         drug quality assessment in the public sector, and the second round focused on the private sector.
        To strengthen the MOPH, the project financed and provided technical assistance to MOPH to
         establish the Performance Management Office (PMO) to oversee SP performance. The project
         also hired a firm to support MOPH with the analysis of health system data and to train MOPH staff in
         data analysis and performance management. Twenty MOPH staff were certified by the firm in
         performance management.
        The PMO defined targets for service volumes and service quality for each SP. Service providers that
         did not reach these targets were potentially subject to losing their contracts with MOPH, in addition to
         earning smaller performance-based payments. As a result of poor performance, SPs in Takhar and
         Zabul provinces were replaced in December 2020. These data also provided an assurance against
         politically motivated pressure to cancel the contracts of some well-performing SPs.

Intermediate outcomes

Two quality-related intermediate results indicators were collected as part of the BSC. (1) The indicator
“availability of essential drugs and vaccines” measured the availability of 31 important pharmaceutical items.
The ICR reported that drugs and vaccine availability improved during project implementation. During the
preceding SEHAT project, the score had mostly ranged from 80 to 85. During Sehatmandi, these scores rose
to above 90 from 2019 to 2021, which exceeded the project annual and final targets. (2) The IRI “community
involvement in decision-making" related to the activity of local health councils (“shuras”). This score had
varied between 84.5 and 91.4 during SEHAT. During Sehatmandi’s first year of implementation, the score fell
to 85.1, then rebounded to its highest-ever rating of 93.2 in 2021, exceeding the pre-restructuring target for
2020 of 90, and the post-restructuring target for 2021 of 89.4. The tuberculosis case detection rate is also an
indicator of the quality of health services and did not improve during the project.

Outcomes



                                                                                                   Page 10 of 23
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Afghanistan Sehatmandi (P160615)



                              One PDO indicator assessed improvements in the quality of health, nutrition, and family planning services:
                              the national score on overall service quality assessed using the balanced scorecard (BSC). The BSC
                              provided a comprehensive assessment of health service quality at a representative sample of health facilities
                              in all 34 provinces of Afghanistan. This overall quality score exceeded the target. The original baseline of 63.0
                              (from the BSC 2017) was revised down to 59.3 (based on the 2018 BSC data) at restructuring, and the target
                              score was adjusted from 68 to 64.5, which maintained the same percentage improvement in the target. The
                              score reached a high point of 65.1 in 2020, and fell to 63.9 in the 2021 BSC 2021, the last year for which
                              these data are available, partially achieving the goal. The ICR noted that the Sehatmandi project did not
                              provide direct financial incentives for quality and suggested that the quality increase may have been an
                              indirect effect of increased staff, medicines, and other quality-related inputs that were put in place to help
                              achieve the service volume targets that were directly linked to payments.



                              Rating
                              Modest


                              OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
                              Revised Objective
                              The objective was not revised.

                              Revised Rationale
                              Since the Taliban takeover on August 15, 2021, there has been no official relationship between the World
                              Bank and the government. No data on quality are available for this period.



                              Revised Rating
                              Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Considering the performance on all indicators, the rating is substantial. In both aspects of the PDO, the
                            counterfactual is clear - since the project provided most of the funding for the health services across the entire
                            country, without the project, few of the achievements are likely to have been realized.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                                                                                                                                Page 11 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Afghanistan Sehatmandi (P160615)




  OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
  Considering the available evidence that the SPs that had been hired under the project were able to continue
  providing services even when their funding was interrupted, and provided services that were relatively robust
  even in the face of the collapse of the government, the overall efficacy rating for the final months of the
  project after the collapse of the government is rated modest.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                        Primary Reason
  Modest                                                    External shock


5. Efficiency
Efficiency of Design

The major focus of the project was to deliver the BPHS and EPHS across the country. These well-prioritized
sets of interventions were chosen for their relevance to the burden of disease in the country to ensure high
impact, and for their high cost-effectiveness. The efficiency of this approach in responding to important basic
health needs of the communities had been demonstrated clearly in previous projects. The ICR noted that the
provision of BPHS and EPHS through contracting out in Afghanistan has become a model for other fragile states
trying to rebuild their health systems after emerging from conflict. Many of the BPHS interventions self-target the
poor, which contributed to their increased access to health care. Analysis of the impact on equity of the
preceding project found that BPHS interventions improved access for those in the lowest economic quintile
disproportionally. For example, the Gini coefficient for institutional deliveries improved from 0.863 to 0.525
between 2010 and 2015, indicating especially strong progress in providing maternity-related care to poor women
(PAD, p. 24).

Efficiency of Implementation

Implementation by the MOPH was efficient, apart from three issues. (1) Introduction of the pay-for-performance
mechanism was postponed six months (from July 2018 to January 2019) because the Standard Operating
Procedure (SOP) was not complete, and the new procurement of SPs had not been completed by the end date
of the SEHAT SP contracts (June 30, 2018). To avoid disruption in service delivery, the SEHAT contracts were
extended until December 31, 2018, with financing from the Sehatmandi project. (2) During project
implementation, there were delays in payments to SPs by the MOPH due to bureaucratic inefficiencies. (3) The
Minister of Public Health failed to extend SP contracts beyond June 2021 (in part due to increasingly centralized
decision-making by the Palace), which resulted in financial losses for the SPs after the government collapsed.

The project fully disbursed the first two ARTF tranches, but increased security issues and the collapse of the
government on August 15 prevented the release of the third and last ARTF tranche. Just before the collapse,
the MOPH was working on a memo to document that they had met the ARTF third tranche release conditions.

The ICR reported that implementation by SPs was satisfactory. SPs continued to deliver services despite the
contracting and payment delays by MOPH, and most SPs maintained adequately high performance scores.
Only two SPs had their contracts terminated due to poor performance. As described in the Efficacy section, both
the volume of services and their quality improved. The ICR stated that the financial incentives of the pay-for-


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Afghanistan Sehatmandi (P160615)



performance model, and the managerial autonomy permitted under the contracts, likely resulted in service
providers finding innovative strategies to expand access to care.

Efficiency in use of resources

A costing study conducted by the MOPH for 2018 estimated the cost of a child health and immunization visit at
US$1 in Afghanistan and the cost of a family planning visit at US$0.4. The World Bank estimated the cost of an
institutional delivery in 2020 at US$12.5 and antenatal and postnatal care at US$0.5 per visit. These costs are
relatively low compared to available estimates for Bangladesh and Pakistan (cited in the ICR Annex, p. 49),
implying efficient use of resources.

The ICR noted that the Sehatmandi project, which introduced pay-for-performance payment, achieved a 10
percent increase in the number of key services delivered, compared to the final year of the preceding SEHAT
project, with the same amount disbursed to service providers, indicating efficiency gains. Furthermore, the ICR
explained that although some partners had raised concerns during implementation that SPs who provided
relatively low bid amounts in the contracting process would be less successful in delivering services, there
turned out to be no correlation between service provider performance scores and the proportion of the total
contract allocated to the lump sum payments, showing that some providers were able to provide good care at
very low cost. This is another indicator of the efficiency of the approach requiring SPs to bid (ICR, pp. 21-22).

The overall efficiency rating is Substantial. Despite the implementation delays that were linked to the MOPH,
the project was implemented, and services delivered. The cost of the project was very reasonable given the
large value derived. An additional rationale for the rating is that the contractors hired under the project continued
to deliver services even after the upheavals of the collapse of the government and suspension of project
disbursements.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

                                            Before Aug 15, 2021                     After Aug 15, 2021


                                                                                                       Page 13 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Sehatmandi (P160615)



Relevance                                        High                                  High
                                          Substantial (with
Efficacy                                                                              Modest
                                      caveats)
Efficiency                                                  Substantial
Outcome Rating                            Moderately Satisfactory            Moderately Unsatisfactory
Outcome Score                                       4                                    3
Disbursed (US$ millions)                         390.6            17.5
Phase weight                               390.6/407 = 0.96                    17.5/407 = 0.04
Weighted rating                                   3.84                              0.12

Overall rating score                                       3.96 - rounds up to 4
Overall outcome rating                                       Moderately Satisfactory (4)

This split rating methodology was adapted specifically for the Afghanistan portfolio, give the abrupt fall of the
government and takeover by the Taliban. This project is unusual in that data were available on-line for the post-
split period.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to the development outcomes achieved by the project is considerable. This was the case even
before the Taliban takeover in August 2021, which substantially increased the risk. Corruption had worsened
in the health sector before the takeover, and the government continued to face critical governance
challenges. The worsening security situation affected the supply of health services, including closing some
health facilities. Some Taliban rulers opposed and stopped vaccinations. Increased restrictions on women's
movements reduced their use of health services.

Project outcomes are highly reliant on externally funded financial and technical assistance, and although the
World Bank, ARTF donors, and international partners have found pragmatic ways to provide support for
essential basic services to the Afghan people since the Taliban takeover, continuity is uncertain.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project's PDO and design were in line with health sector priorities, government development policies,
  and the World Bank's strategy for Afghanistan. The project built on the very successful SEHAT
  project and financed the same carefully chosen packages of services. Project activities had a logical

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Sehatmandi (P160615)



  relationship to the expected results, and the M&E design was strong. The project built on lessons learned
  and analysis of the previous project results and of household and health facility data (published as
  “Improving access to and quality of health services: The Afghanistan Health Services Study,” May 2017).
  The design improved on the SEHAT project by: introducing performance incentives in SP contracts to
  increase SP focus on selected services where better progress was needed; increasing the emphasis on
  nutrition services; planning for additional support for demand-side interventions; and including actions to
  strengthen MOPH management of SP contracts and performance. Institutional support for the more
  rigorous management of the SP contracts and performance was strengthened through a “Presidential
  Summit on Health” held in June 2017, which made explicit recommendations on these areas. The team
  arranged additional support through WB Programmatic Advisory Services and Analytics and parallel
  technical assistance from the WB Governance Global Practice.

  Key risks were assessed realistically, and thoughtful mitigation measures were identified and set out in
  detail in the PAD's Annex 1 (pp. 38-41). Analysis of service delivery data that compared areas with
  different levels of insecurity had found that most SPs were able to continue to provide health services in
  low security areas, particularly due to their considerable success in negotiating with local communities
  and armed groups. The MOPH’s institutional capacity and fiduciary risks were mitigated through (a)
  capacity-building support to key departments, (b) establishment of a new department for performance
  management, (c) updating the financial management (FM) manual, (d) capacity development of internal
  audit of MOPH, (e) retaining Grant and Contract Management Unit (GCMU) staff to support procurement
  of Sehatmandi, and (f) providing technical assistance to the MOPH. The fall of the government in August
  2021 was not anticipated.

  The strong project team included national and international health specialists with decades of experience
  working on predecessor projects, as well as experts on performance management and other specialist
  areas of the project. This experience, working relationships with partners, and deep understanding of the
  country (technical, political, cultural, and contextual) positively informed the project design and
  preparation of the project. Health partners actively contributed to project design. Careful attention was
  given to ensuring a smooth transition from the SEHAT project; the Sehatmandi project extended the
  SEHAT contracts for six months through December 2018 to ensure continuity of implementation.

  The one questionable decision was setting the target increase in the prevalence of modern contraceptive
  use at nearly 29 percent, from 16.3 to 21 percent (discussed in section 9 on M&E).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Kabul-based team provided continual and strong support and follow-up to the MOPH. Despite security
 challenges, and COVID-19 restrictions from 2020, the team held in-person or virtual implementation
 support missions twice a year and remained closely engaged with the health partners until the government
 collapsed. The ICR noted that the implementation status and results reports (ISRs) and aide memoires
 were detailed and regularly provided clear assessments of project achievements and challenges, clear



                                                                                                  Page 15 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Sehatmandi (P160615)



 recommendations, and agreed-upon actions to address the identified challenges for follow-up. Changes in
 ISR ratings were explained and well-justified, and comments were frank.

 The ICR also commended the very thorough preparation of the MTR and its usefulness. The WB team
 prepared a comprehensive issues paper to guide MTR discussions that took into consideration issues
 papers by the MOPH and donors, and a position paper by the Alliance for Health Organization. The MTR
 resulted in a clear set of actions and next steps, notably the extension of the project and SPs' contracts
 beyond June 2021, and updating the baselines and targets in the Results Framework using newly available
 household survey data.

 There was strong implementation support for fiduciary and safeguard policies. Given the project’s
 complicated procurement process, its magnitude, and the introduction of new procurement methods, the
 World Bank provided hands-on implementation support. A procurement specialist worked with the MOPH
 to finalize procurement planning. A dedicated performance management specialist was hired to support the
 MOPH in developing the project’s SOP and capacity building of the PMO. After approval, the WB
 organized a workshop on FM and disbursement for the MOPH. The FM supervisions were filed in the Bank
 system. The FM performance ratings were candid, issues were highlighted and followed up with MOPH,
 and the project was provided with requisite implementation support. The team also worked assiduously to
 support MOPH’s agenda on health care waste management as well as gender and social safeguards.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The theory of change was clear, and PDO and intermediate indicators were clearly specified and well
 selected to monitor progress toward the project objectives. Four of the six PDO indicators are widely used
 metrics for assessing health service utilization. The HMIS system was an appropriate data source because
 it was timely and reliable; with the project imposing sanction on SPs (who were responsible for reporting
 data) if data were found to be inaccurate in careful regular reviews by the independent TPM hired through
 the project. The household health survey that was expected to provide some of the end-line project data
 was included in the TPM contract, which would have worked with the DHS and maintained continuity
 following the 2015 and 2018 surveys. Use of the Balanced Scorecard as a measure of service quality is
 appropriate because the BSC is a high-quality tool that has been implemented consistently in Afghanistan
 since 2005, and reflected careful annual assessments carried out by the TPM. All indicators in the results
 framework had baselines, targets, and yearly intermediate targets. The indicators met “SMART” criteria,
 and targets struck a good balance between ambition and realism, with one exception: in the Afghanistan
 context, increasing contraceptive prevalence by nearly 29 percent was a stretch, even from the low
 baseline of 16.3 percent.



                                                                                                Page 16 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Sehatmandi (P160615)




b. M&E Implementation
  Third-party monitor and contracting: An independent TPM agency was contracted for M&E. The TPM
  completed three annual rounds of the Balanced Scorecard assessment and five semi-annual rounds of
  HMIS data validation of the accuracy of service delivery volumes reported by service providers.
  The HMIS provided unusually rigorous and accurate health system data for a conflict-affected country.
  However, the TPM contracting process was challenging. First, there was a six-month delay in contracting,
  although this did not cause any disruptions in data collection. Second, the contract for a national
  household survey was initially delayed due to a dispute between the MOPH and the National Statistical
  Agency, and then delayed again due to an oversight during the procurement process. The household
  survey was therefore not on track at the time of the government’s collapse.

  HMIS system: Afghanistan has an extremely robust HMIS that captures monthly service delivery reports
  from every Sehatmandi-financed health facility in the country. HMIS verification by a TPM, and sanctions
  on SPs for inaccuracies, resulted in strong reliability of the HMIS data. The TPM audited a sub-set of
  reported services by visiting approximately 500 randomly selected health facilities across all 34 provinces
  every six-months. Accuracy levels during Sehatmandi for payment-linked indicators were generally
  assessed at over 95 percent. The TPM was able to access 98 percent of selected health facilities,
  despite ongoing conflict.

  Quality assessments Quality was assured and assessed using three tools. In conjunction with the HMIS
  verification activities, the TPM conducted “minimum standard of services” health facility assessments of
  the availability of staffing, equipment, and drugs, and of facility governance. Achievement of the minimum
  standard of services was included in SP performance evaluations. The second tool, the BSC,
  comprehensively assessed health service quality each year in a representative sample of health facilities
  in all 34 provinces of Afghanistan. Three rounds of the BSC were administered; each had a sample size
  of approximately 25 health facilities in each of the 34 provinces, for a total sample size of over 800 health
  facilities. Third, the TPM conducted two rounds of drug quality assessments (DQA); the first round
  focused on drug quality in the public sector, and the second round focused on the private sector.

  There were some shortfalls in M&E implementation. (1) The intended evaluation of how SPs used their
  increased flexibility to adopt innovations or other actions to increase their performance was not done. (2)
  As noted, the household survey that was to provide end-line data was not done. (3) The community
  scorecard developed for use by Community Development Committees (CDCs) to monitor services
  provided to communities by different sectors, including health, did not prove as useful as hoped
  for assessing the availability of minimum standards relating to critical inputs and services in the health
  facilities. This system covered only about one third of the country, and the TTL explained that some
  communities had unrealistic expectations for their local health facilities (conversation with TTL on
  September 25, 2023).

  The systematic supervision of health facilities by the various MOHP departments was also not as
  constructive as hoped. In response to complaints from SPs about the number of different supervision
  visits, the WB team offered incentives to the MOPH (willingness to cover travel costs and per diems) if
  its Performance Management Office (PMO) and Grant and Contract Management Unit would undertake
  joint supervision. This resulted in improvement action plans and follow-up visits, but in some cases,


                                                                                                    Page 17 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Sehatmandi (P160615)



  MOPH officials requested per diem payments from SPs, and reacted to refusals with unwarranted
  negative reviews, which undermined the process.

  Overall, the anticipated M&E activities were carried out mostly on schedule and as planned, until the
  collapse of the government, which prevented the end-line survey from being done, as noted above.



c. M&E Utilization
  Use of the utilization and quality data in determining SP payment provided a strong incentive to
  providers to strive towards project objectives. Consistent with the project design, M&E focused on
  results, and measured achievement of outcomes in addition to outputs. The routine monitoring data and
  verification data were reviewed by MOPH management and discussed with SPs, who took the process
  extremely seriously, given the impact on their performance-related payments.

  Performance management: M&E data were used for quarterly performance reviews of the Sehatmandi
  SPs. The MOPH PMO had a well-defined set of targets for service volumes and quality for each SP.
  Service providers that did not reach these targets were potentially subject to losing their contract with
  MOPH, in addition to earning smaller performance-based payments. As a result of poor performance,
  SPs in Takhar and Zabul provinces were replaced in December 2020. Data also provided an assurance
  against politically motivated pressure to cancel the contracts of some well-performing SPs.

  In addition to routine use of monitoring data for performance management and provider incentives, the
  updating of baselines and targets in the RF using the 2018 Household Survey data and 2018 BSC data
  has been noted. The MTR noted a disappointing volume of vaccinations of infants and pregnant women,
  and the WB and MOPH decided to increase the performance-based fee for these services, to increase
  the incentive to SPs. (This was not able to be done because of the limits on the allowed increases in SP
  contract amounts.)

  Data use for assessing project efficacy: The ICR was able to use HMIS data to estimate coverage
  levels in the absence of end-line household survey data to assess progress towards four of the six PDO
  indicators, as explained earlier.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project required an Environmental Assessment (under OP/BP 4.01) (PAD, p. 4), and was rated
   category B - Partial Assessment. The PAD noted that the Environmental and Social Management
   Framework (ESMF) had been updated and would be adopted for the project. The ESMF had been
   disclosed in-country on the MOPH website and on the WB external website before project effectiveness.
   The PAD also noted that the Health Care Waste Management Plan (HCWMP) had been updated and would
   be implemented in all project facilities, and that the ESMF and the HCWMP would be operationalized with

                                                                                                  Page 18 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Afghanistan Sehatmandi (P160615)



  an appropriate Action Plan including institutional arrangements, capacity development, and training (PAD,
  p. 27).

  The ICR noted that the MOPH further revised the ESMF and HCWMP during implementation of the
  Afghanistan COVID-19 Emergency Response and Health Systems Preparedness Project (which was
  approved in April 2020). The Sehatmandi Coordination Office (SCO) recruited an environmental and social
  specialist to ensure compliance with social and environmental issues. The project aimed to enhance the
  SCO’s capacity to implement E&S measures at different health facilities levels, but implementation of the
  ESMF was not satisfactory. The project did not follow the requirements of the HCWMP to mainstream color
  coding, segregation, collection, transportation, and disposal of health care wastes. The MOPH contracted a
  firm to handle the HCWs, but the contract was not continuous and continued to change. Despite repeated
  recommendations from the WB, the MOPH never developed proper institutional and implementation
  arrangements for HCWP or Occupational Safety and Health concerns. This suggests a lack of ownership of
  the provisions of the ESMF.

  Grievance redress: At appraisal, it was decided that: (a) a three-tier grievance committee would be
  established under the project; (b) a central grievance hotline would be set up, and (c) the existing grievance
  Redress Mechanism (GRM) would be improved. Despite progress in finalizing the GRM action plan, there
  was no functional GRM in place as of August 15, 2021. The MOPH and SCO did not have adequate human
  and monetary resources (or perhaps adequate commitment) to establish a robust health-sector GRM at the
  ministry, provincial, and HCF levels. A toll-free number for GRM was not established.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Fiduciary Compliance: The project FM risk rating remained High throughout implementation, but FM
  performance was considered moderately satisfactory. The project FM staff were experienced, with relevant
  experience and knowledge of WB FM requirements, and all key positions were filled throughout the
  project. The Interim Unaudited Financial Reports (IUFRs) were submitted on time and in an acceptable
  format. The IUFR for the semester ended on June 21, 2021, which was due by September 05, 2021, was
  not submitted. The WB received audit reports for fiscal years 2018 and 2019 with unqualified (clean) audit
  opinions. The audit report FY2020 is overdue from June 21, 2021.

  Procurement. Most of the project procurement was with NGOs to deliver the BPHS/EPHS. MOPH has
  long had full accreditation for procuring services through GCMU. The GCMU was well-staffed, competent,
  and capable; the ICR describes performance in completing the procurement process for all provinces as
  excellent. However, cases were reported to the Integrity Vice Presidency (INT) alleging collusion of
  MOPH’s top management with some of the SPs. The WB provided hands-on expanded implementation
  support for procurement of non-consulting services packages, for which GCMU did not have NPA
  accreditation.

  The project procurement rating was satisfactory until the MTR but was downgraded in January 2021 and
  further downgraded to unsatisfactory in September 2021 due to lack of decisive action to extend the SP
  contracts and launch the bidding process to replace poor-performing SPs. The Procurement Directorate in
  MOPH (responsible for procuring small works and goods, including equipment and drugs) was weak, but
  since SPs implemented their procurement independently, this unsatisfactory performance had little impact
  on project performance other than delays in pharmaceutical procurement for the three SM-Provinces. The

                                                                                                  Page 19 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Sehatmandi (P160615)



   procurement for TPM-1, responsible for HMIS verification and BSC, was delayed at the start of
   implementation. The contract for the household survey was never signed due to lack of coordination with
   the National Statistics and Information Authority, and formative and operational research, campaigns, and
   capacity-building procurement were canceled due to significant delays.

   Delays in approving the TPM report and the involvement of various departments in the payment
   process led to significant delays in SP payments. The delay in processing led to fund-flow challenges
   for SPs and impacted the timely payment of health workers' salaries and procurement of medicines.
   Several factors contributed to delays in processing SPs payments: (a) lack of clarity on the roles and
   responsibilities of various departments involved in the payment process; (b) delays in the health oversight
   committee meetings to approve the TPM report; (c) delays in timely submission of progress reports and
   invoices by the SPs; and (d) at times presence of several auditing teams from the Ministry of Finance,
   supreme audit office, and donor agencies in the MOPH.

   Following the government’s collapse and halt in funding the Afghanistan portfolio, the World Bank obtained
   permission under Approach Paper 1.0 to make direct payments to SPs for past due payments. The project
   team worked with the SPs and ARTF-TPMA to verify past due payments under valid contracts and make
   payments directly to SPs. The ARTF-TPMA verified invoices, progress reports, and financial reports of SPs
   per the contract and SOP of Sehatmandi and considered the TPM report, then issued cover letters for
   payment to SPs. Ultimately, the WB paid all Sehatmandi SPs, WHO, and Third-Party Monitors for the past
   due payments through June 30, 2021 (approximately US$17.5 million). These payments were critical for
   service delivery continuity.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR reported an unintended benefit of the project as improved coordination between Sehatmandi
   facilities and facilities financed by other partners. This happened because SPs were concerned that if
   another health facility was providing duplicative services in their catchment area, they might not be able to
   meet their performance targets. SPs raised this issue in multiple forums and review meetings. The project
   also helped to significantly improve the quality of HMIS data, as SPs were concerned about being
   penalized after TPM visits and verification of services. The consistency and accuracy of HMIS data was
   more than 95 percent during the Sehatmandi period.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory


                                                                                                    Page 20 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Afghanistan Sehatmandi (P160615)



Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

These lessons are drawn from the ICR, pp. 33-35, with some restatement by IEG, except for the
final lesson, which was added by IEG.

Contracting out health services to NGOs can be an effective mode of service delivery in an
FCV environment, resilient to conflict and sudden changes in government at the provincial
and national level. This has proved to be a flexible, resilient, and efficient mode of service delivery.
It provides accountability to the beneficiary population since SPs can be terminated if they fail to
perform adequately. SPs were able to continue service delivery in areas controlled by anti-
government forces as they were able to negotiate access. And when international financing stopped,
the system enabled rapid resumption of services, and relatively swift re-engagement of the donor
community with the health sector in Afghanistan.

Pay-for-performance can provide strong incentives and managerial autonomy for SPs to
expand services, but it requires substantial implementation support. Multiple analyses have
demonstrated that the volume and quality of services improved during the Sehatmandi period.
Successfully introducing a performance-based system is an impressive achievement in a low-
income FCV environment, because it requires a strong data system and verification. Linking outputs
to payments made SPs accountable for successful service delivery. SPs need flexibility to develop
strategies to meet their targets, but also some degree of regulation of SP practices is necessary. For
example, some SPs linked health worker salaries to performance targets. SPs claimed this reduced
absenteeism, but some health workers believed their salaries were unfairly cut when factors outside
their control affected performance. The MOPH mandated that no more than 20 percent of health
worker salaries could be linked to performance. Design, preparation, and implementation of pay-for-
performance in an FCV environment needs simplicity of design, adequate resources to ensure
effective implementation, adherence to the performance framework, and monitoring of results.

Reliable data reported through a well-functioning HMIS system, and regular independent
verification, are essential for performance-based contracts. Furthermore, care must be taken
that the time needed for data verification does not create administrative delays in disbursements that
cause difficulties for providers. In this case, when the process for approving the TPM reports caused
untenable delays, the procedure was changed to make payments in advance and then make
retroactive adjustments after the TPM report was approved. Administration could have been
smoother if there had been a system that provided a central record of whom documents were with,
when they were to be approved, and where they were to be transferred.

Financial incentives under pay-for-performance may need adjustment, so the process for
recalibration should be clear in the project SOP, and procurement regulations should allow for
contract amendment and budget revision. The project MTR identified that the tariffs for tetanus
toxoid and pentavalent vaccinations were too low. The MOPH and WB agreed to increase these
tariffs to improve SPs’ incentive to deliver vaccinations. However, the MOPH was unable to



                                                                                                    Page 21 of 23
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Afghanistan Sehatmandi (P160615)



implement this change because they were not authorized to change the value of the SP contracts
beyond a certain percentage. The procurement/PFM regulations needed to allow this flexibility.

In FCV contexts, events are often unpredictable, requiring flexibility, additional time for
implementation, and contingency arrangements. Several implementation activities were
significantly delayed due to political or bureaucratic hurdles. Examples include the contracting of the
third-party monitor, payments for force majeure events, and contract extensions. Task teams may
consider building in extra time into implementation schedules, and including clauses in contracts that
automatically extend them in the case of delayed signing.

Task teams should be required to explain the basis for setting PDO targets. For example, a
target might extrapolate existing trends, or be expected to accelerate improvements because of
additional efforts supported by the project. This would also be helpful when analyzing the reasons
for differences between targets and actual achievements.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is concise but informative. It clearly links the narrative, ratings, and evidence on the project's results. It
is candid about the difficulties faced by the project, and has a strong focus on results. The theory of change is
clearly explained, and aligns with the information provided about the chain of results, with good details provided
on many project activities. The ratings are well substantiated. The lessons are thoughtful, relevant, useful, and
well-articulated.

The split rating guidelines established for addressing the periods before and after the collapse of the
Afghanistan government were correctly followed, except for a lack of clarity about the undisbursed amount in
the period after August 2021. The ICR does not justify using a total commitment amount of US$600 million
rather than the US$465 million listed in the WB project system. (The project was appraised as costing US$600
million over five years, but initially approved with a commitment of US$465 million to stay within the amount
available from the ARTF, with an additional third tranche of US$135 million expected to be released and
committed through Additional Financing, which was prevented by the collapse of the
government.) Furthermore, although the ICR was not wrong to apply a split rating to take account of the
changes in PDO targets when the project was restructured in November 2020, it applied the split rating
methodology incorrectly by assessing project performance during two separate periods (before and after
restructuring), rather than assessing the project achievements over the entire time period against the original
targets, and against the revised targets, and then weighting the ratings by the proportions disbursed before and
after the restructuring.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating


                                                                                                       Page 22 of 23
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Afghanistan Sehatmandi (P160615)



Substantial




                                                                  Page 23 of 23
