     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Serbia Health Project (P129539)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023694

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P129539                                    Serbia Health Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Serbia                                     Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-83380,IBRD-88300                     30-Sep-2019                                           61,509,167.71

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Feb-2014                               31-Dec-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            40,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             71,100,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         61,509,167.71                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Reantha Pillay              Salim J. Habayeb            Eduardo Fernandez               IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                         Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project’s Development Objectives (PDO) as stated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD), Loan
   Agreement(s) and Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR) were “to contribute to improving the
   efficiency and quality of the public health system of the Republic of Serbia through the strengthening of: (i)
   health financing, purchasing, and maintenance systems; and (ii) quality improvement systems and
   management of selected priority non-communicable diseases.” (Section 2 PAD, Annex 1 of PAD, Schedule 1
   of Loan Agreements, ICR, para 11).


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Serbia Health Project (P129539)



   Although the project was restructured three times (September 2015 for reallocation of funds; September 2021
   for extending the closing date, December 2021 for reallocation of funds) and received additional financing for
   scale-up activities (in March 2018), the PDOs remained unchanged.

   No split evaluation is being undertaken as despite one outcome target on “unit price reduction for key
   pharmaceuticals” being reduced by ten percent, when combined with other outcome data, having not met the
   original target for this one indicator would not have changed the rating for the related objective. Also, only 14
   percent of the Bank loan was spent before the restructuring that reduced the objective.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  20-Mar-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The four components of the Project reflected the Government's reform priorities and included the following:

   Component 1: Improvement of Health Financing (US$8.3 million at initial appraisal, US$3 million at
   additional financing, US$11.2 million at closure)

   This component was initially designed to provide technical assistance and training to support financing
   reforms of two subcomponents:

   1.1 At hospital level for acute and non-acute care through a phased implementation of a Diagnosis
   Related Group (DRG) reimbursement system and,

   1.2 At primary healthcare centers (PHCs) through introducing incentives for performance in health
   provider payment mechanisms.

   This component included policy and legal amendments, development of information technology
   infrastructure and monitoring systems, building awareness and capacity of staff, strengthening
   governance at all levels and introducing a Quality Improvement Grants Scheme. At additional financing
   subcomponents 1.1 and 1.2 were expanded to include integrating clinical pathways into e-health systems
   for hospital and primary healthcare and a new subcomponent was added:

   1.3 Developing a healthcare network optimization plan to improve the efficient utilization of existing
   capacities.



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Serbia Health Project (P129539)



Component 2: Improve Access to Quality Health Care (US$6.6 million at initial appraisal, US$1.5 million
at additional financing, US$8.9 million at closure)

This component included subcomponents:

2.1 At project entry called “Efficient purchasing of pharmaceuticals and medical products”, its name
was changed at additional financing to “Improve access to medicines”. This subcomponent initially
included capacity building for all stakeholders involved in central procurement, policy and legal amendments
to allow for centralized procurement and piloting of e-Prescription, e-Procurement and unified stock
monitoring and dispensing systems. At additional financing, improving the e-health system to support the
rational use of antibiotics was added to this subcomponent.

2.2 Strengthening the Borrower’s capacity to perform Health Technology Assessments (HTA). This
subcomponent initially included developing partnerships with regional and international HTA organizations,
strengthening institutional capacity and establishing a HTA unit within an entity of the Government. At
additional financing this subcomponent was further developed to include Evidence Based Medicine
Situation analysis, and a more detailed strategy for HTA including identifying priority areas.

2.3 Improve medical equipment maintenance systems. This subcomponent included a preliminary
assessment of the current distribution of medical equipment and the processes and costs involved in their
repair and maintenance as well as the establishment of an entity focused on medical technology
management. This subcomponent was streamlined at additional financing but maintained the same focus.

Component 3: Strengthening Quality of Service Delivery (US$22 million at appraisal, US$19 million at
additional financing, US$46 million at closure)

This component included subcomponents:

3.1 Strengthen quality improvement systems. This initially included the development and implementation
of clinical practice guidelines and clinical pathways for priority diseases at hospital and primary healthcare
level and the implementation of a Health Management Information System. At additional financing this
component was rephrased but substantively unchanged.

3.2 Improve cancer management. This subcomponent initially included the purchase and installation of
six linear accelerators, and training and strengthening of information systems such as the national cancer
registry system. At additional financing this subcomponent was scaled-up substantially to include 2 more
linear accelerators, the rehabilitation of two bunkers, ten magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) units,
six computer computed tomography (CT) units, one CT simulator, building interconnectivity of radiotherapy
services and supporting the development of the Serbian Comprehensive Cancer Management Strategy that
covers prevention, diagnosis and treatment.

Component 4: Monitoring and Evaluation and Project Management (US$3 million at initial appraisal,
US$1.5 Million at additional financing, US$4.9 million at closure)

This component includes project management, monitoring and evaluation activities, and audits, and
financing of operating costs, studies, and training. At additional financing, a 27-month extension period was
included. Training for Roma health mediators was specified.



                                                                                                 Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Serbia Health Project (P129539)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   All project costs were covered by World Bank financing through the International Bank for Reconstruction
   and Development (IBRD), with no financing contribution expected or made by the Borrower. The project
   was initially appraised at US$40 million (EUR 29.1 million) and after additional financing of US$31.1 million
   (EUR 25 million) was subsequently appraised at US$71 million (EUR 54.1 million), 100 percent of which
   was disbursed by project closure on the 31st December 2022 as per data from client connection (ICR,
   Annex 7). The Internal Bank systems use USD equivalents and, as such, reflect EUR to USD exchange rate
   fluctuations, giving the impression that the Project disbursed less than the total amount, however, this is
   incorrect.

   Dates:

   Project approval took place on 25 February 2014, however the project only became effective on 8 May
   2015 due to delays with meeting the conditions of effectiveness (ICR, para 61).

   The project underwent the following restructurings:

         14th September 2015 for reallocation of funds across categories as a number of activities planned
          under the project were achieved prior to project effectiveness (Amount disbursed prior to this
          US$2.21 million)
         20th March 2018, on request of the Borrower, the project received additional financing for scale-up
          activities and minor changes were made to the results framework (discussed in Section 4:
          Efficacy) (Amount Disbursed prior to this US$8.86 million, 12 percent)
         1st September 2021 for extending the closing date of the project by 12 months, from December
          2021 to December 2022, due to COVID-19 related delays (Amount disbursed prior to this US$42.38
          million)
         22nd December 2021 for reallocation of funds from disbursement category 3 to disbursement
          category 2 to finance the procurement and installation of four additional linear accelerators instead
          of the originally planned financing of diagnostic equipment which had already been purchased under
          the Serbia Emergency COVID-19 Response Project (P173892) (Amount disbursed prior to this
          US$45.11 million)

   The Mid-Term Review took place on 29 January 2018 and the project closed on 31 December 2021.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Relevance of the objectives is rated high. At appraisal Serbia was facing major economic challenges
following the 2008-09 Global Financial Crisis and was in a time of severe fiscal austerity. The
government was simultaneously pushing ahead with reforms to enable European Union (EU) integration,
which was and remains a government priority (Government of Serbia 2013 EU pre-accession economic
plan, Government of Serbia Action Plan 2020-2022). Health sector inefficiency was a key concern given
that at appraisal Serbia spent almost twice as much per capita on health (10.4 percent of gross domestic

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 18
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Serbia Health Project (P129539)



product) as comparator countries yet had similar health outcomes (PAD, para 4). Public expenditure on
health was already ballooning (130 percent increase between 2001 and 2011) (PAD, para 4), in part due to
an aging population with increased demand for health and social care and a rising burden of non-
communicable disease. Shrinking National Health Insurance Fund contributions due to reduced contribution
rates (Delivering Health Services for Serbians Efficiently p.29) and an old-age dependency ratio of 21
percent of the working-age population (ICR, para 1) threatened the financial sustainability of the Serbian
Public Health system. As such, health efficiency was a priority at appraisal and part of broader social sector
financing reforms (CPS FY2012-2015 para 64-68). The PDOs remained relevant in subsequent Country
Partnership Frameworks (CPF) particularly the CPF FY22-26 at closure which included "Objective 2.2
Better access to quality health and education services for the disadvantaged".

The focus on non-communicable disease is highly relevant. The PAD (para 5) and ICR (para 3) Sectoral
and Institutional Context sections underline that there were three main causes of premature death at
the time of project preparation: heart disease (19.9 percent), stroke (18.8 percent), and cancer (about 18
percent). The burden of each of these diseases was equally high and it was important to address all of
them through addressing key shared risk factors and improving treatment of these diseases. The project
team later added that the Government used their own resources for improving treatment of cardiovascular
diseases (ICR Review Preparation Interview, October 17, 2023). Strengthening treatment capacities in
radiotherapy was the area where the Government requested the Bank's support.

The high relevance of investing in improving cancer management is supported by the fact that cancer
mortality was unacceptably high in Serbia as a European country. Cancer death rate (191 per 100,000 in
2014) was among the highest in Europe, Balkan and European and Central Asian region (144 per 100,000
in 2014). The project team later highlighted that there was a more apparent gap in radiotherapy versus
other treatment modalities for cancer which meant that the need for radiotherapy treatment was urgent at
the time of project preparation. This gap resulted from obsolete equipment that meant that contemporary
therapies were not available at all. There were not enough machines for radiotherapy treatment and
patients were referred to chemotherapy even for cancers where chemotherapy was not the preferred
treatment option (ICR Review Preparation Interview, October 17, 2023). Furthermore, the Bank’s
comparative advantage is investment in infrastructure alongside technical assistance which is more suited
to radiotherapy support than interventions in other treatment modalities.

This project built on previous World Bank supported health projects, namely the Serbian Health Project
(2003-2012) and Delivery of Improved Local Services Project (2009-2015), and further developed
institutional capacity within the Government. Additionally, the European Commission had requested the
World Bank to support Serbia in achieving health sector reforms to comply with EU Acquis
requirements (PAD, para 16). The World Bank coordinated with other development agencies working on
health sector reforms in the country to ensure optimization of resources (ICR, para 100).


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 18
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Serbia Health Project (P129539)


EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Contribute to improving efficiency of the public health system of the Republic of Serbia.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change

               The theory of change was developed by the ICR team as it was not required in the PAD at the time of project
               preparation. The project activities were inter-connected, and the theory of change illustrated by the ICR
               (Figure 1) is applicable to both objectives discussed in this section. It was reasonably expected that:

                     Support for design and roll out of provider payment reforms for hospitals and Primary Health
                        Centers (PHCs), support for developing cost accounting methodology and training and capacity
                        building for healthcare managers would plausibly contribute to an output-based provider payment
                        model implemented in hospitals and a performance-based payer model implemented in PHC which in
                        the literature are associated with increased health system efficiency and quality.
                       Developing a "Master Plan" would plausibly encourage better integration and optimization of the
                        health institutions network to address population health needs and thus improve health system
                        efficiency and quality.
                       Support for design and implementation of centralized procurement of drugs could plausibly increase
                        efficiency of public procurement for medicines.
                       Campaigns for rational antibiotic use could plausibly increase the rational use of antibiotics and
                        through reduced costs and resistance, increase health system efficiency and quality.
                       Establishing a maintenance system for medical equipment and a department in the Ministry of Health
                        (MoH) responsible for the same could plausibly reduce the depletion of medical technology assets
                        and increase patient access to lifesaving technology thus contributing to health system efficiency and
                        quality.
                       Procurement of and installation of new equipment for oncological radiology could plausibly result in
                        improvement of treatment outcomes, reduced waiting times and minimization of harmful side-effects of
                        radiation thus improving health system efficiency and quality.
                       Investments in IT systems for financial management, drug procurement, prescription, and quality
                        improvement; the development and implementation of clinical guidelines and e-pathways; and the
                        training of public health staff to utilize the aforementioned could plausibly increase coverage of
                        targeted early detection and prevention activities and thus improve health system efficiency and
                        quality.

               Outputs and Intermediate Results

               The project achieved the following:

                     98 percent of both Dom Zdravlja (Health Centers) and pharmacies implemented an e-prescription
                        system, surpassing both the original target of 85 percent and the revised target of 90 percent.
                     39 479 healthcare workers received training on health financing from a baseline of 500, surpassing
                        both the original target of 3 000 and the revised target of 13 000 workers. Additionally, over 300
                        managers across the Serbian public health system received training on health financing reforms.

                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Serbia Health Project (P129539)




      A DRG payment system was implemented in acute care hospitals meeting the qualitative target set.
      700 pharmaceuticals and health products were procured through centralized framework contracts
       meeting the target.
      The project achieved a 20.1 percent reduction in the total consumption of antibiotics for systemic use
       (Defined daily dose/1,000 persons/per day), falling just short of the 22 percent target. It should be
       noted that the consumption of antibiotics reduced significantly in the years before the COVID-19
       Pandemic (37.6 percent in 2018 compared to the baseline). Trainings for over 26 000 healthcare
       professionals, students, children and parents were conducted on proper hand hygiene and rational
       antibiotic use as part of this effort.
      Whilst the revised target was to have a HTA unit, guidelines and benefit package fully established and
       functioning; by the end of the project only the preconditions were in place. The project assisted Serbia
       in becoming a member of the EUnetHTA, staff and experts dealing with HTA received training on new
       EU legislation related to the topic and, a comprehensive package of documents on HTA was prepared
       by the project. Whilst the ICR offers no clear reason why this target was not achieved, the project
       team later added that the change in European HTA legislation and processes were released just after
       the Government had finalized HTA documentation and resulted in the documentation having to be
       redrafted in accordance to European Standards (ICR Review Preparation Interview, October 17,
       2023).
      The medical equipment maintenance unit was established at MoH and a national system for budget
       allocation for medical equipment maintenance was established but fell short of the target as the
       system was not in use nationally (ICR, para 41)

Outcome

Sufficient evidence has been provided in the ICR to support substantial gains in health financing reforms and
centralized procurement which contribute towards improving health system efficiency in Serbia.

    1. 95 percent of total acute care hospitalization cases in public hospitals reported accurately based on
       DRGs with number of errors in coding reduced by two times. This new DRG payment model was
       introduced in all 57 Serbian acute hospitals and resulted in a 30 percent decrease in average length of
       stay, a 2.2 times increase in more efficient same day hospital services and better quality clinical and
       economic data.
    2. Revised target achieved with 27 percent reduction in average unit price relative to baseline for the 50
       most frequently dispensed multi-source pharmaceuticals that are procured through centralized
       framework contracts, however, fell short of the original target of 30 percent. It should be noted that this
       target was reduced by ten percent (from 30 percent to 27 percent at additional financing when 14
       percent of the Bank Loan was disbursed), based on this IEG opted not to do a split evaluation on this
       ICR Review as when combined with other outcome data, having not met the original target for this one
       indicator wouldn't change IEGs rating for Objective 1. The central procurement of drugs and
       digitalization of drug prescribing in hospitals resulted in a 25 million Euro saving for the National
       Health Insurance Fund.

As the project received additional financing, targets would have been expected to increase. They remained
the same and one outcome target was reduced. Also, several intermediate results were partly achieved.
Therefore, the objective is assessed as almost fully achieved.



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Serbia Health Project (P129539)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Contribute to improving the quality of the public health system of the Republic of Serbia.

Rationale
Theory of Change

As for objective 1. The assessment of the Efficacy of Objective 2 recognizes the overlapping activities
between the two PDOs, and considers all activities, however, to avoid repetition outputs and outcomes were
discussed under the most relevant objective.

Outputs and Intermediate Results

The project achieved the following:

      71.43 percent of Dom Zdravlja (Health Centers) met grant agreement performance criteria in the
         preceding one year, surpassing the target of 30 percent (but not the original target of 80 percent set in
         September 2019). The Grant Scheme financed 91 quality improvement projects (QIP) implemented in
         83 PHCs (52.5 percent of all PHCs in Serbia). Whilst, the ICR does not provide any data on the
         outcomes of the QIP undertaken and no evidence that it meaningfully improved quality of the
         healthcare system, project team clarifications on 17 October 2023 and 10 January 2024 demonstrated
         quality improvement projects in nine of the 83 Primary Healthcare Clinics. Six Primary Healthcare
         Clinics utilized the scheme to increase CVS screening, two for cervical cancer screening and
         education and one for implementing an electronic laboratory referral system.
        8 annual trainings were organized by health Roma mediators surpassing the target of 4. Attribution for
         this particular indicator is unclear as the ICR does acknowledge that UNICEF was also working to
         achieve medical access and health education in the Roma community.
        50 clinical pathways were developed from a baseline of 14, surpassing both the original target of 30
         and the revised target of 48 clinical pathways.
        289 health institutions have completed staff training on the priority clinical pathways from a baseline of
         50, surpassing both the original target of 157 and the revised target of 160 institutions.
        88.2 percent of patients were satisfied with the quality of care in PHC facilities, surpassing the
         baseline of 78 percent and the target of 80 percent.
        12 linear accelerators were installed at the national level, surpassing the initial target of 6 and meeting
         the revised target of 12 linear accelerators. Per project team clarifications on 10 January 2024 80
         percent of radiotherapy services are now considered advanced (3D-CRT IMRT, VMAT and IGRT) and
         there was a subsequent decrease in standardized mortality rates in 2021 compared with 2016 for

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Serbia Health Project (P129539)



         tumor localizations treated using radiotherapy. Whilst many factors could affect the change in the
         standardized mortality rate (disease stage, availability of other types of treatment, etc.), improvement
         of the quality of radiotherapy services likely contributed to this positive trend.
        Ranking of health institutions on quality criteria was done based on 2019 data (the year before the
         COVID-19 pandemic) rather than from data of the year prior to project closure. It should be noted that
         this was a justifiable action undertaken by the project team and it facilitates future comparability.
        38.5 percent of adult diabetic patients in Dom Zdravlja (Health Centers) had at least one glycosylated
         hemoglobin (HbA1c) in the last year, down from the baseline of 45 percent in October 2013 and
         missing both the original target of 65 percent and the revised target of 50 percent.
        44.1 percent of registered adult patients in Dom Zdravlja (Health Centers) with hypertension under
         treatment had their last recorded blood pressure less than 140/90mmHg in the last year before project
         closure down from a baseline of 45 percent in January 2014 and missing both the original target of 65
         percent and the revised target of 75 percent.
        The ICR noted that the performance-based payer model implemented in PHCs improved non-
         communicable disease prevention and early diagnostics (ICR, para 44) however, the data provided
         (ICR, Table 5 p.18) suggests a positive trend prior to the new capitation formula and intermediate
         results indicators related to Hypertension and Diabetes control were not achieved.

Outcome

The project offered modest evidence of improvements in the quality of the public health system:

    1. A monitoring system is in place to measure, and set baseline and target values for "Percentage of
       patients starting radiotherapy treatment at public hospitals within 28 days between the date of
       issuance of treatment protocol and the first radiotherapy session for a) breast, b) cervical, c) prostate,
       and d) lung cancers." A discussion on the mismatch between indicator and target is in the M&E
       section 9. Marginal improvement in the proportion of patients starting radiotherapy timeously has been
       demonstrated (ICR, Table 6 p.21). The project team later noted that this marginal improvement should
       be seen in the context of significant downtime as new equipment was being installed and bunkers
       renovated, and radiotherapy that is now offered is based on modern clinical protocols and has a
       longer duration (ICR Review Preparation Interview, October 17, 2023).
    2. 28.9 percent of registered adult patients in Dom Zdravlja (Health Centers) had a recorded blood
       pressure value, Body Mass Index, smoking status and recommended tips for healthy behavior in the
       preceding 12 months in their medical records, falling short of the baseline 35 percent from 2013 and
       the revised target of 45 percent. The ICR rightly cautions that this indicator measures utilization rather
       than quality. The ICR further attributes the non-achievement of this outcome to a COVID-19 drop in
       utilization stating that in 2018-2019 the trends were on track (ICR, para 47), which was verified by
       assessing the trend data in the Implementation Status Results Report.
    3. 11.0 percent of registered insured persons age 50-69 received a targeted examination for early
       detection of breast cancer in the last two years; 17.6 percent of registered insured persons age 25-
       64 received a targeted examination for early detection of cervical cancer in the last two years and 13.8
       percent of registered insured persons aged 50-74 received a targeted examination for early detection
       of colorectal cancer in the last two years, falling short of the baseline for cervical cancer of 27
       percent from November 2017, and falling short of all three targets 25 percent, 35 percent and 35
       percent respectively. The ICR rightly cautions that this indicator measures utilization rather than



                                                                                                   Page 9 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Serbia Health Project (P129539)



                                    quality. As in the PDO indicator above, the ICR attributes the non-achievement of this outcome to a
                                    COVID-related drop in utilization.

                            The achievement of this objective was assessed as substantial despite several screening-related targets
                            regressing from the baselines due to COVID-19 related changes in healthcare utilization. Project outputs
                            contributed to increased access to screening prior to COVID-19 disruptions and it is plausible that the decline
                            of screening would have been worse in the absence of the project and that the project outputs will contribute
                            to increased access to screening services post the COVID-19 pandemic. The increased access to advanced
                            radiotherapy techniques and the strong links between the two objectives (efficiency and quality) further
                            support the substantial rating.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Objective 1 to contribute to improving efficiency of the public health system of the Republic of Serbia,
                            and almost fully achieved, and objective 2 to contribute to improving the quality of the public health system of
                            the Republic of Serbia was partly achieved. The aggregation of achievements is indicative of a Substantial
                            rating for overall efficacy, but with caveats.

                            Plausible contribution: The ICR did not assess attribution directly, however, it did note the severe fiscal
                            constraints in the country context which suggest that the Government would have struggled to self-fund
                            related health sector reforms. The PAD noted that the project disbursement was a small percentage of public
                            health expenditure (PAD, p.71). The ICR mentioned the presence of other development partners active in the
                            health sector. The project team later clarified that the Government used funds from other International
                            Financial Institutions to invest in health system infrastructure outside the area of the Project (ICR Review
                            Preparation Interview, October 17, 2023). Plausible contribution is justified by the fact that reported results
                            trends can be reasonably linked to project activities.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Cost-benefit analyses were undertaken both ex-ante (PAD, Annex 6) and ex-post (ICR, Annex 4). The analysis
   carried out at appraisal estimated the development impact of the following three subcomponents separately over
   the period 2014-2030; i) hospital financing reforms, ii) central procurement of drugs and medical supplies, iii)
   PHC financing reforms, establishment of HTA and a medical maintenance system, QIP including clinical practice

                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Serbia Health Project (P129539)



guidelines, pathways and improved Health Information Management System and improved cancer care. The
estimated Internal Rate of Return (IRR) was between 20-65 percent depending on inflation and effectiveness of
the interventions.

The analysis at appraisal considered the benefit of the hospital financing reforms to be a decrease in public
health expenditure growth, however, the COVID-19 pandemic increased hospital expenditure substantially,
complicating the evaluation of this benefit and others. As such, the ICR notes that it was not possible to
completely replicate the original economic analysis and that a few changes were made including adding the
following to the quantification of benefits: i) decrease average length of stay, ii) increase of same day hospital
services and iii) reduction of waiting times to start radiotherapy.

The cost-benefit analysis at closure estimated Total Benefits as a result of the project to US$422.3 million, with
a net present value of US$214.9 million and a resultant cost benefit ratio of 5.27. This Total Benefit took
conservative assumptions of a 1 percent efficiency improvement from 2023 for health financing, 5
percent savings per annum on centralized drug procurement and Disability Adjusted Life Years (DALYs) averted
valued at 1 times GDP per capita. Further analysis demonstrated that even when omitting the 5 percent savings
from centralized procurement, an IRR of 29-40 percent is achieved when considering the value of DALYs
averted alone or DALYs averted plus 1 percent efficiency improvement. Whilst the ICR did not clearly state the
assumptions on percent of total DALYs and percent of DALYs averted the PAD laid out these assumptions in
Annex 6. The project team later confirmed that the original estimates for the number of DALYs averted were
followed and that the counterfactual health spending for 2019-2022 was derived using a linear forecast applied
to the 2015-2019 data (ICR Review Preparation Interview, October 17, 2023).

Implementation efficiency:

The project faced a number of delays i) 14-month delay between approval and effectiveness due to issues in
meeting the conditions of effectiveness which resulted in an early restructuring of the project ii) unspecified
duration of delay in 2016 due to the absence of key project coordination unit staff who were filled by early 2017
and, iii) COVID-19 pandemic related delays.

In view of a favorable cost benefit ratio, but with shortcomings in the efficiency of implementation, overall
efficiency is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

                                                                                                       Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Serbia Health Project (P129539)




* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the objectives is rated high as health efficiency and quality are the Government's priorities and
aligned with World Bank strategy and previous work in the country. Overall efficacy is rated as
substantial despite an external shock in the form of COVID-19. The efficiency rating is substantial due to the
cost-effectiveness of project interventions, but with negative aspects of implementation that moderately reduced
efficiency. The overall outcome is rated satisfactory. The rating is indicative of minor shortcomings in the
project’s achievements of its objectives and in its efficiency.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR cautions that a COVID-19 related decrease in health utilization for non-communicable diseases and
its subsequent backlog pose a possible risk to the development outcome (ICR, para 102), however, to date
this has not been seen. The risk to development outcomes is low given Serbia's status as an upper-middle-
income country with growing political stability and EU candidate status. The Government's ownership of the
project, institutional strengthening and ongoing work of the World Bank in the health sector through The
Serbia Emergency COVID-19 Response Project (P173892) and the Serbian Non-Communicable
Disease Prevention and Control Project (P180619) further reduce the risk. The project team later added that
Borrower commitment is high and can be seen in the request for a new Bank funded project shortly after
closing this project (ICR Review Preparation Interview, October 17, 2023).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project’s objectives were informed by the strategic goals of the Government and built on lessons
  learned from the Bank’s long-term engagement in the sector, including the learnings of the first Serbia
  Health Project (ICR, para 67). During preparation the Bank sought agreement with MoH to establish
  policies, regulations and technical units and build consensus for reforms amongst key stakeholders in the
  Government. The preparation of the project championed local ownership and institutional capacity
  building by ensuring that the staff of the project coordination unit were local technical consultants that had
  worked on previous projects (ICR, para 70).

  The project design was politically and technically complex and ambitious with both system wide and
  disease specific activities. The ICR took one of the strengths of the design to be the alignment of broad
  institutional reforms and the provision of high-cost, state-of-the-art diagnostic and therapeutic medical

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Serbia Health Project (P129539)



  equipment. Whilst this approach has merits, it comes with a trade-off as the focus on a specialist, tertiary-
  level treatment modality does concentrate capacity building in these centers. Lastly, the project design
  failed to adequately plan for measuring its objective of health system quality, opting for utilization
  measures instead as discussed in M&E section 9.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank allocated sufficient budget and human resources to the project as is evidenced by aide-
 memoires that demonstrate Bank supervision which took place on a regular basis and provided appropriate
 and well-targeted observations and recommendations. The Bank team was diligent in its communication
 with Government, providing analysis on the status and impact of Project activities and suggesting possible
 solutions to address issues that arose in light of evolving needs. The Bank team coordinated well with
 development partners active in the health sector and all government agencies to ensure optimization of
 resources and promote strong coordination.

 COVID-19 negatively affected the project and further tested quality at supervision. Project activities were
 interrupted due to logistical delays, limited training and onsite support, increased healthcare expenditure
 and unusual patterns of health utilization. The team shifted to online formats, added a hand hygiene
 campaign, and demonstrated flexibility and good coordination with the Serbia Emergency COVID-19
 Response project.

 Implementation status reports were timely and largely candid, although the flaw of inadequate quality
 measures was not addressed during implementation. The PCU team were responsible for fiduciary issues
 such as procurement and financial management. The project team later emphasized that the project had
 no fiduciary issues and that the experienced PCU team were extremely capable. The overall social and
 environmental safeguards rating during project implementation was satisfactory. The ICR confirmed that,
 as per the Bank Environmental Specialist, the Environmental Management Plan-related measures were
 monitored effectively and adequately. There were no complaints from stakeholders or the public at large
 (ICR, para 88). The interviews with stakeholders by the ICR mission and the annex to the ICR by the
 Government acknowledge the technical skill and advice provided by Bank experts. Transition
 arrangements were well taken care of ahead of project closure and withdrawal conditions related to
 procurement of diagnostic equipment further supported this (ICR, para 77).

 Despite a shortcoming in inadequately addressing quality measures, when taken into consideration of the
 much larger context of all other supervision criteria that were satisfactorily met, Bank Quality of Supervision
 is rated satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Serbia Health Project (P129539)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 M&E under the Project was integrated into the regular monitoring functions of MoH, National Health
 Insurance Fund, and Institute of Public Health and was designed to strengthen and improve unreliable or
 missing monitoring systems. The PAD defined PDO indicators and intermediate results indicators and
 established a results framework that was largely specific, well defined, measurable, achievable, relevant,
 and timebound. There were, however, some minor design shortcomings, including:

       The results framework inadequately measured the PDO of quality by focusing on process measures
           that tracked utilization of preventative services (which were significantly disrupted by COVID-19)
       One of the PDO indicators has a mismatch between a quantitative indicator "Percentage of patients
        starting radiotherapy treatment at public hospitals within 28 days between the date of issuance of
        treatment protocol and the first radiotherapy session for a) breast, b) cervical, c) prostate, and d)
        lung cancers." and qualitative target "a monitoring system is in place to measure, and set baseline
        and target values".
       Despite the project being framed as “gender-sensitive” in the PAD (para 19) no gender-related PDO
        indicators or intermediate results indicators were specified, nor were gender related activities
        included in the theory of change prepared for the ICR (ICR, Figure 1). Given that health seeking
        behavior and health utilization are known to have gender slants, sex-disaggregated indicators may
        have been useful for a number of PDO indicators and intermediate results indicators. This
        disaggregated data may have been relevant to the neglected equity dimension of quality.



b. M&E Implementation
  The MoH regularly collected data to track progress towards achieving the PDO indicators
  and intermediate results indicators. A monitoring system was established to collect data for one of the
  PDO indicators on radiotherapy timeliness as this data had previously not been collected.

  The Mid-term Report suggested that some PDO indicators and intermediate results indicators required
  adjustment in (a) their formulation; (b) their target values to reflect progress, challenges and proposed
  extension, and (c) to include scale-up activities pertaining to the AF. These revisions were made.

  The last two PDO indicators for quality focused on preventative aspects. And, if achieved could have
  offered high returns. Sufficient evidence has been offered to suggest that barring the pandemic these
  indicators would have been achieved.


       



                                                                                                     Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Serbia Health Project (P129539)




c. M&E Utilization
  M&E was not only used as a management tool to evaluate the progress and status of
  implementation, but also to inform policy makers priorities and monitor the impact of policy reform in the
  health system. The M&E capacity of MoH, National Health Insurance Fund, Institute of Public Health
  was significantly strengthened through project activities, including Quality Improvement Grants for PHC,
  DRG and performance-based payment models for hospitals and PHCs and, the Quality Benchmark
  Information System for health institutions. M&E findings also helped in informing a follow-on project.
  There were several shortcomings of moderate significance, but the M&E system as designed and
  implemented was generally sufficient to assess the achievement of objectives.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The overall safeguards rating during project implementation was satisfactory. The Project was assigned an
   Environmental Assessment category “B” due to activities related to the installation of radiation equipment for
   cancer treatment at several hospitals throughout Serbia. An Environmental Management Framework
   document was prepared for the Project in line with the national regulations and the Bank's safeguards
   policies to guide MoH in developing environmental and social instruments. The Environmental Management
   Framework specified the need for site-specific Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Plans for the civil
   work activities undertaken at health facilities such as - noise, dust, vibrations, and management of
   construction waste, health and safety of workforce, and other impacts resulting from decommissioning of
   the old medical equipment.

   The Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Plan's implementation was monitored by the supervising
   engineers at sites and who reported to the project coordination unit and the Bank on a monthly
   basis. Progress of Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Plan implementation was additionally monitored
   by project coordination unit Engineer and Environmental Specialist who visited health facilities where new
   linear accelerators had been delivered. The ICR confirmed that as per the Bank Environmental Specialist
   the Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring Plan-related measures were monitored effectively and
   adequately, and there were no complaints from stakeholders, or the public at large (ICR, para 88).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Despite moderate to substantial fiduciary risks noted in the Implementation Status Results Reports, the
   ICR did not raise any issues of fiduciary compliance. The PCU team were responsible for fiduciary aspects
   such as procurement and financial management. Experienced fiduciary staff from a previous World Bank-


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Serbia Health Project (P129539)



   supported project had to be retained in the project coordination unit. The project team emphasized that the
   project had no fiduciary issues and that the project co-ordination unit was very capable and familiar with
   Bank processes. The project team suggested that the fiduciary risk rating was increased to substantial in
   the latter Implementation Status Results Reports because of 1) the broader country socio-economic-
   political context, 2) procurement related experiences of the Bank in projects in the country in other sectors,
   3) a number of procurement contracts for linear accelerators needing to be fulfilled (by project closure all
   were fulfilled) (ICR Review Preparation Interview, October 17, 2023).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR did not report any unintended impacts.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                            ICR                 IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                            Satisfactory       Satisfactory

Bank Performance                   Satisfactory       Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                     Substantial        Substantial

Quality of ICR                     ---                Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons selected are the most relevant of the eight lessons presented in the ICR:

      Continuous involvement of the Bank in a specific sector can build trust amongst actors in that
       sector. This project built on long-term World Bank engagement in the transformation of the
       health care system in Serbia.
      Engagement of all stakeholders in the preparation, implementation and evaluation of
       a project can ensure synergistic effects, ensure active participation and institutionalize
       responsibility. In this project, smooth adoption of the Health Care Network Optimization Plan
       was facilitated by the process of its development which included both public discussions and
       a broad consultative process.

IEG offers an additional lesson:


                                                                                                    Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Serbia Health Project (P129539)



       Health system quality indicators that focus on outputs such as utilization provide insufficient
        evidence to determine improved quality. In this project, despite notable achievements in
        outputs such as new clinical pathways and financed quality improvement projects, there was
        insufficient evidence to demonstrate the translation of these outputs into improved quality.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  The evaluation of efficacy of this project has been affected by the external shock of COVID-19. The three
  quality related PDO indicators are valued highly as they are preventative health focused and if achieved could
  offer high returns on the project in the long term. These indicators should be reviewed in the medium-term to
  assess if the project had a sustained impact in non-communicable disease management.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was generally concise, consistent with guidelines and had a results-orientation. The ICR candidly
acknowledged the inadequacy of quality measures in the M&E design, offered alternative evidence for
efficiency gains through reduced average length of stay and increase in same day hospital services.
Further, the lessons offered in the ICR were based on the evidence and analysis presented in the report. While
the lessons drew from specific experiences of the project, they also provided relevant guidance to the design
and implementation of other health system reforms.

The ICR did not assess attribution of the objectives to the project directly. There were some occasional lapses
in clarity and completeness, and the ICR was moderately lengthy.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 17 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Serbia Health Project (P129539)




                                                                  Page 18 of 18
