     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Social Safety Nets Project (P151488)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023725

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P151488                                      National Social Safety Nets Project

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Nigeria                                      Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-58310                                   30-Jun-2022                                        492,324,330.61

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 07-Jun-2016                                 31-Dec-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            500,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             500,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                         492,324,330.61                                              0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Aliza M. Belman Inbal        Denise A. Vaillancourt       Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                           Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project’s objectives, as per the Financing Agreement (p.4), are to “provide access to targeted transfers to
   poor and vulnerable households under an expanded national social safety nets system.” This ICRR
   recognizes within the PDO statement two distinct objectives: (1) To expand the national social safety nets
   system; and (2) To provide access to targeted transfers to poor and vulnerable households. This corresponds
   with the ICR’s parsing of the PDO to contain two objectives: (a) the expansion of the national safety net
   system and (b) the expansion in access to targeted cash transfers (p.14).


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Social Safety Nets Project (P151488)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Original estimates drawn from PAD (p.15); revised estimates drawn from ICR (p.55):

   1. Establishing a National Social Safety Nets System (Initial estimate: $180 million to which IDA was
   to contribute US$100 million equivalent; Actual cost: $160 million to which IDA contributed US$101
   million). This component aimed to strengthen and consolidate the building blocks of a safety net at the
   national and state level to deliver targeted support to poor households across Nigeria. The goal was to
   establish a system to be used by the federal and states governments, irrespective of the source of funding
   of interventions. The component had two sub-components:

   a. Project Management and Institutional Capacity: This subcomponent supported (i) the establishment and
   functioning of the National Social Safety Nets Coordinating Office (NASSCO), National Cash Transfers
   Office (NCTO), and the National Social Registry (NSR), as well as coordination and management structures
   in participating states and Local Government Areas (LGAs), the State Operations Coordinating Units
   (SOCUs) and the State Cash Transfer Units (SCTUs); (ii) capacity building, communications, citizen
   engagement and grievance redress/complaints-handling activities; (iii) the preparation of a National Living
   Standards Survey (NLSS), a household survey representative at the national and state levels; and (iv)
   technical assistance for identifying accompanying measures to support sustainable livelihoods and
   graduation out of poverty for a subset of targeted cash transfer (TCT) recipients, including piloting
   livelihoods interventions in a small number of states with functional Social Registries.

   b. Developing the Building Blocks of the Safety Net System: This subcomponent was to finance: (i) a robust
   targeting mechanism and a national registry of the poor and vulnerable households; and (ii) a payment
   system; M&E tools and an MIS.

   2. Implementing a Targeted Cash Transfer (Initial estimate: $1,653 million to which IDA was to
   contribute: US$400 million equivalent. Actual cost: $661 million to which IDA contributed US$390
   million). This component was to finance safety net transfers to targeted poor and vulnerable households
   identified from the NSR. The target was to cover one million households (ten percent of Nigeria’s poor),
   over a five-year period, in 24 states. Each household was to receive a base transfer of Nigerian Naira NGN
   5000 (US$25 equivalent at the time) per month, paid every two months. Targeted households fulfilling the
   eligibility criteria could receive an additional NGN 5000 per month after compliance with co-responsibilities
   on health, education, or nutrition (known as top-up cash transfers).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Costs: The total project cost estimated at appraisal was $1,833 million. The total actual cost at the
   project’s end was estimated at 827.90 million, or 45 percent of the original estimate. This was net of

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Social Safety Nets Project (P151488)



   Government’s in-kind contributions (staff, systems, etc), which were planned but not detailed at the time of
   appraisal or at project closing, but includes the Government’s cash contribution.

   Project Financing. The project was financed by an IDA credit of SDR 355 million, which was fully
   disbursed. Its US$ equivalent was valued at $500 million at appraisal and $491 million at closing. At
   approval, IDA financing was supposed to be supplemented by the Government of Nigeria (GoN) in the
   amount of $1,333 million, including both cash and in kind contributions. But these were not broken down or
   itemized. By project closing, GoN had contributed an estimated $335.5 million in cash through its allocation
   of the Abacha Restitution Fund (including $13 million in interest). The actual value of in-kind support from
   the GoN was not calculated at project close.

   Key Dates: The project was approved on June 7, 2016, became effective on October 3, 2017, and closed
   on 31 December 2022. The original closing date of June 30, 2022, was extended twice for a total of six
   months to ensure achievement of the PDO (ICR p.12). In total, the project underwent three restructurings:

       a. First restructuring (April 27, 2020) specified the amount of GoN’s cash support to be allocated to
          cash transfers (a total of US$322.5 million from the Abacha Restitution Fund and US$13.4 million
          accrued in interest), from the total commitment of both cash and in-kind support. In addition:
                i. The restructuring included changes to institutional counterparts in the GoN, corresponding
                   with institutional changes in the relevant government ministries. The project was moved from
                   the Office of the Vice President to the newly established Federal Ministry of Humanitarian
                   Affairs, Disaster Management and Social Development (FMHDSD), which was to administer
                   national social safety net programs.
               ii. A total of US$50.5 million equivalent in IDA funds was re-allocated from TCTs to operational
                   costs for registration and enrollment of more beneficiaries, the cost of payment to service
                   providers and other delivery mechanisms in the context of the expanding coverage of the
                   program across the country.
              iii. Approximately US$5-10 million dollars (ICR p.11) was reallocated to fund the design and
                   piloting of interventions to explore options of using the National Social Safety Net Project
                   (NASSP) platform to provide additional support to people with disabilities. The money was to
                   cover design and piloting of interventions to explore options for using the NASSP platform to
                   provide additional support to people with disability within the poor and vulnerable households
                   targeted by the program. The First Restructuring Paper (p.7) outlined several possible
                   measures for pilot, including i) review targeting mechanism including ii) additional disability
                   grant through cash transfer program, iii) exception from labor work in public work programs
                   activities and receiving direct support (if applicable), iv) special appropriate skill training for
                   self-employment and wage employment opportunities etc.
       b. Second restructuring (June 21, 2022) provided for extension of the project’s original closing date of
          June 30, 2022 to October 31, 2022 in order to allow completion of activities.
       c. Third restructuring (October 14, 2022) postponed the revised project closing date by another two
          months to December 31, 2022 in order to allow completion of activities.




3. Relevance of Objectives




                                                                                                        Page 3 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      National Social Safety Nets Project (P151488)



               Rationale
               The project had a high degree of buy-in from the Nigerian government. At appraisal, the PDO was
               aligned with GoN development priorities as reflected in the Nigeria’s Vision 2020 Economic Transformation
               Plan. The PDO was also aligned with the country development goal of “implementing nationally appropriate
               social protection systems and measures for all, and by 2030, achieve substantial coverage for the poor and
               vulnerable”. Relevance of the project to GoN goals is also evidenced by the growing government social
               protection budgets in the years preceding the project launch and the considerable borrower contribution to
               project financing, although actual contribution was considerably less than planned.

               The project addressed key issues for the successful implementation of Nigeria’s new National
               Social Protection Policy. At appraisal, coverage of safety net programs targeted to poor and vulnerable
               households was limited and addressed only a small fraction of national needs. Only a small number of both
               conditional cash transfers (CCTs) and unconditional cash transfers (UCTs) were being implemented in
               Nigeria. The Nigeria National Social Protection Policy (which was being finalized at the time of appraisal)
               was intended to change this, by dedicating national resources to improve the lives of its citizens and
               strengthen the role of social protection in broader distribution of resources. To do so, introduction of several
               measures was needed (a) provision of basic services to poor and vulnerable households; (b) effective
               targeting, transfers, and tracking systems for support to poor and vulnerable households and individuals;
               and (c) development of appropriate policies, guidelines, and practices for addressing inequality and
               vulnerability in Nigeria (PAD p.5).

               The PDO was aligned with the main objectives of both the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS FY 14-
               19) and the subsequent Country Program Framework (CPF 2021-2026) for Nigeria. Specifically, the
               PDO aligned with the CPF’s core objective of increasing the coverage and effectiveness of social
               assistance programs, under the Investing in Human Capital pillar. It similarly aligned with the earlierCPS’s
               focus on improved service delivery for greater social inclusion and addressing inequities in income and
               opportunities The CPF outlined the following needs for a well-financed and fiscally sustainable social
               protection system: better channeling of oil and non-oil revenues; strengthening coordination and alignment
               across the federal, state, and local levels; building state-level capacity for program delivery at scale; and
               developing a common delivery platform for programs implemented by different ministries and agencies and
               at different levels of government. All of these needs were addressed, or partially addressed through
               NASSP. Furthermore, the CPF’s mandated COVID-related social assistance programs were planned to
               utilize the social assistance registry developed under NASSP (CPF p.33).




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                     Page 4 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Social Safety Nets Project (P151488)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To expand the national social safety net system.

Rationale
As laid out in the project’s Theory of Change (ICR p. 8), in order to achieve Objective 1 – the expansion of the
national social safety net system – the project supported activities aimed at producing/achieving a number of
outputs and intermediate outcomes, all building blocks for establishing a national platform for the delivery of
social assistance to poor and vulnerable populations. These included:, (a) a targeting mechanism for
reaching those most in need; (b) a National Social Registry (NSR) that includes households eligible for the
national cash transfer program and State-Level Social Registries; (c) a Management Information System
(MIS) for tracking social safety net system performance; (d) a payment system for cash transfers; (e) Citizens
Engagement and Gender and Social Inclusion Mechanisms, including (i) Third Party Monitoring (TPM) to
capture beneficiary feedback; (ii) a GRM system for beneficiaries to provide feedback and report complaints;
(iii) gender mainstreaming activities to support alignment with Nigeria’s gender policy and ensure access to
the targeted cash transfers (TCT) by women (ICR p.7). A further intermediate outcome included in the
project’s Theory of Change was strengthened capacities at national and state levels to utilize these systems
and mechanisms effectively. All of these outputs and intermediate outcomes, when combined, were
expected to culminate in a strengthened and consolidated social safety net platform, functional at both the
national and state levels, which would be used for delivering targeted support to poor households across
Nigeria, irrespective of the source of funding of interventions. (ICR p.9).

Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes:

      Targeting mechanisms were developed and refined for reaching those most in need but not fully
         implemented at the sub-national level. The goal of 350 local government authorities completing the
         targeting process, was partially achieved with only 200 completing the process, due to budget
         shortages and slow implementation pace.
        37 states (36 states and the federal capital territory) signed MOUs with federal level and developed a
         social registry, exceeding the target of 24.
        The goal of 20 percent of individuals registered in the NSR with a valid national ID number was not
         achieved (0.1 percent), due to the slow expansion of the National ID program. As a result, the project
         used other means to verify the identity of beneficiaries collecting cash transfers, including through use
         of electronic transfers wherever possible. According to the Borrower’s Comments on the ICR (ICR p.
         62), the target was overestimated at the outset of the project. Amongst the factors cited mitigating the
         chances of success in achieving this target was the fact that the indicator was not funded under the
         project but the project relied on another government agency to automatically update the relevant
         information.
        A functioning MIS and a payment system through e-transfers was developed, with quarterly reports
         being generated through the MIS, as per target. However, the goal of 18 states compiling quarterly
         reports was not achieved, as all reports were generated at the federal level.
        Citizens engagement and gender and social inclusion mechanisms were developed as per the project
         plan. Amongst the results framework targets achieved: An Annual Results and Resources Scorecard
         was implemented and made public, as per target. 90.95 percent of surveyed beneficiaries and non-
         beneficiaries reported that they are aware of the project objectives and entitlements, surpassing the
         target of 75%.


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Social Safety Nets Project (P151488)




      88% of complaints were satisfactorily addressed within three months of the initial complaint being
       recorded, substantially achieving the target of 90% (98 percent achievement)
      The goal of 12 states developing livelihood strategies was not achieved within the timeframe of the
       project, although 6 states piloted livelihood activities . An impact assessment was conducted of the
       pilots with clear scalable options identified. As part of these pilots, the Project encouraged
       beneficiaries to participate in savings groups in order to optimize income activities. In total 35,544
       savings groups were established with a saved cash value of 609,895,086 Naira and income
       generating activity amounting to 377,183,632 Naira (ICR p.60).

Outcomes:

      The number of households included in the NSR greatly exceeded the original target of 4,000 to
       include 15,673,296.
      11 non-project related social protection or social sector programs utilized the NSR, surpassing the
       target of 5.
      The number of states benefitting from targeted cash transfers was 37, surpassing the original target
       of 24.
      89.1 percent of beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries reported that the targeting process was fair,
       including 89.85% of men and 88.1 percent of women, slightly short of the project goal of 90%.

Overall, the project contributed to significant building of systems. With the support of the project, the
GoN established an NSR, a targeting system which improved over time, a payment system for the national
cash transfer program, a functioning MIS, and a social accountability system to capture beneficiary feedback.
NASSP provided targeted cash transfers to poor and vulnerable households in all states in Nigeria and a
system for the provision of cash transfers to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 on vulnerable households in
urban areas. In addition to the accomplishments listed above, a community ranking system was developed to
help cash based transfer (CBT) teams work in a way that built on the community engagement and improved
accountability. Introduction of quality benchmarks and a supportive monitoring checklist strengthened
regular supervision and fostered adherence to CBT and enrollment procedures. Monitoring reporting
templates were developed to monitor core program activities like trainings, beneficiary enrolment and cash
transfer payments. In correspondence with IEG, the project TTL noted these key systems-building
accomplishments:

      The project informed the government policy/strategy setting towards establishing a social
       protection system and prioritization of the sector.
      The project played a big role in setting up appropriate and efficient delivery systems for social
       protection programs including a digitized and technology aided targeting mechanism, a fully digitized
       payment system and the required institutional set up at all levels.
      The project played an important and pioneer role in supporting the government to develop a shock
       responsive social protection system which was used during COVID-19, during economic shocks
       related to food inflation, and to mitigate the impact of fuel subsidy reform by government.
      The project built a system for transparency and social accountability (such as involving independent
       CSO in the monitoring of the program).




                                                                                                   Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Social Safety Nets Project (P151488)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To provide access to targeted transfers for poor and vulnerable households.

Rationale
The development of mechanisms for an expanded social safety net system under Objective 1 made possible
the targeting and transfer of cash to beneficiaries, which was funded through a combination of IDA and GoN
financing.

Outputs/intermediate outcomes:

      100% of households receiving cash transfers, received their payments electronically, surpassing the
       85% target.
      90% of payments were delivered to beneficiaries within one month of the due date, meeting targets.
      Only 6% of households received top-up transfers, against a target of 80%. According to the ICR, this
       was due to a decision to focus on base targeted cash transfers because of implementation challenges
       and reduced resources from the GoN (ICR p.47).

Outcomes:

      The project had 9,666,420 direct beneficiaries of targeted transfers to poor and vulnerable
       households, greatly exceeding the target of 5,000,000. The target of 50% female beneficiaries was
       met at 51%.
      94% of transfer recipients within beneficiary households were female, exceeding the target of 85%,
       thereby increasing their access to income and decision-making power. Gender activities were not
       mainstreamed from the beginning, but they were developed during implementation. Women were
       purposely included in community decision-making structures, and the beneficiary card recognizes the
       caregiver and alternate, including both male and female household heads to encourage joint decision-
       making on household use of transfers. Women’s capacity was built through training offered as part of
       the saving groups and other accompanying measures under the cash transfer program (ICR p.21).
      The target of 80% of beneficiaries in the bottom two quintiles was not achieved, with only 53% of
       beneficiaries in this category. This is explained in the ICR (p.16) as partly attributable to a decision
       made jointly by the Bank and GoN in 2018 to increase the cut-off point of eligible beneficiaries to the
       6th decile (i.e. the bottom three quintiles) to better serve the needs of the population. Despite this, the
       relevant target was not formally revised to reflect this policy change. In addition, the ICR (p.83)
       documents difficulties with adequately pro-poor targeting in the early years of the project, leading to
       several refinements in targeting methodologies as the project progressed.

Overachievement of targets for project beneficiaries was offset by lower transfer amounts (ICR p19).
Households were intended to receive a base transfer of 5,000 Naira per month (paid bi-monthly) for three
years before being recertified. However, delays in the early phases of the project meant that more than three-
quarters of households joined too late to receive three years of support. This has been addressed through a
continuation of support to these households in the follow-on NASSP Scale Up project. Furthermore, all

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                National Social Safety Nets Project (P151488)



                            eligible households were intended to receive a top up cash transfer element, doubling their benefit level,
                            conditional on compliance with co-responsibilities. However, this sub-component was eventually only
                            implemented at pilot scale, benefiting 188,808 households in 11 States due to: (i) supply side constraints in
                            education and health services; (ii) shortfalls in monitoring capacity; and (iii) an identified trade-off between
                            expanding coverage and increasing the level of benefits received by each household. As a result, according
                            to the ICR, the decision was made to focus on scaling up base transfers and gathering lessons about co-
                            responsibilities for future interventions.

                            The ICR reports preliminary results from the impact evaluation done indicating positive impacts of
                            cash transfer on household savings, food security, access to farmland and livestock ownership, as well as
                            on women recipients’ happiness, freedom of movement and autonomy over how to spend their own
                            income. The final Impact Evaluation Report was not available at the time that the ICRR was
                            drafted. Notably, in 94% of all households women were the direct recipient of cash transfer on behalf of the
                            family, thereby improving women's access to income and decision making power.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            By project completion, Nigeria had succeeded in: establishing an expanded and functional national social
                            safety net system at national and state levels (Objective 1); and providing access to targeted transfers to
                            almost 1 million poor and vulnerable households across the country (Objective 2).



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis at appraisal found that there would be significant economic benefits from NASSP’s
   investment in systems development (PAD p.81). These investments were projected to have substantial
   short-term costs, but significant efficiency and cost savings in the medium term. The NSR was projected to help
   ensure efficiency in the delivery of social services, minimize leakages or misuse of funds, and facilitate the
   coordination of social programs. A coordinated payment system using electronic modes of payments was found
   to have significant benefits, including an electronic trail for cash transfers, allowing safety, efficiency, and
   transparency of cash transactions; cheaper and less cumbersome administrative costs; reduced costs incurred
   by beneficiaries in accessing cash grants; and financial inclusion dividends for safety nets beneficiaries.



                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      National Social Safety Nets Project (P151488)



Appraisal included an assessment of likely human capital benefits of cash transfers based on a meta-
analysis of international experience (PAD p.81). This analysis showed a strong impact of cash transfers on
human capital outcomes, including health and education outcomes. As well,the analysis found that the
distribution of cash transfers was likely to positively impact beneficiary households and their communities by
smoothing household consumption, protecting household assets, and avoiding negative coping behaviors

The PAD presented different elements in the economic and financial analysis to propose the most cost-
effective approach to reach the PDO in a sustainable manner (p.84). This included: i) a comparative
analysis of unit cost and cost-efficiency ratios for selected social transfer programs in Africa and Latin America
and ii) a simulation of levels of the transfer benefit and their impacts on poverty. The analysis enabled the
project team to estimate what level of financial transfers were most cost-effective for reducing poverty
levels. The analysis concluded that in the best case scenario—where all poor households received NGN 10,000
per month per household and used 100 percent of the transfers to improve consumption—yielded a 12 percent
reduction in poverty headcount. Yet, in this scenario, 21 percent of the population would still be below the
poverty line indicating that the poorest population might need higher transfers to move out of poverty.

The project largely surpassed targets, despite reduced financing (ICR, p.20). The project greatly
surpassed targets for number of states covered, number of direct beneficiaries and number of households in the
NSR. In addition, a new Rapid Response Register (RRR) was developed during COVID-19 pandemic, and it
has captured 2.7 million households, using the same level of resources as originally planned. Coverage of the
registries four times higher than envisaged at design was achieved with a Component 1 budget 40 percent lower
than planned, due to a reduction in the planned GoN contribution from US$1.3 billion to US$335.9
million. Overachievements in coverage of cash transfers came at the expense of a lower average benefit level
per household, as explained in section 4.

The project’s investments in institutional strengthening of implementing agencies and in systems
development multiplied the benefits of project resources (ICR p.20). Institutional strengthening contributed
to better coordination, dialogue among the implementation units and improved project implementation. All
systems (targeting, enrollment and payments) were upgraded from rudimentary paper-based systems to
advanced technology-based identification and delivery systems, which resulted in more efficient access of poor
households to targeted cash transfers. Benefits of this included improved transparency, ensuring correct
destination of funds and time saving for beneficiaries.

Project successes convinced the GoN to shift from insistence on conditional cash transfers to the more
efficient unconditional cash transfers. In an interview with IEG, project staff explained that effective project
interventions, including intensive awareness raising, training and follow-up work helped ensure that the
beneficiaries fully understood the objectives of the program so that, in addition to meeting consumption needs,
they utilized the unconditional cash transfer they received to invest in livelihood activities (through saving and
income generating activities) and in human capacity development for their children including improved access to
education, health and nutrition services. These claims are backed up by preliminary results of a a June 2023
study on the effects of cash transfers on welfare and women economic empowerment, using data collected in
August and November 2019 from a sample of 8,000 recipient households (ICR p.57). In consequence, the GoN
observed the substantial benefits that households received from cash transfers even in the absence of
conditionalities, and became convinced of the utility of unconditional transfers, enabling a speed of scale up that
would not have been possible had the GoN remained wedded to the idea of hard conditionalities.

Flexibility while designing the project allowed for a relatively swift preparation period (ICR p.23). Project
design took account of the fact that this was the first national social protection project. The project was designed


                                                                                                       Page 9 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       National Social Safety Nets Project (P151488)



to accommodate a range of different activities and pilots so that implementation details could be worked out as
the project progressed, particularly in relation to the livelihood component and gender and communication
activities. The NASSP incorporated the lessons of the earlier Youth Employment and Social Support Operation
project and other operations into its design, but not all activities had been tested (such as the payment
system). This flexibility contributed to avoiding restructurings.

There were also aspects of implementation that undermined the project’s efficiency (ICR p.21). These
were: (i) frequent staff turnover in fiduciary areas that slowed implementation as incoming staff had to get up to
speed with the project; (ii) financial management capacity gaps that required continued technical support from
Bank staff and delayed disbursement of funds and affected payments; (iii) procurement issues that caused
delays in implementation, creating inefficiencies; and (d institutional transitions and frictions, including the shift of
the program from one government agency to another midway through the project that undermined efficiency.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?               Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                          0
 Appraisal                                                     0
                                                                                           Not Applicable
                                                                                          0
 ICR Estimate                                                  0
                                                                                           Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Project outcome is satisfactory, with strong performance contributing to achievement of the PDO. Relevance of
the project to both the GoN’s goals and to the Country Program Strategy is assessed as high. Project
objectives were substantially achieved, with all PDO-level targets surpassed, except the percentage of
beneficiaries in the bottom two poverty quintiles (53% against a target of 80%) due to a policy change extending
benefits to persons in the bottom three poverty quintiles . Overall, however, the project effectively achieved the
goal of putting the institutional building blocks in place for a national social safety net system as well as
surpassing targets on coverage of beneficiaries, albeit at a lower transfer amount than originally
planned. Efficiency was substantial, with implementation based on a rigorous cost-benefit analysis and meta-
analysis of comparable programs done at appraisal, and with most project targets surpassed despite a 40%
reduction in the Component 1 budget due to lower than planned GoN financing. Drawing on international
studies and project implementation experience, funds were allocated to high impact interventions.


a. Outcome Rating


                                                                                                          Page 10 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Social Safety Nets Project (P151488)



   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR’s assessment of risk to development outcome included the following factors (p.32):

      A National Social Protection Policy was prepared in 2022, showing the government’s strong
         commitment to providing social safety nets to its citizens. Social Protection policy initiatives have
         been discussed or are on track to be adopted in the states.
        There is now an institutional framework in place to implement the different programs that encompass
         the social protection system.
        Substantial capacities have been built at federal, state and local levels: human resources trained,
         staff hired, institutions equipped, and systems developed and in use. Capacity has been built in the
         institutions coordinating SP programs and delivering CTs, both at national and state levels.
        The building blocks of a social safety net system were established, at national and state level. These
         building blocks have continued to be used following project completion. As of the drafting of the ICR,
         the NSR was used by 11 agencies and programs.
        NASSP was completed and most of its processes were carried out by functional systems and
         computerized: MIS, NSR, RRR. All CT payments were made electronically to beneficiaries’ bank
         accounts.
        A follow up operation, supported by IDA had been approved and became effective, shortly after this
         project’s completion. The new program (NASSP-SU) further advances the delivery approaches and
         systems developed under NASSP and creates a platform for targeting and delivery of different social
         services and policy reform initiatives.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project benefitted from a well thought out design that took into account considerable risk
  factors (PAD p.18). At appraisal, the overall risk rating of the project was substantial due to lack of GoN
  experience with administering social safety net programs, as well as several other identified
  risks. Mitigation measures included investments in capacity development and a thoughtful approach to
  targeting to prevent elite capture. In addition, intensive efforts were made by the Bank project team to
  mitigate the fiduciary risks of implementing cash transfers on such a large scale. Alongside the use of
  direct cash transfers, the project introduced several additional mechanisms including quarterly interim
  audits of the cash transfer payments, annual performance audits of key processes using output-based
  disbursement, and a targeting assessment undertaken every six months.

  Project design was built on the implementation experience of related programs in Nigeria as well
  as extensive analytical and technical work conducted during the design. (PAD p. 23). This includes
  the earlier Bank-financed Youth Employment and Social Support Operation project, government efforts to
  implement CCT interventions, United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and U.K. Department for

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Social Safety Nets Project (P151488)



  International Development (DFID) support to a CCT intervention in three northern states, and state-level
  interventions. Lessons learned from these interventions informed discussions and decisions on
  implementing arrangements, transfer sizes, payment modalities and co-responsibilities (ICR p.29). In
  addition, significant analytical work informed the design, including a review of existing social assistance
  programs, institutional assessments, economic and financial analysis, gender and social analysis,
  systems assessments for payments, and M&E, as well as lessons learned from South-South knowledge
  exchange. In addition, the PAD included a gender assessment and action plan and citizen engagement
  analysis, carrying out the analysis that was feasible at that time, while completing the project’s
  preparation, moving towards implementation.

  The project preparation process was participatory at the country and state level (ICR p.29) The
  Bank carried out consultations during preparation to secure states’ buy-in and commitment to project
  goals These consultations resulted in a clear definition of roles and responsibilities between levels of
  government. In addition, the project took into consideration power relationships between the levels of
  government. The incentives for states to opt into the program were carefully thought through at design
  stage to reach an appropriate balance between the requirement for states to demonstrate buy in, and the
  need to avoid entry barriers that would exclude states with lower capacities or resources. States needed
  to demonstrate commitment by signing an MoU and establishing institutional structures before cash
  transfers were financed in their state; at the same time the project recognized the limited financial
  resources of states and so cash transfers were fully financed at the federal level. Additionally, the
  decision was made to not design a uniform national safety program, but rather to allow LGAs a measure
  of flexibility in design to foster ownership, greater sustainability, and institutionalization. This approach
  was successful, as demonstrated by the fact that all states opted into the project.

  The project’s design introduced a level of flexibility and adaptive learning that allowed to adjust
  the project’s activities during implementation (ICR p. 30). As this was the first social safety net
  project of its kind in Nigeria, the project allocated considerable financing to monitoring and learning to
  allow the project to adapt to changing circumstances and evolve throughout implementation. Project
  design included incorporation of feedback mechanisms such as third party monitoring and support for
  development of robust grievance reporting mechanisms. Furthermore, as detailed in Section 9a, the
  project paid special attention to capacity development for monitoring and evaluation and included a
  robust M&E framework.

  The Bank and the GoN did not define the details of the counterpart contribution at appraisal, (ICR
  p. 30). leaving the details for discussion and monitoring during supervision. The fact that the expected
  contribution was not broken down into cash and in-kind components made it difficult to plan the scope
  and scale of cash transfers.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    National Social Safety Nets Project (P151488)



The Bank maintained a high level of coordination with and support for the GoN throughout project
cycle (ICR, p.30). The Bank carried out supervision missions during the period spanning approval, signing
and effectiveness (a period of 16 months) in support of the GoN for project readiness. During that time, the
World Bank actively supported the GoN in key activities to get ready for disbursement of project funds. The
Bank provided extensive support to the GoN to implement the Project. Immediately after approval,
preparatory work to allow implementation after effectiveness was supported by the Bank. The Bank
provided training on social and fiduciary matters and supported the development of manuals to guide
project implementation. After effectiveness, the Bank carried out regular supervision missions, in person
and virtually, during implementation. There were three Task Team Leaders (TTLs) responsible for the
Project’s implementation. According to the ICR, transition between TTLs was smooth and well-coordinated.
There was effective dialogue and collaboration with the national team throughout implementation. The
Bank engaged in dialogue with the GoN and other partners regularly to overcome challenges and
constraints that arose during implementation.

The Bank worked closely with the GoN to overcome key challenges (ICR p.31). The Bank supported
the government in its efforts to address “institutional hiccups” between NASSCO and NCTO, and to
manage the transition of the program from the Office of the Vice President to the newly
established Federal Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs, Disaster Management and Social Development (see
Section 2e); The Bank provided extensive ongoing support and training to strengthen financial
management and procurement processes, crucial with the repeated changes in procurement specialists at
NASSCO. The Bank incorporated technical expertise at different moments during implementation:
payments experts, livelihoods, and co-responsibilities. The Bank supported the GoN in its efforts to
increase the role and the ownership of states in the implementation of the program. In addition, the Bank
reacted in a timely manner to a worsening security situation due to conflict in the northern states and
economic challenges (inflation, unemployment, elimination of subsidies). In July 2019, a security risk
mitigation plan was developed to ensure the safety and security of all staff. Flexibility in adapting to
challenges that arose, whilst ensuring accountability of funds, promoted positive project outcomes
(ICR p.31). The World Bank team showed great flexibility in adapting to the challenges of the context. For
example, in the face of serious delays in the development of a robust payment system, an effective
workaround was developed, which involved using the existing semi-automated system and putting in place
specific risk mitigation measures. Similarly, World Bank flexibility in agreeing to finance additional
implementation costs enabled the Abacha Restitution Fund to be fully used, given the stipulation that these
funds could only be used for cash transfers. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the World Bank
supported the use of satellite imagery-based poverty maps and big data coupled with cell-phone
technology to build the COVID-19 Rapid Response Register (RRR) to identify poor and vulnerable affected
people. In addition, the Bank team worked closely with GoN to improve pro-poor targeting of payments
over the course of the project (ICR p.83).

The Bank used ongoing monitoring data to improve pro-poor targeting of cash transfers. In mid-
2018 ongoing monitoring and analysis revealed that the selection of households to be included in the NSR
and the targeting of beneficiary households for the national TCT program were not sufficiently pro-
poor. In consequence, several measures were introduced to correct this shortcoming. A proxy means
test was introduced as well as community ranking to ensure that selection of communities started from
among the poorest communities. Before this, the selection process had tended to start in communities that
were conveniently located, which were generally not the poorest. In addition, a checklist was developed to
improve the quality of implementation of cash based transfers.




                                                                                                 Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Social Safety Nets Project (P151488)



 The monitoring and calculation of the in-kind counterpart contributions by the federal government
 and the states was not carried out during supervision as foreseen in the PAD (ICR p.31). The lack of
 specificity regarding expected GoN cash/in-kind contributions made tracking more difficult. Nevertheless,
 this challenge was not addressed in the early years of the project.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Project design took into account weaknesses in monitoring systems and incorporated considerable
 institutional capacity building elements to address these weaknesses. According to the PAD (p 4), “A
 recent national stock-taking exercise also found that most federal and state-level SSN interventions are
 constrained by systemic (institutional and process) weaknesses, including poor targeting, undefined
 eligibility criteria, lack of monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems, and absence of a management
 information system (MIS).” Amongst the measures undertaken to enhance monitoring was financing
 oversampling in the Nigeria Living Standards household survey to capture existing cash transfer
 beneficiaries and to use it as a baseline for future evaluation as well as adding a social protection module
 to the survey. The project also financed the development of a cash transfer MIS to capture beneficiary
 registry, management of payment information, compliance monitoring, supply side tracking, grievance and
 redress, and change management of beneficiary information. In addition, the project financed an
 assessment will be conducted to ascertain the status of existing M&E systems in the states, with
 results integrated into a detailed project M&E manual. Finally, the M&E design included an impact
 evaluation to measure achievements of the PDO, with surveys at the baseline, mid-term, and project end.

 The PAD had well-thought-out M&E arrangements for the project. The PDO and results framework
 were thoughful and robust. The PAD was mindful of the importance of targeting poor and vulnerable
 households, and the M&E system was designed to measure this aspect. Project design also included
 beneficiary surveys to gather feedback during implementation. Nevertheless, the design did not
 incorporate measurement of the adequacy of transfers, which was an important gap, as evidence indicates
 that level of benefits is an important factor in determining outcomes for beneficiaries (ICR, p.27).

 Project design included Third Party Monitoring (TPM) of key objectives of the program, including the
 assessment of beneficiaries/communities’ awareness, perception and satisfaction with the National Social
 Safety Net Program and checking the transparency and compliance level with the standard operating
 guidelines established for the program. The Third-Party Monitor was to provide independent monitoring
 information on the different processes that were being implemented within the project (ICR p. 73).




                                                                                                 Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Social Safety Nets Project (P151488)



b. M&E Implementation
  The original M&E plan including baseline, midterm and endline evaluations was not fully
  implemented. According to the Bank project team, due to delays in start of the project implementation
  (effectiveness in 2017 and start of cash transfer at small scale in 2018), the initial survey was conducted
  only in 2019. While labeled a baseline survey, as cash transfers had already been delivered this was in
  actuality a midterm survey which informed project implementation (see Section 8b). As planned, an
  oversample 2500 of NASSP beneficiaries was included in the National Living Standard Survey conducted
  in 2018/20219 to capture the poverty profile of the beneficiary households as compared to the overall
  poor in the country and an impact evaluation was conducted at the program close, although, according to
  the project team, this evaluation has yet to be finalized.

  The project developed and employed an M&E manual that served as a step-by-step user’s guide
  and management tool to plan and manage the collection, analysis, and reporting of performance
  (ICR p.27). The project M&E system regularly collected monitoring data through a decentralized system,
  working with the participating states. Roles and responsibilities were well defined and state teams carried
  out periodic field monitoring activities and generated reports, while NASSCO and NCTO provided
  technical oversight and quality assurance. This approach was effective in advancing timely project
  implementation of project activities and development of systems for quality assurance and field
  monitoring.

  Federal teams supported M&E capacity at the state level (ICR p.27). NASSCO and NCTO prepared
  regular semester reports. Besides these, the project supported M&E capacity building and the
  development of several state-level monitoring systems, including: quality benchmarks and a monitoring
  checklist for ongoing project supervision; monitoring reporting templates for core program activities like
  trainings, beneficiary enrolment and cash transfer payments and regular back-checks to ensure that
  deviations from the established process were corrected.

  Implementation progress was assessed against the results framework, with inputs from the M&E
  teams in NCTO and NASSCO. The MIS allowed for continuous updating of data and its availability
  during implementation. At the national level, the project M&E team continued to provide technical
  and oversight functions in developing systems that promote learning and build capacity of state level staff
  to be able collect and use accurate data. At the state level, regular monitoring and supportive supervision
  of field activities provided a clear pathway and improved targeting and identification, enrollment and
  payment processes. The monitoring mission and spot check visits by the national team to states
  enhanced the performance of the M&E units of the State Cash Transfer Unit and State Operations
  Coordinating Unit in tracking program progress, efficiency, effectiveness, and decision making. The
  outcomes of these visits were used in developing quality improvement plans.



c. M&E Utilization
  The effective use of the project’s M&E system and the utilization of its findings to adjust the
  project’s interventions contributed to achievement of the PDO. According to the ICR (p. 28), the
  main findings through the M&E system were used to define new strategies, try new approaches and
  introduce adjustments. Examples of the use of the M&E system are the adjustments introduced to the
  targeting system to make it more pro-poor (Section 8b),and the adjustments made to data captured for
  the NSR and the NBR. In addition, according to the Bank project team, ongoing monitoring findings
  resulted in: a move from partially digital payment system to fully digital payment system; improvements

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Social Safety Nets Project (P151488)



  in the timeliness of payment to beneficiaries and strengthened accountability mechanisms such
  GRM; use of digital technology such as satellite imagery and mobile technology especially during
  COVID-19; increased scale up of the coverage of the program overtime with the priority given to poorer
  states; increased ownership and improved project management system especially at the state level; and
  development of scalable and improved delivery system to facilitate response to shocks including COVID-
  19.

  The use of TPM also contributed to improving delivery of the project services. Findings were used
  to: (a) develop action trackers; (b) organize review meetings; (c) organize refresher training for CBT/CTF
  team to improve performance; (d) Improve the quality of monitoring and data preparation process; and
  (e) develop motivational and accountability measures based on back-check exercise recommendations.
  Outcomes of spot checks and monitoring visits were used in developing quality improvement plans.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category C project (PAD p.26), as the activities under this project
   were likely to have minimal or no adverse social or environmental impacts. According to the ICR
   (p.28), the project complied with environmental and social policies and retained a satisfactory rating on
   social and environmental safeguard performance throughout. The PAD included a negative list to ensure
   that cash payments, including for livelihoods pilots, did not lead to activities that could result in significant
   environmental and social impacts and/or trigger any World Bank safeguards policies. During the project,
   there was an the incidence report on kidnapping and death of project staff, which was determined to be
   unrelated to the project.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   At appraisal, fiduciary risk was found to be high due to large procurement packages and the
   significant number of grants to be disbursed to targeted recipients through new channels (PAD
   p.18). Amongst the mitigation measures built into project design were use of payment service providers to
   directly disburse cash grants from the federal level to beneficiaries, to the extent possible, using electronic
   or mobile modalities. Also, in addition standard financial controls and annual audits, NASSP introduced
   several additional mechanisms including quarterly interim audits of the cash transfer payments, annual
   performance audits of key processes using output-based disbursement, and a targeting assessment
   undertaken every six months. These measures, while important, were not sufficient in themselves to
   ensure fiduciary compliance. Instead, close monitoring enabled timely response to problems as they arose.



                                                                                                        Page 16 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    National Social Safety Nets Project (P151488)



  According to the ICR (p.28), financial management (FM) faced challenges throughout the life of the
  project, but, by completion, was satisfactory, with account reports prepared on time. Some of the
  issues faced during implementation were: (i) difficulties to computerize accounting system, which took
  longer than anticipated - reporting was done manually in the meantime, which was time consuming and
  resulted in higher than desired human error; (ii) the NASSCO and NCTO teams took time to understand
  what was needed and required for adequate FM and financial reporting, especially regarding documenting
  expenditures, and were not able to document expenditures on time, delaying disbursements; and (iii) the
  need to build capacity for FM, as both NASSCO and NCTO had not worked with World Bank projects
  before. The Bank supported NASSCO throughout this process. Supported by resources from the ARF, it
  was possible to hire a consultant to support the NASSCO FM team day-to-day. The Bank FM specialist
  worked with NASSP throughout implementation, which was key to complete FM without issues. External
  audits were unqualified and prepared on time throughout the life of the Project. Approximately US$1.3
  million in project funds were seized by the Independent Commission on Practices of Corruption in 2020,
  during an investigation regarding the payment service providers in four states. However, the investigation
  concluded without finding any corrupt practices.

  Procurement was challenging during implementation, due in part to staffing problems. The PIUs
  were new and required extensive capacity building. There were difficulties staffing procurement positions
  in NASSCO. There was, on the other hand, continuity of procurement experts in NCTO, allowing for
  smoother capacity building. During a fiduciary compliance in-depth review in 2019, the WB procurement
  team found ineligible expenditures involving six contracts for an amount of US$2 million. The largest of
  these contracts was for the acquisition of tablets used for targeting. The reason for the ineligibility was that
  the procurement guidelines were not correctly applied for these procurement processes due to PIU
  inexperience. After the in-depth review, the government took steps to correct the weaknesses found
  around procurement processes, and the affected firms involved with the procurement were referred to
  Bureau of Public Procurement for debarment.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  One of the project achievements has been the inclusion of information on households with
  disability, paving the way for awareness and inclusion of members of one of the most vulnerable groups
  in society (ICR p. 23). NASSCO worked to make the NSR more inclusive for people with disabilities,
  generating disaggregated data in the NSR. Thus, with NASSP support, a disability assessment was carried
  out, contributing to potentially greater access by People with Disabilities to a wider set of social protection
  programs.

  The also project played an important and pioneering role in supporting the government to develop
  a shock responsive social protection system which was used during COVID-19, during economic
  shocks related to food inflation, and more recently to mitigate the impact of fuel subsidy reform by
  government.



d. Other
   ---



                                                                                                     Page 17 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Social Safety Nets Project (P151488)



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                  IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory        Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory        Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial         Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                 High


12. Lessons

Key lessons cited by the ICR (p.33) include:

Utilization of restituted funds under the ARF can support the effective and efficient use of the
restituted funds and enhance social safety net program impacts. This approach contributed to
building strong fiduciary and social accountability mechanisms, with the involvement of a network of
national CSO network that ensured the use of funds. Another element of this approach was the
decision to allocate the resources only to cash transfers for beneficiaries, with IDA playing a
fiduciary role, which contributed to build trust and accountability.

Securing the buy-in of all levels of government involved in social safety net systems in key
for success. Among the drivers of buy-in and participation are: clear communication of project
goals and modalities, well-targeted incentives and maintenance of ongoing dialogue; a clear
institutional architecture, including clear mandates for stewardship, policy guidance and
coordination and implementation mandates.

Third party monitoring can enhance transparency and accountability of digital
payment systems for cash transfers. In any cash transfer program, it is key to ensure that
targeted beneficiaries receive the cash transfers in the amounts intended on time. Third party
monitoring can provide critical evidence that beneficiaries received their payments in the due
amounts, as well as providing useful information on issues requiring attention.

Close and rigorous follow-up and monitoring, including checks for quality and accuracy and
the use of technology to reduce human error and ensure consistency, can contribute to
enhanced targeting of the poorest and most vulnerable households. The project used
numerous feedback mechanisms, including TPM and beneficiary surveys to identify shortcomings in
the pro-poor targeting of cash transfers. This enabled the project to introduce a suite of policy
changes mid-term with the result that, by November 2018, poor households were more likely to
benefit from the targeted cash transfers than they were during the initial project period. Community
ranking was introduced, to ensure that the poorest communities were targeted by the intervention
rather than those who were more centrally located. A checklist was developed to improve the
quality of implementation of community-based targeting and a proxy means test was introduced.
Finally, a protocol for backchecks was introduced as well: a sample of households were re-



                                                                                                 Page 18 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       National Social Safety Nets Project (P151488)



interviewed and data was compared to see if there were discrepancies between reported data and
actual monies received.

 Geographical targeting has an important role to play in reaching the poorest households,
and new technologies can refine the approach. Poverty in Nigeria is highly concentrated in
certain areas, so geographical targeting has a key role to play in selecting beneficiaries of social
safety net programs. Self-learning algorithms have been used successfully to identify geographical
pockets of poverty using satellite images. In some cases, it may be advisable to include in the
National Social Registry all households living in the very poorest areas to reduce the extent to which
the poorest households are missed out.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was of excellent quality. Writing was clear and well-evidenced, with a clear link between the narrative,
the ratings and the evidence. Project shortcomings, where they existed, were clearly identified and
explored. Quality of evidence and analysis was substantial and informed all aspects of the ICR. The ICR
presented an extensive list of relevant lessons learned, which can be used to inform future social safety net
programs both in Nigeria and beyond.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 19
