      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SLU Response, Recovery, Resilience DPC (P174346)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023893

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                                Operation Name
 P174346                                     SLU Response, Recovery, Resilience DPC

 Country                                     Practice Area (Lead)
 St. Lucia                                   Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



  Non-Programmatic DPF

  L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
  IDA-68210                                 31-Dec-2021                                            30,000,000.00

  Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
  14-Jan-2021                               31-Dec-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                           30,000,000.00                                                0.00

  Revised Commitment                            30,000,000.00                                                0.00
  Actual                                        30,000,000.00                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Shahrzad Mobasher           Vandana Chandra              Gabriela Chamartin Escobar       IEGEC
 Fard



2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Financing Agreement did not state the Program Development Objective (PDO) for this operation. The
Program Document (PD) presents the PDO as "mitigating the negative effects from the COVID-19 crisis on
the most vulnerable, and to strengthen medium-term resilience and sustainability by: (i) protecting lives and
livelihoods in response to COVID-19, (ii) ensuring business continuity and financial resilience, and

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SLU Response, Recovery, Resilience DPC (P174346)



(iii) enhancing public sector and public debt management for the post-crisis recovery" (PD, p. 3). For the
purposes of this ICR Review, the PDO will be considered as:

     i. PDO 1: Protecting lives and livelihoods in response to COVID-19;
    ii. PDO 2: Ensuring business continuity and financial resilience; and
   iii. PDO 3: Enhancing public sector and public debt management for the post-crisis recovery.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
There were three pillars/policy areas aligned to the objectives of the DPO, which consisted of:

Pillar 1: Protecting the lives and livelihoods in response to COVID-19;

Pillar 2: Ensuring business continuity and financial resilience; and

Pillar 3: Enhancing public sector and public debt management for the post-crisis recovery.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Program Cost. The operation was approved for a loan amount of US$30 million. The actual amount disbursed
was US$30 million. There was no difference between the approved and the disbursed amounts.

Financing. The operation was approved for an International Development Assistance loan of US$30 million
(IDA-68210).

Dates. The operation was approved on January 14, 2021, became effective on April 2, 2021, and closed on
December 31, 2021, as envisaged.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Saint Lucia — a small island country that is heavily dependent on tourism to sustain its economy —
 was severely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. According to the PD, the country’s GDP was projected
 to contract by 18 percent in 2020 because of the COVID-19 pandemic that halted tourism activity. Tourist
 arrivals declined by 65 percent in 2020 relative to 2019, and 45 percent of workers in the tourism sector were
 estimated to have ceased to work. The poverty rate was estimated to have increased by 2.8 percentage points
 between 2019 and 2020 (ICR, p. 5).

 The PDO was aligned with the Government's strategy in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well
 as the fiscal and debt sustainability targets committed to the Monetary Council of the Eastern
 Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB). The Government of Saint Lucia (GoSL) adopted the Economic Recovery
 and Resilience Plan (ERRP) to address the challenges related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The ERRP was
 comprised of three phases with this DPO targeting measures under the first two. The first phase consisted of
 the Public Health Response which included the introduction of curfews and border closures, physical

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SLU Response, Recovery, Resilience DPC (P174346)



distancing, the conversion of the Victoria Hospital to a respiratory hospital, and the hiring of medical
professionals to address increased medical needs. The second phase consisted of the Social Stabilization
Plan which provided income support to formal and informal workers and was intended to improve liquidity
conditions for MSMEs. The third phase was intended to safeguard lives and livelihoods and build resilience.
PDO 3 was aligned with Saint Lucia’s commitments to the ECCB.

The DPO was also aligned with corporate priorities. The PDO was highly relevant as it provided
emergency financing to cope with a national crisis that threatened largescale loss of lives and livelihoods,
which was consistent with the Bank’s COVID-19 Crisis Response Approach Paper. Furthermore, it was
aligned with the Bank’s Regional Partnership Strategy for the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States for the
period 2015-2019 aimed at modernizing the public sector and enhancing its resilience to shocks.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

The operation was comprised of eight prior actions (PAs), with PAs 1-3 supporting PDO 1, PAs 4-5 supporting
PDO 2, and PAs 6-8 supporting PDO 3 (Table 1).

Table 1: Prior Actions of the Saint Lucia Response, Recovery and Resilience DPC

 DO 1: Protecting lives and livelihoods in response to COVID-19
 PA1: The Recipient has (i) approved a COVID-19 Compliance Certificate requirement for tourism
 operators, and (ii) waived import duties for Personal Protective Equipment (“PPEs”) to limit the risk of
 COVID-19.
 PA2: The Recipient has approved regulations to provide subsistence allowance to formal workers that
 have been negatively impacted by the COVID-19 crisis.
 PA3: The Recipient has (i) approved Policy Guidelines formally establishing the Education Assistance
 Program (EAP) and mandating the application of the updated targeting tool, Saint Lucia National
 Eligibility Test 3.0 (SL-NET 3.0) to the EAP, and (ii) approved the provision of additional financial
 resources for the horizontal expansion of the EAP, to increase support to school children from poor and
 vulnerable households through the Education Assistance Stimulus Program (EASP) under the EAP.
 PDO 2: Ensuring Business Continuity and Financial Resilience
 PA4: The Recipient has approved the use of parametric insurance to mitigate the impact of climate risk
 and disasters on fisherfolks, including the Caribbean Oceans and Aquaculture Sustainability Facility
 (COAST) parametric insurance as the primary option for fisherfolk.
 PA5: The Recipient has adopted the following measures to support liquidity and business continuity for
 enterprises in response to COVID-19 (i) a fifty percent (50 percent) allowable deduction of income tax
 on interest income earned from lending to MSMEs by licensed commercial banks for purposes of
 determining their corporate income tax liability for income years 2020 to 2022, and (ii) a partial waiver of
 commercial property tax for landlords who extend moratorium or rent reductions to their tenants.
 PDO 3: Enhancing Public Sector and Public Debt Management for the Post-Crisis Recovery


                                                                                                      Page 3 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SLU Response, Recovery, Resilience DPC (P174346)



PA6: The Recipient has enacted the Public Finance Management Act, 2020 to strengthen public
financial management.
PA7: The Recipient has issued a Commencement Order indicating that the Public Procurement Act,
Cap. 15.10 (which includes the amendments set forth in Act No. 13 of 2020), shall come into force on
June 1, 2021, to provide a more comprehensive administrative framework, aligned with best practices
for the conduct and oversight of public procurement functions, including through electronic means.

PA8: The Recipient has (i) approved a public debt management policy, which includes timely debt
reporting, as part of its commitment towards best practices in debt management, and (ii) approved the
publication of and published the annual debt portfolio review for the period ended December 2019.




PDO 1: Protecting lives and livelihoods in response to COVID-19

PA1 sought to support PDO1 by containing the spread of the COVID-19 virus in the tourism sector by:

(i) promoting compliance with COVID-19 protocols for tourism operators through the issuance of COVID-19
Compliance Certificates. Part III of the COVID-19 (Prevention and Control) Act, 2020 provided a list of
requirements for tourism operators to obtain the COVID-19 Compliance Certificate, along with provisions for the
revocation of certificates if tourism operators failed to comply with the COVID-19 protocols upon inspection. The
list of certified tourism operators was published online (https://slutourism.govt.lc/listing/certified). To support
compliance with COVID-19 protocols, the Ministry of Health and Wellness increased the number of
Environmental Health Officers and an Assistant Environmental Health Officer prior to the COVID-19 pandemic
to four Environmental Health Officers.

(ii) encouraging the use of PPE by waiving import duties. Prior to PA1(ii), tariffs of up to 20 percent applied to
imports of PPE in Saint Lucia. The waiving of the tariffs was intended to reduce the price of PPE that had risen
significantly in Saint Lucia because of the rise in the global demand for PPE.

The relevance of PA1 is rated Satisfactory as the measures taken to increase compliance with COVID-19
protocols and support greater reliance on PPE were intended to reduce the population's exposure to the
COVID-19 virus in the tourism sector where a significant portion of the population was employed, thereby
protecting lives and livelihoods (Relevance of PA1=S).

PA2 provided an allowance to workers in the formal sector who had lost their job or suffered a reduction in their
income because of the COVID-19 pandemic. Workers in Saint Lucia were severely affected by the COVID-19
pandemic given that more than 40 percent of households reported to have at least one member of their
household who had stopped working or who was unable to perform his/her usual job because of the pandemic
(CSO-WB, 2020). Activity in the wholesale, retail trade, hotels and restaurants and related service sectors was
most adversely affected by the pandemic. Overall, almost 45 percent of the pre-pandemic labor force stopped
working in May 2020 (ICR, para 5). PA2 supported the adoption of a temporary economic relief program for
formal sector workers who had either lost their job or were earning less income because of the pandemic, were
contributing to the National Insurance Corporation (NIC) in February 2020, and were not entitled to other NIC
benefits. The benefits provided under the program were equivalent to half of workers' insurable earnings,
ranging from EC$500 to EC$1,500 per month, for a period of up to six months. The cost of the program was


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SLU Response, Recovery, Resilience DPC (P174346)



estimated at EC$65 million (equivalent to 1.2 percent of GDP), representing a little more than half of the
estimated cost of the temporary measures included in the Social Stabilization Plan (equivalent to 2.1 percent of
GDP). The temporary economic relief program was expected to benefit 16,000 individuals, including, 9,000
females, providing coverage for at least 80 percent of the formal workers who lost their job or who were earning
less income because of the pandemic between March and August 2020. The number of formal workers who
were eligible was measured by considering individuals who were not contributing to the NIC for at least two
months over the March and August 2020 period. The relevance of PA2 in supporting PDO1 is rated Satisfactory
(Relevance of PA2=S).

PA3 contributed to PDO1 by supporting the adoption of policy guidelines to improve the targeting of
beneficiaries of the EAP and EASP to mitigate the adverse impact for school children of poor households
affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.

PA3(i): An estimated 4,427 households with school-aged children were poor in 2016, representing 26 percent
of all households with school-aged children. Further, 2.3 percent of children between the ages of 5 and 16 had
dropped out of the school system (PAD, p. 26). The EAP was intended to increase access and quality of
education for children of poor households attending primary and secondary schools given their vulnerability for
dropping out of the school system, through the provision, inter alia, of in-kind educational supplies such as
uniforms, shoes, and books. Prior to PA3, the selection of beneficiaries to the EAP was based on the SL-NET
2.0 targeting tool which led to significant inclusion and exclusion errors. PA3’s adoption of the SL-NET 3.0
targeting tool combined monetary and multi-dimensional poverty measures to identify poor households,
reducing exclusion and inclusion errors.

PA3(ii) included the Cabinet approval of EC$3 million for the horizontal expansion of the EAP and the creation
of the EASP. The EASP would expand coverage of the EAP and provide guidelines for operational rules such
as increasing maximum benefit levels and expanding beneficiary selection criteria in response to the crisis. The
horizontal expansion of the EAP was intended to be a temporary measure to limit the number of school
dropouts which was expected to increase because of the COVID-19 pandemic.

The relevance of PA3 is rated Satisfactory as the increased coverage of in-kind educational supplies through
the EAP and the EASP was intended to support school attendance of students among poor households, and
ultimately limit the number of school dropouts, with higher educational attainment rates among the population
supporting the PDO of protecting lives and livelihoods (Relevance of PA3=S).

PDO 2: Ensuring Business Continuity and Financial Resilience

PA4 was intended to support the provision of parametric insurance against natural disasters to protect the
financial assets, food security and livelihoods of coastal fishing communities and fisherfolk[1] who were among
those most vulnerable to natural disasters. Offering the choice of the parametric COAST insurance to the
fisherfolk was seen as a proactive approach towards disaster risk management and climate change adaptation,
and a means to reduce the financial burden on the government and taxpayers in the event of a natural disaster.
It provided a safety net for the fisherfolk, protecting them from potential loss of income due to disasters, climate
risks and exogenous shocks. It also showed a commitment by the GoSL to address the potential impact of
climate change and disasters on the most vulnerable populations, and to provide them with necessary support
and protection. However, to become eligible for the insurance, the fisherfolk were required to adopt climate-
smart practices, which required a behavioral change. The relevance of PA4 to the achievement of the PDO is




                                                                                                     Page 5 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SLU Response, Recovery, Resilience DPC (P174346)



rated Moderately Satisfactory given that the behavioral change needed to adopt climate-smart practices may
have limited insurance uptake (Relevance of PA4=MS).

PA5 was intended to support lending and reduce rental charges for MSMEs, thus contributing to PDO2 by
ensuring business continuity and financial resilience for firms in two ways:

PA5(i) allowed licensed commercial banks to apply a 50 percent deduction on interest income earned from
lending to MSMEs over the 2020-2022 period. This measure was intended to encourage bank lending to
MSMEs, and to provide MSMEs with much-needed liquidity to stay afloat. Given MSMEs' limited access to
finance compared to larger firms, and the fact that the pandemic further reduced their creditworthiness, and
without a persuasive analytical basis for this channel of support, IEG is not convinced that PA5(i) would support
the overarching objective of supporting business continuity and financial resilience through a credible results
chain. The relevance of PA5 (i) is rated Unsatisfactory.

PA5(ii) was intended to support business continuity by providing a waiver of 50 percent on commercial property
taxes for landlords who reduced rental charges for MSME tenants over the April-June 2020 or July-September
2020 period. This tax expenditure was estimated at 0.1 percent of GDP. While the PD suggests that this
measure was intended to incentivize landlords to pass on savings from commercial property taxes to tenants in
the form of reduced rents, IEG does not consider this measure as a part of a credible results chain given that
landlords consider numerous factors for the purposes of establishing rents, and that a temporary reduction in
commercial property taxes would not automatically lead to reduced rental charges. The relevance of PA5 (ii) is
rated Unsatisfactory.

The relevance of PA5 is rated Unsatisfactory as the measures did not support lending and reduced rental
charges for MSMEs through a credible results chain (Relevance of PA5=U).

PDO 3: Enhancing Public Sector and Public Debt Management for the Post-Crisis Recovery

PA6 supported a rapid response to a disaster by channeling resources to programs and agencies where they
were most needed. Prior to PA6, the Ministry of Finance lacked the legislative authority to implement temporary
changes to budget rules in case of an emergency, thereby limiting GoSL’s response to disasters. PA6
supported the adoption of the Public Finance Management (PFM) Act 2020 to (i) establish a link between the
PFM and emergency powers by including the explicit definition of a disaster that broadens the scope of what
constitutes a disaster and includes a definition for a state of emergency, and (ii) provide the Minister of Finance
the necessary authority to flexibly manage budget and resource allocations during such events. The PA was
intended to: (i) suspend existing procedures to accelerate allocation or reallocation of budgetary resources in
the event of a natural disaster and emergency; (ii) reallocate their budgets to address natural disasters and
emergencies; (iii) follow up regarding additional budget allocations/financial resources; and (iv) enable the swift
allocation of resources to address emergency situations. The relevance of PA6 to the achievement of
enhancing public sector management for the post-crisis recovery is rated Satisfactory given that it provided the
government the flexibility it needed to allocate adequate funds in the event of a natural disaster or an
emergency to address the population’s socio-economic needs (Relevance of PA6=S).

PA7 supported the adoption of a comprehensive administrative framework for the conduct and oversight of
public procurement, aligned with international best practice. Prior to PA7, Saint Lucia’s public procurement
framework was governed by the Finance Administration Act (2005) and included minimal provisions regulating
the government’s procurement operations. It included provisions for only two procurement methods, i.e., tender
and direct purchase, and did not include the procedural aspects for how these two methods were to be carried


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SLU Response, Recovery, Resilience DPC (P174346)



 out. Despite a Central Tenders Board that was charged with approving contract awards above EC$100,000, a
 World Bank assessment revealed that 99.4 percent of contracts were priced below this threshold, suggesting
 that firms were deliberately splitting procurement bids to avoid a review by the Central Tenders Board. The
 procurement process was highly fragmented and led to inefficient and duplication of public expenditures. There
 was no central repository of public procurement documents. Ministries and departments published procurement
 notices on their website and on the national government portal. PA7 supported the adoption of the Public
 Procurement and Asset Disposal Act which unified, simplified, and clarified public procurement procedures.
 This, combined with the adoption of a national e-GP platform, was intended to promote fair competition,
 enhance transparency, foster ethical conduct, upgrade systems through a web portal, and develop a dispute
 settlement mechanism. P. 34 of the PAD indicates that the government issued the Commencement Order,
 allowing the Public Procurement Act, as amended in 2020, to become effective as of June 1, 2021. The Bank
 later clarified that the Saint Lucia Sustainable Recovery Development Policy Credit (P179539) approved in
 October 2023 supported the adoption of public procurement regulations to implement the provisions of the
 Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act and given this complementary measure, the relevance of PA7 is
 rated Satisfactory (Relevance of PA7=S).

 PA8 supported increased debt transparency. The results of the Debt Management Performance Assessment
 conducted in 2016 identified areas of improvement for public debt transparency and debt management in Saint
 Lucia, including, establishing guidelines for public debt and debt guarantees in accordance with the new PFM
 Act, and supporting public debt transparency and accountability through the publication of reports with complete
 government debt data in a timely manner. PA8(i) supported the adoption of a debt management policy which
 included timely debt reporting. PA8(ii) supported the approval of the publication of the annual debt portfolio
 review for the period ending December 2019. The Bank later clarified that the development of the debt
 management policy under PA8(i) supported the enactment of the Public Debt Management Act under the Saint
 Lucia Sustainable Recovery Development Policy Credit (P179539) approved in October 2023 and as such, the
 relevance of PA8 is rated Satisfactory (Relevance of PA8=S).

 [1] Saint Lucia has about 1,000 fishery workers and they rank among the most vulnerable groups. Their
 activities are often impacted by tropical storms, which require them to come to shore and stop fishing.
 Moreover, heavy storms can damage assets such as vessels and gear (e.g. Dominica46). The 2016 HBS found
 one in four households with a worker in the fishing sector had experienced a significant shock due to a climatic
 event in the past five years. Small vessels are more vulnerable to climate conditions and events such as storms
 (PAD, p. 70).



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

The program included 11 Result Indicators (RIs). PDO1 included five RIs. PDO2 included three RIs.
PDO3 included three RIs (Table 2).



                                                                                                   Page 7 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SLU Response, Recovery, Resilience DPC (P174346)



Table 2: Results Indicators

                                 Baselin
                                                                   Actual Change
                 Associa RI      e        Target     Actual
                                                                   in RI Relative RI Achievement
RIs              ted     Relevan (includi (includin Value as of
                                                                   to Targeted    Rating
                 PA(s)   ce      ng       g date)    Target Date
                                                                   Change
                                 date)
PDO 1: Protecting lives and livelihoods in response to COVID-19
RI1: Number
of Tourism
                                 Baselin                           More than
Operators
                                 e: 0     Target: 78 Actual: 696 100% of
issued with the PA1(i) MS                                                         High
                                 (Februa (2020)      (2020)        targeted
COVID-19
                                 ry 2020)                          change
Compliance
Certificate.
RI2: Number
                                 Baselin
of medical                                                         100% of
                                 e: 0     Target: 16 Actual: 16
articles subject PA1(ii) MS                                        targeted       High
                                 (Februa (2020)      (2020)
to waiver of                                                       change
                                 ry 2020)
import duties.
RI3:
Percentage of
the formal
workers that
lost their jobs                           Target:    Actual: 100
having                                    80% t (of percent (of More than
                                 Baselin
received                                  which      which 57% 100% of
                 PA2     S       e: 0                                             High
income                                    55% are are female) targeted
                                 (2019)
support                                   female)    (December change
through                                   (2021)     2021)
National
Insurance
Corporation
(NIC).
                                                     Actual:
                                                     5,253
RI4: Beneficiar
                                                     (2023)        More than
y households                     Baselin Target:
                                                     (achieveme 100% of
covered by       PA3(i) S        e: 1,099 5,000                                   Substantial
                                                     nt for target targeted
EAP, including                   (2019) (2020)
                                                     year (2020) change
EASP.
                                                     is not
                                                     reported)




                                                                                             Page 8 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SLU Response, Recovery, Resilience DPC (P174346)



RI5:
                                                  Actual: 16%
Percentage of
                                                  (824/5,253)
the beneficiary
                                        Target:   (2023)
households                    Baselin                             Only 18% of
                                        90%       (achieveme
covered by       PA3(ii) S    e: 0                                the target was   Substantial
                                                  nt for target
EAP that are                  (2019)                              achieved
                                         (2021)   year (2021)
selected
                                                  is not
through SL-
                                                  reported.
NET 3.0.
PDO 2: Ensuring business continuity and financial resilience
                              Baselin
                              e: 0
RI6: Number                   (Total of
of additional                 active
                                                  Actual: 242     Achievement of
fishers                       register Target:
                                                  fishermen.      target - 33%
formally                      ed        730 (of
                                                                  aggregate;
registered with               fishers: which 10
                                                  Male: 225
the fisheries    PA4     S    1,475 of percent                                     Modest
                                                                  34% for males;
department to                 which are
                                                  Female: 17
benefit from                  1,391 female)
                                                                  23% for
the climate risk              are       (2021)    (2021)          females.
insurance                     male
policy-COAST.                 and 84
                              female)
                              (2019)
RI7: Number
of financial
institutions and
institutions in
the money
services                      Baselin
                                        Target: 3 Actual: 0       0% of targeted
business         PA5(i) U     e: 0                                               Negligible
                                        (2021)    (2021)          change
involved in                   (2019)
lending to
MSMEs that
have funded
MSMEs under
the program. *
RI8: Number
of landlords                                        Actual: 5
                                 Baselin                       Only 10% of
benefiting from                          Target: 50 (Value:
                PA5(ii)   U      e: 0                          targeted            Negligible
partial waiver                           (2021)     EC$46,591)
                                 (2019)                        change
of commercial                                       (2021)
property tax.**
PDO 3: Enhancing public sector and public debt management for post-crisis recovery



                                                                                                 Page 9 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SLU Response, Recovery, Resilience DPC (P174346)



RI9: Authority
for emergency                      Baselin
                                                                     100% of
procedure is                       e       Target    Actual
               PA6        U                                          targeted         [High]
granted to the                     (2019): (2021): Y (2021): Y
                                                                     change
Ministry of                        N
Finance
RI10:
Percentage of
procurement
                                                                     More than
volume having                      Baselin Target: 10 Actual: 15
                                                                     100% of
been          PA7         S        e: 0    percent    percent                         High
                                                                     targeted
processed in                       (2019) (2021)      (2021)
                                                                     change
the e-
procurement
system.
                                                     Actual:
                                                     Public Debt
                                                     Manageme
                                                     nt Policy
                                                     approved
RI11: Annual                                         and
                                   Baselin                        100% of
Debt Portfolio                             Target: 2 released the
               PA8        MU       e: 0                           targeted            [Substantial]
Review                                     (2021)    2019 and
                                   (2019)                         change
published.                                           2020
                                                     Annual Debt
                                                     Portfolio
                                                     Review by
                                                     the end of
                                                     2021 (2021)

The original indicator, which was “Number of commercial banks that have funded MSMEs under the
program”, was revised to more appropriately capture all the institutions involved in providing funding to
MSMEs.

** The original indicator, which was "Number of tenants benefiting from a partial waiver of commercial
property tax", was revised given that the waiver was provided to landlords rather than tenants as an
incentive for them to extend rent reductions or moratoriums to commercial tenants.

Note: RI achievement ratings note achievement of the targeted change for the RI. RI achievement ratings
in brackets reflect ratings that may have been adjusted based on weak relevance of the results indicator
(discussed in efficacy section).

PDO 1: Protecting lives and livelihoods in response to COVID-19

RI1 measured the compliance of tourism operators with COVID-19 protocols, which was a necessary
requirement for tourism operators to remain active, and to protecting the lives and the livelihoods of
workers who were dependent on tourism activity. The ICR notes that the target for RI1 was set too low as

                                                                                                      Page 10 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SLU Response, Recovery, Resilience DPC (P174346)



it only represented 3 percent of tourism operators. For this reason, the relevance of RI1 for the
measurement of the achievement toward the objective of protecting lives and livelihoods in response to
COVID-19 is rated Moderately Satisfactory (relevance of RI1=MS).

RI2 measured the number of medical articles exempt from import duties, making these articles more
affordable to tourism operators, increasing their likelihood of complying with COVID-19 protocols,
supporting the overarching objective of protecting the lives and the livelihoods of the workers in the
tourism industry. However, it is unclear whether the exemptions helped to curb the prices of the imported
medical articles. For this reason, even though RI2 measured PA1’s achievement along a credible results
chain toward PDO1, its relevance is rated Moderately Satisfactory (relevance of RI2=MS).

RI3 measured the access to subsistence allowance benefits of formal workers who had lost their job
because of the COVID-19 pandemic. Since RI3 measures progress in PA2 toward the PDO of protecting
lives and livelihoods, its relevance is rated Satisfactory (relevance of RI3=S).

RI4: Since RI4 measured PA3’s achievement of PDO1 through expanded household coverage to the EAP
and the EASP intended to limit the school dropout rate, its relevance is rated Satisfactory (relevance of
RI4=S).

RI5 intended to better identify poor households and to eliminate the non-poor households through the
application of an improved targeting tool in measuring PA5’s progress along the results chain toward
PDO1. Its relevance is rated Satisfactory (relevance of RI5=S).

PDO 2: Ensuring business continuity and financial resilience.

RI6 measured the new registration coverage of fishermen, with registration being a requirement to being
able to access parametric insurance through COAST. The relevance of RI6 is rated Satisfactory to
measuring PA4’s progress toward PDO2 (relevance of RI6=S).

RI7 measured the number of financial institutions and institutions in the money services business to have
provided financing to MSMEs as a direct result of the temporary tax deduction offered on interest income.
The original indicator, which was “Number of commercial banks that have funded MSMEs under the
program”, was revised to more appropriately capture all the institutions involved in providing funding to
MSMEs. The relevance of RI7 is rated Unsatisfactory in measuring progress toward the achievement of
the objective through a credible results chain given that financial institutions were unlikely to extend loans
to MSMEs to preserve business continuity. Indeed, MSMEs, which generally have low creditworthiness
which limits their borrowing ability, experienced a deterioration of their creditworthiness in the aftermath of
the pandemic, with many MSMEs at risk of shutting down their operations due to a significant fall in
revenues. Financial institutions were unlikely to risk their capital in exchange for a modest tax exemption
in such a context. Rewarding financial institutions with a temporary tax deduction for loans extended to
MSMEs was therefore not considered a credible means of supporting the business continuity of MSMEs
(relevance of RI7=U).

RI8: The original indicator for RI8, which was "Number of tenants benefiting from a partial waiver of
commercial property tax", was revised given that the waiver was provided to landlords rather than tenants
as an incentive for them to extend rent reductions or moratoriums to commercial tenants. The relevance
of RI8 to measuring achievement of PA5 along the results chain toward improving business continuity is
rated Unsatisfactory because landlords consider a multitude of factors for the purposes of establishing


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 18
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   SLU Response, Recovery, Resilience DPC (P174346)



               rents, including, notably, their ability to cover their costs, and a temporary waiver on commercial property
               taxes would not automatically lead to reduced rental charges (relevance of RI8=U).

               PDO 3: Enhancing public sector and public debt management for post-crisis recovery.

               RI9 measured whether the Ministry of Finance was authorized to implement emergency procedures
               following a disaster. RI9 does not measure progress toward the achievement of enhancing public sector
               and public debt management for post-crisis recovery and instead replicates the PA, and its relevance is
               consequently rated Unsatisfactory (relevance of RI9=U).

               RI10: By measuring the percentage of procurement contracts being processed through an open,
               competitive e-procurement process, RI10 measured PA7’s contribution to enhancing public sector
               management for the post-crisis recovery (relevance of RI10=S).

               R11 measured whether the Annual Debt Portfolio Review in 2019 was published. IEG finds that the
               publication of the debt portfolio in 2019 does not support the achievement of the objective of enhancing
               public debt management for the post-crisis recovery as this only enhanced debt transparency in one year
               and is unrelated to debt management practices which should be implemented regularly and encompass
               the structure of the debt portfolio (i.e., maturity, currency, interest rate composition and contingent
               liability). The relevance of RI11 is therefore rated Moderately Unsatisfactory (relevance of RI11=MU).



         Rating

         Moderately Satisfactory

         5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Mitigate the negative effects from the COVID-19 crisis on the most vulnerable, and strengthen medium-term
               resilience and sustainability by protecting lives and livelihoods in response to COVID-19.

               Rationale
               Outcome. PDO1 is rated Moderately Satisfactory. Three of the five RIs achieved/exceeded their targets and
               are rated High but two RIs are rated Negligible.

                     • The number of tourism operators issued with the COVID-19 Compliance Certificate rose from 0 to 696
                       in 2020, largely surpassing the target (achievement of RI1=High).
                     • The number of medical articles subject to the waiver of import duties increased from 0 to 16 in 2020,
                       meeting the target (achievement of RI2=High).
                     • The percentage of formal workers who received income support through the NIC rose from 0 to 100
                       percent by December 2021, surpassing the target. The target for female beneficiaries was also met,
                       with 57 percent of the beneficiaries being female against a target of 55 percent (achievement of
                       RI3=High).


                                                                                                                   Page 12 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SLU Response, Recovery, Resilience DPC (P174346)




     • The number of beneficiary households covered by the EAP, including the EASP, rose from 1,099 to
       5,253 in 2023, against a target of 5,000 by 2020. The achievement rating is downgraded to
       Substantial given that the achievement occurred three years after the targeted date (achievement of
       RI4=Substantial).
     • The percentage of beneficiary households covered by the EAP that were selected through the SL-
       NET 3.0 targeting tool increased to only 16 percent of the target by 2023, two years later than
       targeted. The ICR explains that most EAP beneficiaries were selected through case management
       workers in constituencies, resulting in indicator SL-NET 3.0 not being achieved. While the target for
       RI5 was not met, its achievement is rated Substantial given that a different approach was adopted to
       identify children from vulnerable households who may potentially dropout of the school system if the
       cost of education is not reduced (achievement of RI5=Substantial).



Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Mitigate the negative effects from the COVID-19 crisis on the most vulnerable and strengthen medium-term
resilience and sustainability by ensuring business continuity and financial resilience.

Rationale
Outcome. None of the targets were achieved.

     • The number of additional fishermen formally registered with the fisheries department to benefit from
       the climate risk insurance policy-COAST rose from 0 to 242 in 2021 achieving only 33 percent of the
       aggregate target; 34 percent of the target for males and only 23 percent of the target for females
       (achievement of RI6=Modest).
     • None of the financial institutions or money services businesses funded MSMEs under the program
       against a target of 3. The ICR reports that the passage of Section 18(1)(u) of the Income Tax Act by
       the Parliament was delayed to September 2021 which, combined with a poor communication strategy
       for MSMEs, resulted in no deduction claims being made (achievement of RI7=Negligible).
     • The number of landlords benefiting from the partial waiver on commercial property taxes rose from 0
       to 5 against a target of 50. The ICR reports that the low achievement is explained by a poor
       communication strategy, resulting in a low level of awareness about the program, as well as landlords
       being reluctant to provide rent reductions and forego income at a time when they were confronted with
       financial constraints. Even if the target had been met, IEG could not give credit for achieving a low
       relevance RI (achievement of RI8=Negligible).



Rating

Unsatisfactory


                                                                                                Page 13 of 18
                          Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                          SLU Response, Recovery, Resilience DPC (P174346)




                      OBJECTIVE 3
                      Objective
                      Mitigate the negative effects from the COVID-19 crisis on the most vulnerable, and strengthen medium-term
                      resilience and sustainability by enhancing public sector and public debt management for the post-crisis
                      recovery.

                      Rationale
                      Outcome. While the targets were met for all three RIs, the low relevance of two out of the three RIs implies
                      that together the three RIs do not adequately measure progress toward the achievement of PDO 3.

                           • The authority for emergency procedures was granted to the Ministry of Finance in 2021 (achievement
                             of RI9=[High]).
                           • The percentage of procurement volume having been processed in the e-procurement system rose
                             from 0 percent in 2019 to 15 percent in 2021, surpassing the target of 10 percent (achievement of
                             RI10=High).
                           • The government published the 2019 and 2020 Annual Debt Portfolio Reviews by the end of 2021
                             (achievement of RI11=[Substantial]).



                      Rating

                      Moderately Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Overall efficacy is rated Moderately Satisfactory. The efficacy of PDO 1 is rated Satisfactory, the efficacy of PDO
2 is rated Unsatisfactory, and the efficacy of PDO 3 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory


      6. Outcome

      Rationale

      With the relevance of PAs rated Satisfactory and efficacy rated Moderately Satisfactory, the outcome of this
      DPO is rated Moderately Satisfactory.




                                                                                                                       Page 14 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SLU Response, Recovery, Resilience DPC (P174346)



a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to the development outcome of this operation consist of:

    1. Since annual debt reporting was not institutionalized through PA8, annual debt reporting could be
       limited to the annual debt reporting in 2019;
    2. Inadequate reserves under the COAST parametric insurance could undermine the sustainability of
       the program if the government does not assess future payment modalities and adjust premium
       payments to ensure the long-term sustainability of reserves under the program; and
    3. The development outcome pertaining to the adoption of a comprehensive administrative framework
       for the conduct and oversight of public procurement aligned with international best practices may be
       undermined by the lack of implementation provisions, with neither the PD nor the ICR indicating what
       provisions (if any) may have been provided.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


The Bank developed the operation in close consultation with a wide range of stakeholders, including the
government, private sector, academia and civil society organizations. Some reform areas, such as in PFM,
underwent multiple rounds of consultation. The Bank coordinated with other development partners,
including the International Monetary Fund and the Caribbean Development Bank. Some of the PAs were
complemented by technical assistance and capacity building through WB-supported IPF engagements, as
well as other stakeholders such as the Canada-Caribbean Resilience Facility supporting the identification
and mitigation of risks. This approach constituted a key lesson learned from previous engagements in the
country and across the Caribbean region given the limited capacity found in these countries.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale



                                                                                                   Page 15 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SLU Response, Recovery, Resilience DPC (P174346)



Technical assistance provided by the Bank was purposely directly to a few areas of engagement given the
country’s limited capacity and the provision of the technical assistance from other development partners. One
particular area of successful technical assistance engagement pertains to the development of the proxy means
test targeting tool SL NET 3.0 jointly with the Ministry of Equity, which led to a reduction in exclusion errors of
the potentially eligible population to only 3 percent.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Overall Bank performance is rated Satisfactory, with Bank performance on design and implementation each
rated Satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

None noted.



b. Environmental

None noted.



c. Gender

RI3 and RI6 present gender disaggregated data.



d. Other


                                                                                                     Page 16 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SLU Response, Recovery, Resilience DPC (P174346)



None noted.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The quality of the ICR is rated Modest. The ICR could have included more detailed information on the
substance of some of the PAs, such as PA5 on the parametric insurance, especially because the Program
Document did not present a good overview of how the parametric insurance was structured and did not discuss
the sustainability of the facility. The discussion linking the PAs and RIs to the achievement of the PDOs through
a credible results chain is also missing in some instances. The lessons learned section of the ICR discusses
findings rather than lessons learned, which is not consistent with the ICR guidelines.



a. Rating

Modest

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreement/Comments
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory           Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                    Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                    Modest


12. Lessons

The ICR identifies two lessons for this operation, consisting of:

    1. The sustainability of the reforms supported by a DPO requires institutional capacity building and strong
       governance systems. Given the Bank’s limited engagement in a country such as Saint Lucia, it would be
       important to consider ongoing engagement on institutional capacity building to ensure that reforms
       adopted through an operation are sustained over time.
    2. There is a need to ensure that PAs that are intended to enhance public resource management are not
       one-off actions, but instead reflect the institutionalization of these actions. The St. Lucia Response,
       Recovery, Resilience DPC (P174346) during the Covid-19 pandemic included a PA that supported
       increased debt management transparency through the adoption of a debt management policy which
       included timely debt reporting. The PA supported the approval of the publication of the annual debt

                                                                                                     Page 17 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SLU Response, Recovery, Resilience DPC (P174346)



      portfolio review for the period ending December 2019. While this was a relevant PA supporting increased
      debt management transparency and contributing to the overarching objective of enhancing public debt
      management for the post-crisis recovery, a critical shortcoming of the PA was that it did not support the
      institutionalization of annual debt reporting. The PA would have made a more meaningful contribution to
      the PDO had it supported medium-term resilience and sustainability by requiring the publication of
      annual debt reports instead of a one-off report at the end of the pandemic. Not institutionalizing annual
      publications was a lost opportunity for the country’s public resource management strategy.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                Page 18 of 18
