     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LIFELINE ROAD NETWORK IMPROVEMENT PROJ (P126782)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0023701

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Project Name
 P126782                                 LIFELINE ROAD NETWORK IMPROVEMENT PROJ

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 Armenia                                 Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82290,IBRD-85230,IBRD-89570        30-Jun-2017                                         98,463,719.12

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Jan-2013                             31-Dec-2022

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         45,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                          98,246,426.83                                              0.00

 Actual                                      98,463,719.12                                              0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan               Peter Nigel Freeman         Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and in
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 9) is:

   " To improve access of rural communities to markets and services through the upgrading of selected
   lifeline roads, and to strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Transport and Communication (MoTC)
   to manage the lifeline road network ".


                                                                                               Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LIFELINE ROAD NETWORK IMPROVEMENT PROJ (P126782)



   The revised PDO as stated in the Additional Financing (AF) document of April 16, 2019 is:

   " To improve access of rural communities to markets and services through upgrading of selected
   lifeline roads and to strengthen the capacity of the Borrower's line ministry in charge of roads to
   manage the lifeline road network ".

   * The Government in 2008 reclassified about 4,000 kilometers (kms) of mainly republican roads and 2,250 km
   local roads) as lifeline roads. The lifeline road network (LRN) is a priority road network that ensured at least
   one access road to all 960 communities in Armenia.

   For the purpose of this Implementation Completion and Results Report Review (ICRR), the PDOs are taken
   to be:

   PDO 1. To improve access of rural communities to markets and services through the upgrading of selected
   lifeline roads;

   PDO 2. To strengthen the capacity of the Borrower's line ministry in charge of roads to manage the lifeline
   road network.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  16-Apr-2019

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were three components (PAD, pages 10 - 11).

   1. Lifeline road Improvement. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$52.39 million. The estimate with
   AFs was US$92.80 million. The actual cost was US$94.23 million. This component planned to improve
   selected sections of the LRN. Activities in this component were:

   a. Road rehabilitation works. This sub-component aimed to rehabilitate/upgrade about 170 kilometers
   (km) of the LRN with road safety measures.

   b. Pilot on rehabilitation and maintenance contract. This sub-component added a pilot of road
   maintenance on the rehabilitated roads for three years.




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    LIFELINE ROAD NETWORK IMPROVEMENT PROJ (P126782)



  c. Pilot for routine maintenance through microenterprises. This sub-component planned to finance
  routine road maintenance activities by microenterprises (local entrepreneurs using labor-intensive
  techniques) for two years.

  d. Supervision and technical designs. This sub-component planned to finance design studies and
  supervision activities.

  e. Road safety engineering and black spot improvement. This component planned to finance the
  costs of four Safe Village schemes on road sections and black spot improvements at selected locations
  identified by the Government.

  2. Project management and institutional strengthening. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$3.72
  million. The estimate with the AFs was US$7.20 million. The actual cost was US$4.23 million. This
  component aimed to strengthen the MoTC's capacities for managing road assets. There were four sub-
  components.

  a. Project management and implementation, including audits. This sub-component financed
  implementation costs and the costs of preparing audits.

  b. Road asset management system and survey equipment. This sub-component planned to install a
  Road Asset Management System (RAMS) and survey equipment for road condition and traffic.

  c. Road safety technical assistance (TA). This sub-component planed to finance road safety activities
  such as designing Black Spot Improvement works and training the Road Safety Engineering Unit staff, road
  safety education in "Safe Village" schools and safety campaigns.

  d. TA. This sub-component planned to provide TA on: (i) designing pilots and feasibility of a Performance-
  Based Contract (PBC); (ii) social monitoring and evaluation study; (iii) study on sector sustainability; (iv)
  training MoTC staff and local contractors and microenterprises on multi-year performance based road
  maintenance contracts; and (v) technical studies for preparing potential future sector investments.

  A new component was added with the AF (discussed in section 2e).

  3. Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC). Funds were not allocated for this component.
  This component was added as a precautionary measure to enable the Government to quickly channel funds
  for emergency recovery efforts in the event of an adverse natural or man-made disaster. This component
  was not activated as there were no disasters during implementation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$56.72 million. The estimate with AFs was
  US$121.25 million. The actual cost was US$122.99 million.

  Bank financing. The Project was financed by an International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
  (IBRD) credit of US$45.00 million. Two AFs of US$40.00 million and US$15.00 million were approved. With
  these, the Bank-financing for the project was US$100.00 million. US$98.46 was disbursed.



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 17
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  LIFELINE ROAD NETWORK IMPROVEMENT PROJ (P126782)



Borrower contribution. Borrower contribution of US$11.22 million was planned at appraisal. The revised
estimate was US$21.25 million. Their actual contribution was more than planned at US$24.53 million.

Dates. The Project was approved on January 31, 2013, became effective on July 15, 2013, and was
scheduled to close on June 30, 2017. However, it closed on December 31, 2022.

Changes. The project was restructured four times. Two AFs were approved. Both AFs included level 2
restructurings to modify the results framework. In addition, there were two level 2 restructurings. The
changes made during the project are listed below in sequential order.

The changes made through the first project restructuring on July 31, 2015, with the AF on July 2015.

      The project scope was scaled up to include rehabilitation of an additional 155 km of the LRN, based
       on the success achieved thus far. With this, the project aimed to rehabilitate a total of 360 km of the
       LRN.
      The activity of routine road maintenance through microenterprises was dropped. In 2014, the Bank
       financed a study tour to Peru and Bolivia to present to the Armenian delegation practical experience
       with microenterprises. Following the tour, the MoTC informed the Bank that the approach would
       cause a number of practical difficulties, relating to state registration of microenterprises, financial
       and tax issues and require amendments to the existing legal acts. For these reasons, the MoTC
       believed that the benefits of this approach did not override the costs. The Bank at government
       request, dropped this activity and funds for this activity were reallocated to installing road safety
       signs on the LRN.
      A new Contingent emergency response component (CERC) was added as a precautionary measure
       which would enable the Government to quickly channel funds for emergency recovery efforts in the
       event of an adverse natural or man-made disaster (discussed in section 2d).
      The closing date was extended by two years and six months from June 30, 2017 to December 30,
       2019 for completing the added activities. Some target values and dates in the results and monitoring
       indicators were modified and aligned with the new closing date.

The following change was made through the second project restructuring on June 12, 2017.

      This restructuring was made to accommodate institutional reorganization changes. The MoTC was
       renamed as the Ministry of Transport, Communication and Information Technology (MOTCIT). The
       PDOs were revised to remove reference to the name of the ministry.

The changes made through the third project restructuring on May 8, 2019, following the second AF.

      The number of roads to be rehabilitated was extended by an additional 61 kms. With this, the total
       km of roads to be rehabilitated increased to 450 km.
      An activity - a consolidated modern crash data collection and management system - was added. A
       challenge faced by Armenia in matters pertaining to road safety was the lack of information on road
       crash related death and injuries, as it did not have a consolidated crash database linking crash data
       from the road safety stakeholders (the traffic police, the MOCTIT, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry
       of Emergency Situation, insurance companies and the general public). This activity aimed to provide
       a consolidated modern data collection and management system.



                                                                                                 Page 4 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LIFELINE ROAD NETWORK IMPROVEMENT PROJ (P126782)



         The closing date was extended by two years from December 30, 2019 to December 30, 2021.

   The closing date was extended by a year to December 30, 2022 through the fourth project restructuring
   on August 26, 2021, for completing the ongoing activities that were delayed due to the COVID-19
   pandemic restrictions and the after effects of the military conflict in 2020.

   Split rating. The PDOs were revised to reflect the change in institutional arrangements. The revised PDO
   did not change the original intent of the project and the project scope was substantially expanded with the
   AFs. Therefore, this review is not based on a split rating of objectives.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. The road network mode, which accounted for 77% of freight movements and
all passenger transport, is crucial in view of Armenia's landlocked location. Despite Armenia's efforts to
improve its network before appraisal, 40% of its classified road network was in poor condition and 40% of
Armenia's rural population lacked access to an all-weather road. The deterioration of the network was due
to factors such as ((i) historical underfinancing, (ii) inefficient use of available resources and focus on new
road construction rather than maintenance of existing roads, and (iii) lack of sustainable institutional
arrangements for preserving the network. In 2008, the Government launched the Lifeline Road
Development Program and introduced the concept of the LRN. The program identified a priority network
(4,000 km) of secondary and local roads that connected rural roads with interstate roads to final markets
and services. The Program's objective was to stimulate economic growth and reduce poverty by improving
the lifeline roads.

Government strategy. At appraisal, the PDOs aligned with the Government's Sustainable Development
Program and the Armenia Transport Sector Strategy for 2010 - 2020. This strategy developed an
investment plan for the road sector and prioritized investments for improving rural and interstate roads. The
non-investment components of the strategy identified priority reforms such as developing regulations and
operational procedures, encouraging private sector participation in road construction and maintenance, and
building the capacity of the authorities to manage road assets.

The PDOs were consistent with the Government's current 2021 - 2026 medium-term development program,
articulated in the Government's Action Plan. This program aimed to build a competitive, inclusive, and
modern export-led economy and included priorities such as enlarging business opportunities outside
Yerevan and strengthening infrastructure reliability and access. The Project was aligned with the priorities
of stakeholders in Armenia. In the 2023 Country Opinion Survey (COS) Report for Armenia, which
assessed the World Bank Group's reputation among stakeholders, transport was listed as one of the four
priority areas (including education, public sector governance, and health) for the Bank to focus on.

Bank strategy. The PDOs are well-aligned with the Bank's strategy. At appraisal, the PDOs supported a
strategic objective of the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2009 - 2013: Strengthening
Competitiveness for Post-Crisis Growth through improving the road network and strengthening the
regulatory capacity for managing them. The Bank's CPS progress report for 2019-2013 highlighted the
need for continuing LRN investments to strengthen the CPS goals of "addressing vulnerability and building

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      LIFELINE ROAD NETWORK IMPROVEMENT PROJ (P126782)



               the foundations for competitiveness and medium-term growth." The PDOs were well-aligned with the CPS
               for 2014-2017 when the AF was approved. They were aligned with the pillar of "supporting competitiveness
               and job creation."

               The PDOs remained relevant for the Current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2019 -2023. A key
               objective of the CPF was " enabling exports and fostering competitiveness," including through "enhancing
               connectivity and access to reliable infrastructure." The ICR (para 16) noted that the CPF envisioned another
               road project in 2019 for the unfinished rural agenda. However, by 2022, the Government deemed adequate
               capacity had been built in the country for managing future LRN investments without the Bank's financial
               support.

               Previous Bank experience. Although Armenia's road sector is supported by multiple development
               partners, such as the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the European Investment Bank (EIB), the World
               Bank was the only international financial institution that provided financing for improving the LRN. The Bank
               financed the first Lifeline Road Improvement Project, launched in 2009 and closed on December 31. 2013,
               aimed at upgrading selected sections (430 km) of the LRN. This project was designed as an emergency
               measure in the wake of the global economic crisis 2008 and focused primarily on generating short-term
               employment in road construction.

               This project built on the success of the first lifeline project. Unlike the previous project, this project had a
               stronger focus on the sustainability of LRN through (i) capacity building of the MoTC for managing the road
               assets and (ii) initiating new contracting modalities combining road maintenance with road rehabilitation. It
               was, therefore, more challenging. The project scope was further expanded with the AFs to enhance the
               country's transport connectivity by introducing activities to improve the resilience of the LRN to climate
               change considerations and managing road safety. Therefore, the relevance of the PDO is rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             PDO 1. To improve access of rural communities to markets and services through the upgrading of selected
                             lifeline roads.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change. The project activities aimed to address the challenges of underinvestment in the sector
                             and deferred maintenance, which had led to the degradation of the LRN. The outputs, such as upgrading
                             segments of the LRN and combining road maintenance with rehabilitation, road safety features, and climate
                             resilient standards, will likely improve road conditions. These outputs are likely to help in the desired outcome
                             of improving access of the rural population to interstate roads and final markets and services. Given that the

                                                                                                                                Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LIFELINE ROAD NETWORK IMPROVEMENT PROJ (P126782)



remoteness of the agricultural land and access to final markets was a concern in the country context, the
intended outcomes of this project are likely to contribute to the long-term challenge of developing the
agricultural sector. The causal links between project activities, outputs, and outcomes were logical, and the
outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs.

      453.21 km of the LRN were upgraded with road safety and climate-resilient features, exceeding the
       target of 450 km. The roads were selected based on the following criteria and their corresponding
       weightage; (i) economic rate of return (EIRR) of road works (30%); (ii) size of the rural population
       benefitting from the road section (25%); (iii) percentage of poor people in the community (25%); and
       (iv) the percentage of roads in poor condition (20%). All project roads were in poor condition, with
       many experiencing severe pavement failures. Hence, works focused on reconstructing pavements
       (excavation, embankment, asphalt overlays on existing pavements, reconstruction with asphalt
       concrete pavement, upgrading drainage facilities and slope stabilization measures). The works were
       based on international design standards.
      The share of roads in fair/good condition increased from 50% to 61.33% at closure, exceeding the
       revised and original targets of 54.20% and 59%. The rehabilitated roads' international roughness
       index (IRI) decreased from a baseline range of 6.5 to 16.0 (average 11.8) to a post-completion range
       of 1.30 to 3.27 (average 2.49). (The IRI is an international standard to quantify road surface
       roughness).
      The project introduced a collaboration between academia and the Roads Department (RD) to attract
       women engineering graduates to six-month paid partnerships in engineering, design, and road safety.
       In total, nine female and five male graduates (exceeding the target of eight) undertook internships, of
       which four (two men and two women) were hired by the RD.
      The activity of routine road maintenance of LRN through microenterprises was dropped.

Outcomes.

The outputs of upgrading segments of LRN were expected to increase the share of the rural population with
access to all-season roads and reduce average travel time in the project-intervened areas.

      The share of the rural population with access to all-season roads increased from 51% to
       77.56%, exceeding the target of 60%.
      The average speed on LRN increased from 20 km per hour at the baseline to 40 km per hour as
       targeted.

A Social and Monitoring Evaluation was conducted by the implementing agency to gauge the project's impact
on beneficiaries. The evaluation was conducted on pre and post-project surveys of 1,932 households and 55
small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in 149 communities. On a five-point scale (with five representing
"strongly agree"), the respondents gave a 4.5 rating to the statement that access to markets and services had
improved considerably. The main conclusions of the survey data are: (i) local communities expressed
satisfaction with the quality of rehabilitated roads; The communities noted that their access to all-weather
increased, due to fewer blocked roads during winter and a decrease in average and medium number of days
of road closures; (ii) travel time to schools, markets and work was cut by as much as half. With each trip
taking less time, the rural population reported using the roads more frequently; (iii) communities reported an


                                                                                                  Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LIFELINE ROAD NETWORK IMPROVEMENT PROJ (P126782)



increase in crops sold outside the community from 39% of crops to 41%; (iv) vehicle maintenance costs
decreased, due to less wear and tear and fewer costly vehicle repairs.

Given that most of the outputs had been completed and there is evidence that the project activities may have
contributed to the desired outcomes, the efficacy of this PDO is rated as Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO 2. To strengthen the capacity of the Borrower's line ministry in charge of roads to manage the road
network.

Rationale
Theory of change: The project aimed to address the issues of weak institutional capacities of the road sector
agencies for managing the LRN roads. The outputs of activities such as installing the Road Asset
Management System (RAMS), introducing new modalities combining rehabilitation with road maintenance,
road safety education campaigns through the Safe Village scheme and TA for identifying options for sector
financing, were likely to help in contributing to the desired outcome of strengthening the road agencies
capacities to manage and preserve the road network. The results framework was clear and the causal links
between activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. The intended outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs.

      The Ministry of Territorial Administration and Infrastructure (MoTAI) developed the RAMS. The project
         financed installation of the RAMS hardware, software, licenses for the Highway and Management
         Model Four (HDM -4) and equipment for surveying road conditions and traffic. Ten Roads Department
         (RD) and MoTAI staff were trained on using the equipment (no targets were specified).
        The Strategic Development Plan for LRN was completed as targeted. The plan updated the definitions
         of LRN classification and differentiated rural roads from roads serving towns with higher traffic
         volumes. The plan outlined a rehabilitation program through 2025 on 12 sections of LRN with a length
         of about 300 km. This plan was to be incorporated into the broader road sector development strategy
         for 2023-2033 that was being prepared when the project closed.
        A pilot of road maintenance activities on 23 km of roads was completed as targeted. The ICR (para
         33) noted that the Project's Legal Agreement contained a covenant requiring budgetary resources for
         maintenance of the rehabilitated roads for two seasons after completion of the rehabilitated roads. In
         compliance with the covenant, the Government provided the Bank an annual notification of provisions
         in the State budget for road maintenance.
        The Road Financing Study was completed as targeted. This study assessed the current and needed
         expenditure for the sector and recommended ways for ensuring financing for maintaining the entire
         road network.
        TA was provided to determine the sections of road infrastructure that were vulnerable to natural
         hazards (such as landslides, mudslides, avalanches and floods). The final guidelines for assessing

                                                                                                 Page 8 of 17
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               LIFELINE ROAD NETWORK IMPROVEMENT PROJ (P126782)



                                   risks from natural hazards to the road infrastructure was prepared and a knowledge dissemination
                                   workshop was conducted for government departments and other stakeholders as targeted.
                                  The Black spot improvement program was implemented as targeted in accident-prone areas.
                                  114 "Safe Village" projects were completed, exceeding the original and revised targets of four and 100
                                   respectively. Under this scheme, the project financed sidewalks, handrails, warning and traffic signs,
                                   speed bumps and other road safety features. Public awareness and educational campaigns were
                                   carried out in 114 schools for about 7,000 participants.

                            The following activities were not completed when the project closed.

                                  Routine Maintenance through the microenterprises pilot and the multi-year Performance Based
                                   Management Contract (PBMC) pilots was dropped due to legal and budgetary issues.
                                  The Crash Data Collection and Management (CDCM) system was not installed. Although the project
                                   financed a review of the existent crash database and provided technical recommendations for
                                   harmonizing standards with those of the European Union (EU), implementation of this activity was
                                   suspended due to the institutional changes . Responsibility for collecting data at crash sites was
                                   transferred from the two separate entities (traffic police and patrol service) to the patrol service.
                                  Few technical studies and designs for future investments in the LRN were dropped, as the
                                   Government felt that substantial capacity had been developed and that any further rehabilitation of the
                                   LRN could be done by the EU without Bank support (presumably because most EU TA were in the
                                   form of grants, not loans).

                            Outcomes.

                            The outputs described above were expected to contribute to decision-making on LRN.

                                  As noted above, the MoTAI developed the RAMS to support decision-making on the LRN. With
                                   RAMS, the RD collected road data nationwide for all categories of roads. 6,500 km of roads were
                                   surveyed and fed into the RAMS database, exceeding the target of 4,000 km envisioned at appraisal.
                                   A total of 1,600 km of roads were surveyed annually. The ICR (para 25) noted that since the central
                                   government is responsible for managing republican and interstate roads, data on 2,500 km of roads
                                   are stored in the RAMS database. This data are to be collected by the regional administrations (known
                                   as marzes) on an on-demand basis for decision-making on LRN. The ICR noted that the modalities of
                                   how the MoTAI and the Roads Department (RD) coordinate with the marzes on using RAMS were still
                                   to be worked out when the project closed.

                            Although the project fell short of completing a few activities, this review rates the efficacy of this PDO as
                            substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                                                                                                                                 Page 9 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       LIFELINE ROAD NETWORK IMPROVEMENT PROJ (P126782)




  OVERALL EFFICACY
  Rationale
  The project fully achieved the first objective of improving access of rural communities to markets and services
  and almost achieved the second objective. Overall efficacy is rated as substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic analysis. An economic evaluation was conducted to upgrade selected sections of the LRN using the
Highway Development and Management Model (HDM -4). The activities accounted for 93% of the appraisal
estimate and 96% of the actual cost. The benefits were assumed to come from savings in vehicle operating
costs (VOCs), travel time savings, and savings on maintenance costs. The economic analysis demonstrated
economic viability, even though the Net Present Value (NPV) at a 12% discount rate of US$19.8 million at
closing was lower than the NPV of US$33.30 million at appraisal. The ex-post Economic Internal Rate of Return
(EIRR) was 28.1%, slightly lower than the ex-ante EIRR of 29.16%. The NPV and EIRR when the project closed
were lower than ex-ante NPV and EIRR mainly due to the variations in actual cost.

Operational and administrative issues during implementation. The ICR (para 38) noted that work activities
could commence immediately after effectiveness, as the first package or roads had been identified, surveyed,
and designed, and the procurement documents completed even before project approval. After three and half
years of implementation, over 90% of the original financing had been disbursed. The revision of technical design
(the pavement designs were modified from one layer to two asphalt concrete layers, with the inner layer
comprised of bitumen-treated crushed stone and sand mixture) led to cost overruns for some roads. The other
minor cost variations were mainly due to additional drainage works given the challenging topography. All civil
works activities were performed by local Armenian contractors. The ICR (para 40) noted that although at the
beginning of implementation, there was limited competition with only ten firms, as the project progressed, there
were 37 private firms competing for road rehabilitation and maintenance works. The project reconstructed 3.2
km of additional roads and supported fourteen more safe village concepts than originally planned at no
additional cost. Although the project closing date after the second AF was extended by a year, this was mainly
due to factors that were beyond the control of the project, such as the physical restrictions in the wake of the
COVID-19 pandemic and Armenia's conflict with Azerbaijan in 2020.

Overall efficiency is rated as substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LIFELINE ROAD NETWORK IMPROVEMENT PROJ (P126782)




                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     93.00
Appraisal                                                  28.10
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     96.00
ICR Estimate                                               29.16
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDOs to the Government strategy and the Bank strategy is High. Overall efficacy is
substantial. The project fully achieved the first objective and almost achieved the second objective. Efficiency is
rated as Substantial. Taking these ratings into account, overall outcome is rated as substantial, indicating some
minor shortcomings in efficacy and efficiency.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment. There is a medium risk to the sustainability of the development outcome. The
ICR (para 69) notes that the regional authorities (marzes) responsible for managing the LRN often lack the
financial resources and capacity to conduct routine and periodic maintenance and depend on state budget
allocation. However, The ICR also notes that allocations have increased steadily over the years. About
US$25.00 million was allocated in 2012 for routine road maintenance of 5,742 km of lifeline and interstate
roads and none for periodic maintenance. For 2023, the allocation was US$21.3 million for routine
maintenance and US$8.6 million for periodic maintenance. Going forward, the funds allocated for routine and
periodic maintenance need to be increased to prevent the deterioration of the road network.

Technical risk. This project aided in installing and operationalizing the Road Asset Management System
(RAMS) for decision-making on the LRN. The successful implementation of RAMS is contingent on retaining
the staff of the RAMS unit, who will continue to be dedicated full-time to the system. The successful
utilization of the system also requires a proper coordination mechanism by which the LRN condition data is
shared with the marzes.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LIFELINE ROAD NETWORK IMPROVEMENT PROJ (P126782)



  The Bank prepared this project based on the experiences from the previous Bank-financed Armenia
  Lifeline Road Improvement Project. Lessons incorporated at design included: (i) incorporating additional
  safety measures at design; (ii) Unlike the earlier project which was designed to respond to an
  emergency, this project focused more on improving the sustainability of the LRN through addressing
  challenges such as low funding for road maintenance, the limited institutional capacity of the MoTC and
  the Armenian Roads Directorate (ARD) for planning and prioritizing rehabilitation and maintenance
  works; and (iii) testing pilots to improve maintenance of the LRN (PAD, page 14). The Bank prepared this
  project in close collaboration with ADB and EIB, financing complementary road sector activities in
  Armenia. Work activities could commence immediately after effectiveness, as the first package or roads
  had been identified, surveyed, and designed, and the procurement documents completed even before
  project approval.

  As this project was prepared during the last years of the previous project, it benefitted from strong
  familiarity between the government and bank teams. There was an agreement between the Bank and the
  Government about what worked well in the previous project and could be scaled up, such as the safe
  village program, road safety audit, more efficient design standards, and cheaper technical
  solutions. Lessons learned also helped identify areas for improvement, such as providing proper
  incentives for local contractors and placing greater emphasis on the sustainability of the roads.

  The implementation arrangements were appropriate. The MoTC (later renamed as MOTCIT) - the policy-
  making authority for the transport sector - was responsible for project coordination and the Transport
  Project Implementation Unit (TPIU) for day-to-day project implementation (PAD, para 48).

  The Bank identified several risks at appraisal, including moderate risks with overall preparation and
  implementation, capacity risk, governance, and social and environmental risks. With mitigation measures,
  the overall risk was rated as moderate (PAD, para 54). Such mitigation measures were appropriate as
  project performance was not undermined by the risks identified at appraisal. The arrangements made at
  appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance were appropriate (discussed in section ten). There was
  also a minor shortcoming in M&E design (discussed in section 9).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank conducted twenty support missions. The missions were supplemented by technical missions,
 virtual discussions, and other in-country visits. Four project task team leaders (TTLs) were based outside
 Armenia. The TTLs were supported by experienced local staff in Yerevan for fiduciary safeguards, M&E,
 and day-to-day project implementation. The team addressed the Government's priorities and addressed
 implementation issues in a timely manner and aided in safeguards and fiduciary compliance (discussed in
 Section 10). The team was proactive in solving implementation issues by analyzing the local market for civil
 works contracts and revising the value of works contracts and qualification requirements to attract more
 bids. Likewise, there were fewer bids compared to past processes under the previous Bank-financed
 project. The Bank team analyzed the evolution of the size of lots since 2009. From an average contract of
 US$1.01 million covering 3.6 km in 2009, these figures had increased to an average of US$2.7 million per
 contract, covering 10.5 km in 2013. Moreover, the construction market in Armenia had been limited in the

                                                                                                 Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LIFELINE ROAD NETWORK IMPROVEMENT PROJ (P126782)



 preceding five years, limiting the number of contracts awarded each year and making it harder for
 companies to prove similar past experience. The supervision team, togther with Bank management,
 resolved this issue by putting a ceiling on the value of the contract at US$2.5 million and relaxing the
 qualification requirements for joint ventures in the bidding documents for asphalt road sections.

 One shortcoming during supervision was that the shortcoming in M&E design (i.e., the RAMS network was
 intended to have been used for the entire network to aid decision-making) was not rectified during
 implementation.

 In sum. Overall, the Bank's performance is rated as satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework was clear, and the causal links between project activities, outputs, and intended
 outcomes were logical. The key outcome indicators (the share of rural population with access to an all-
 season road, travel time savings, and using the Road Asset Management System (RAMS) for decision-
 making on LRN) were specific, measurable, and attributable to project activities. The M&E framework
 envisioned a user survey to assess performance before and after the project. The Roads
 Department, responsible for M&E, had gained experience monitoring the previous Bank-financed project.

 There was one shortcoming pertaining to how the outcome indicator on RAMS was to be assessed.
 According to the Bank, the RAMS was to be primarily used for decision-making on interstate and
 republican roads, not just the LRN. As such, the Bank assessed the outcome indicator as not achieved.
 However, the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) viewed the current set up of RAMS as helping in selecting
 roads for rehabilitation as sufficient for achieving this indicator. This disconnect was only discovered during
 the last project supervision mission.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (para 54) noted that the M&E framework was implemented as designed. The targets for key
  output indicators (the number of roads to be rehabilitated and the number of safe village schemes) were
  increased with the AFs. The project financed two sets of Social Monitoring and Evaluation Surveys, one
  for the works under the parent project and the other under the AFs. In response to the Bank's concern
  over the quality of the supervision consultant's monthly reports, the Roads Department was asked to
  undertake more robust quality control. To assist in this report, the Bank began using the Performance



                                                                                                     Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LIFELINE ROAD NETWORK IMPROVEMENT PROJ (P126782)



  Assessment Toolkit to monitor the progress of civil works and the contractor and consultants' work
  methods. These factors aided in improving the quality of reporting.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data were utilized to inform project management and decision-making. The ICR (para 55)
  noted that the decision to proceed with AF and extensions of the closing date were made largely based
  on the strong progress in achieving the PDO and outcome indicators. The findings from the Social and
  Monitoring Evaluation Surveys helped to assess performance.

  In sum, M&E is rated as substantial with minor shortcoming in design.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under the World Bank Safeguard
   policies. Two safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); and
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

   Environmental Assessment. Environmental safeguards were triggered, as the activities entailed
   the rehabilitation of existing roads. An Environmental Management Framework was prepared and publicly
   disclosed at appraisal to address the possible environmental effects (PAD, para 78).

   The project's environmental safeguards management was moderately satisfactory overall (ICR, para 57).
   Although the project did comply with environmental safeguards at project closure, there were some
   shortfalls during implementation, such as issues with safe workplace environment (deficient demarcation
   and safety signage at some work sites, speed limit signs, on-site waste management, inadequate
   dissemination of information, inadequate report of environmental work, concerns about the Road
   Department's (RDs) proactive approach to slope stabilization as some completed road sections had
   undergone slope erosion/rock fall). These issues were, however, rectified by project closure.

   Involuntary Resettlement. The PAD (para 76) noted that an initial screening of project activities confirmed
   that there would be no land acquisition or involuntary resettlement, as the activities were to be in areas of
   existing sites and structures. However, as the project included road safety and rehabilitation activities, the
   involuntary resettlement safeguards were triggered as a precautionary measure. A Resettlement Policy
   Framework (RPF) was prepared and publicly disclosed to address land acquisition and resettlement issues
   that arose during implementation.




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LIFELINE ROAD NETWORK IMPROVEMENT PROJ (P126782)



   The project's social safeguards management was rated satisfactory (ICR, para 59). As expected at
   appraisal, all works took place within the right of way of existing roads and hence did not entail land
   acquisitions, physical location, or asset/income loss of the local population.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. The Bank conducted a financial management assessment of the TPIU (later
   renamed as Roads Department (RD). The assessment concluded that the financial arrangements were
   satisfactory. The financial risk was rated low at appraisal (PAD, page 33).

   The financial management was rated as satisfactory (ICR, para 60). Unmodified audit reports were
   submitted in a timely fashion. The RD compiled the public disclosure requirements for the audited financial
   statements, by posting them on the MOTCIT's website.

   Procurement management. The Bank conducted a procurement assessment of the TPIU (RD) at
   appraisal. TPIU had implemented Bank-financed projects, and its staff were familiar with the Bank's
   procurement procedures. The overall procurement risk was rated moderate at appraisal (PAD, page 37).

   The procurement management was rated moderately satisfactory (ICR, para 61). There were some issues
   during implementation, such as a lack of bids for the first works package, difficulties in processing the
   number of TA contracts, insufficient quality of procurement documents (requiring multiple rounds of
   revisions), and procedural issues, such as the RD not obtaining the Bank's no objection in advance of
   issuing amendments. These were resolved and there were no cases of mis-procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR does not report any unintended impacts.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       LIFELINE ROAD NETWORK IMPROVEMENT PROJ (P126782)




12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following two lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language from the ICR.

1. Building upon successful implementation of a previous project may raise the potential for
success. This project on lifeline roads was prepared, while the previous lifeline project was ongoing.
The Project Implementation Unit was familiar with the Bank's fiduciary requirements. Further, priority
investments and detailed technical design and bidding documents had already been completed even
before Bank approval for this project. This contributed to the commencement of project activities
immediately after effectiveness.

2. Additional effort may be required to develop a sustainable rural road strategy for the long
term. This project aided in developing and operationalizing a Road Assessment Management
System (RAMS) for prioritizing asset management appropriately. However, the more significant
challenge was to ensure adequate finance for the future. The RAMS system needs to be
supplemented by sufficient sectoral budgeting to ensure that the rehabilitated roads are not
undermined for want of maintenance activities.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear and well-written. The theory of change articulated in the text clearly shows the logical links
between the project activities, outputs, and the intended outcomes. The evidence and analysis provided in the
ICR is adequate for assessing project performance. The ICR draws good lessons from the experience of
implementing this project. The photographs provided in Annex Seven (ICR, pages 55 -57) are useful in
enabling the reader to visualize the changes made after the project. A minor shortcoming was that the main text
at 24 pages is considerably more than the recommended length of 15 pages.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 16 of 17
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
LIFELINE ROAD NETWORK IMPROVEMENT PROJ (P126782)




                                                                                Page 17 of 17
