     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Statistics and Data for Develop (P162621)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023647

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P162621                                      National Statistics and Data for Develop

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Mozambique                                   Poverty and Equity


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D2280                                    30-Dec-2022                                         54,663,652.72

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Jul-2017                                  30-Dec-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              62,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                               54,333,356.93                                              0.00

 Actual                                           54,663,652.72                                              0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Shahrzad Mobasher            Clay Wescott                  Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC (Unit 1)
 Fard




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   Pg. 1 of the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) presents the Project Development Objective (PDO) as to
   improve the production and dissemination of quality socio-economic statistics. The project will also support
   the use of data in evidence-based policy making through improved capacity for spatial development planning
   and aid data management."

   For this ICRR, the PDO is taken to be:


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Statistics and Data for Develop (P162621)



         PDO1: improved production and dissemination of quality socio-economic statistics and use in
            evidence-based policymaking;
         PDO2: improved capacity for evidence-based spatial planning; and
         PDO3: improved capacity for foreign aid data management.

   The Financing Agreement does not state the PDO of this project.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project comprised the following four components:

   Component 1: National Institute of Statistics (INE) Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building
   (appraisal: US$4.6 million; actual cost: US$6.1 million). This component aimed at supporting the INE to
   create the enabling environment necessary to fulfill its mandate. The component was broken down into four
   sub-components, each one focused on specific dimensions of institutional strengthening and capacity
   building as follows:

           National Statistical System (NSS) Strategy, coordination, and quality assurance;
           INE skills development and technical capacity;
           Investment in information and communications technology (ICT); and
           INE project management.

   Component 2: Data Collection, Analysis, and Dissemination (appraisal: US$69.9 actual cost:
   US$73.5 million. This component sought to strengthen the relevance and quality of INE’s program of
   household budget surveys and economic statistics. It was aligned with the NSDS 2013–2017 objective of
   production and dissemination of quality statistics. It contained the following four sub-components:

           Population and housing census;
           Welfare monitoring system and two household budget surveys;
           National accounts, consumer price indicators, and economic statistics; and
           Data accessibility.

   Component 3: Mainstreaming Spatial Development Planning (appraisal: US$10 million actual cost:
   US$11.9 million). This component aimed to enhance Spatial Development Planning (SDP) capacity across
   priority national government agencies, ensure the sustainability and institutionalization of the National Inter-
   Agency Spatial Planning Platform, and enhance the development of skills in spatial planning in
   Mozambique’s public sector. Five subcomponents were identified to address key dimensions of
   mainstreaming SDP:

         Cross-sectoral institutional development on SDP;

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    National Statistics and Data for Develop (P162621)



          National policy and institutional framework of SDP;
          SDP learning;
          Geographic Information System (GIS) platform management and operation costs; and
          SDP Unit Management

  Component 4: Aid Data Management for Enhanced Planning, Budgeting, and Monitoring (appraisal:
  US$2 million; actual cost: US$2.9 million). This component responded to the GoM's need for more
  effective domestic resource allocation in the national planning and budgeting processes. This was
  necessary as, at the time of the appraisal, the Official Development Assistance to Mozambique Database
  (ODAmoz) did not use national budget classification categories, complicating the integration of aid data with
  budget data.

  At the second restructuring, Subcomponent 1.5 (Support to the Economic Research Unit at MEF) was
  added to support evidence-based policymaking at the MEF’s National Directorate of Economic Policies and
  Development (DNPED). As detailed on pg. 5 of the restructuring paper, the subcomponent “aims to support
  the development of cross-sectoral evidence-based strategic planning, policymaking and evaluation in
  support of economic diversification in Mozambique in the context of an impending resource boom. The
  strategic research funded under this program is expected to inform government policy and serve as the
  basis of a dialogue across ministries to guide public investments, reforms and institutional strengthening.
  The project will invest in strengthening the technical cadre at the unit, as well as some operating costs.” The
  activities under this sub-component supported evidence-based policymaking at the MEF in the areas of (i)
  macroeconomic analysis and statistics, (ii) population studies, (iii) sectoral policies, and (iv) financial
  analysis (ICR pg. 45). This subcomponent was financed by reallocating US$1.5 million from the unallocated
  category to this subcomponent.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The original approved amount from World Bank and non-World Bank financing was
  US$92.54 million. The revised amount was US$108.58 million, with notable changes including the Recipient
  contribution increasing from US$10 million at appraisal to US$29.77 million and the Bank contribution
  decreasing from US$62 million at appraisal to US$54.33 million. Bank financing declined at the second
  restructuring due to the reallocation of funding from this project, as well as other Bank-financed projects, to
  a project intended to address the needs of Mozambique following a tropical cyclone, with US$4.5 million
  from the Population and Housing Census and US$3 million from the unallocated component being
  reallocated to another project. The actual disbursed amount was US$108.91 million. The difference of
  US$0.3 million between the revised project cost amount and the actual disbursed amount is explained by
  changes from other donor commitments.

  Financing. The project was funded by a World Bank International Development Assistance grant of
  US$54.66 million, as well as a non-World Bank financing of US$54.25 million. The non-World Bank
  financing consisted of a Borrower/Recipient financing of US$29.77 million, U.K. Department for International
  Development financing of US$5.95 million, Government of Canada financing of US$7.78 million,
  Government of Italy financing of US$1.77 million, Government of Sweden financing of US$4.60 million,
  Government of Norway financing of US$4.13 million and a United Nations Fund for Population Activities
  financing of US$250,000.



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Statistics and Data for Develop (P162621)



   Dates. The project was approved on July 6, 2017, and became effective on August 7, 2017. The mid-term
   review was held on July 20, 2020. The project closed on December 30, 2022, as envisaged. The project
   underwent three level 2 restructurings on March 27, 2019, December 10, 2019, and November 17, 2021.

   The first restructuring led to changes in the results framework, reallocations between disbursement
   categories, changes in institutional arrangements, changes in financial management, and changes in
   procurement. The second restructuring led to changes in components and costs, the cancellation of
   financing, reallocations between disbursement categories, and changes in institutional arrangements. The
   third restructuring led to changes in the results framework, reallocations between disbursement categories,
   changes in institutional arrangements, changes in the implementation schedule and some other changes.

   None of the restructurings led to a change in the PDO, with the ICR indicating that "the restructurings of the
   project were necessary to allow the implementation of the remaining project activities and to achieve project
   outcomes and objectives (pg. 10, ICR). These changes did not affect the original theory of change."




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Mozambique's economic growth rate was among the highest recorded in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA)
in the period following its civil war. Still, poverty reduction remained weak, undermining progress toward
the twin goals of eradicating extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity. Over the 1993-2014 period,
Mozambique's real gross domestic product (GDP) rose at an annual rate of 7.9 percent, on average, as the
economy recovered from the civil war and benefitted from relatively sound macroeconomic management
and openness to foreign direct investment, as well as substantial official development assistance (ODA).
Between 1993 and 1997, the reconstruction of the country absorbed a significant portion of workers in
agriculture. Still, employment creation remained dismal in subsequent years due to the capital-intensive
nature of the projects that were being undertaken. Each percentage point of real GDP growth led to half of
the reduction in poverty recorded in SSA over that period, and the poverty rate stood at 46.1 percent in
2014-2015.

At the time of appraisal, Mozambique’s economy was adversely affected by low commodity prices,
the worst drought in 35 years due to the El Niño phenomenon, conflict, and the surfacing of public
debts that had not been disclosed. Effective and efficient policies and programs informed by quality, cost-
effective, and geographically disaggregated social and economic data and statistics were required to
sustain inclusive growth. Mozambique’s statistical capacity as measured by the World Bank’s statistical
capacity indicator (SCI) deteriorated from 77.8 in 2012 to 71.1 in 2016. The deterioration in the score was
related to the availability of data, which fell by 24 points between 2010 and 2016 and reached the SSA
average in 2016. As a result, data on the demographic and socio-economic composition of the population,
as well as data on macroeconomic indicators, such as public and private finance statistics, trade statistics,
industrial statistics, and price statistics, were outdated and could not support evidence-based
policymaking.

While the NSDS4 (2013-2017) (Plano Estratégico do Sistema Estatístico Nacional, National Strategy
for the Development of Statistics) established several objectives, there were a number of challenges
to achieving these. The project was aligned with all three objectives of the NSDS4 (2013-2017), which

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      National Statistics and Data for Develop (P162621)



               consisted of (i) strengthening the production and dissemination of timely quality statistics, (ii) coordinating
               the production and quality of statistics, and (iii) supporting sustainable institutional capacity building by
               developing an incentive-based performance and training system. The problems to achieving these
               objectives consisted in the lack of (i) data collection, processing, storage, and analysis, (ii) human, physical
               (primarily ICT), and statistical infrastructure, (iii) dissemination, timeliness, and accessibility to data and
               statistics, (iv) technical capacity limitations, (v) adequate and predictable funding for statistics, and (vi)
               staffing gaps, professional development strategies, and training on statistics (PAD, pg. 13).

               Meanwhile, the effectiveness and the efficiency of ODA remained suboptimal, and improvements to
               Mozambique’s Aid Management Information System (AIMS), also known as ODAmoz, were required.
               Mozambique was the sixth largest recipient of ODA in Africa, with World Bank data suggesting that ODA
               was equivalent to 12.6 percent of the country’s gross national income in 2014. While significant
               improvements were made to the country’s public financial management system, ODA did not rely on
               Mozambique’s Chart of Accounts data definition, and this incompatibility did not allow aid data to be
               integrated into budget data. As a result, the budgetary planning process only considered domestic resource
               allocations. There was a recognition that a well-developed AIMS could (i) encourage improved aid
               cooperation, avoid duplication across development partners, and support a more equitable allocation
               across sectors and regions, (ii) allow for monitoring and evaluation of projects under national development
               strategies and international development agendas such that development partner projects become aligned
               with key policy priorities, and (iii) facilitate greater transparency and accountability between the government
               and development partners through, notably, increased oversight by civil society organizations (PAD,
               pg. 65).

               The project was aligned with the government’s development priorities, as well as the Country
               Partnership Framework (CPF) for the period FY17-21. The project supported the government’s Five-year
               Development Plan (Plano Quinquenal do Governo), which supported a more effective and efficient
               allocation of public resources toward the achievement of the country’s medium-term development priorities
               through informed policymaking. Further, the project was aligned with the objectives of the CPF FY17-21,
               which supported promoting diversified growth and enhanced productivity, investing in human capital, and
               enhancing sustainability and resilience.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve production and dissemination of quality socio-economic statistics and use in evidence-based
                             policies.

                             Rationale

                                                                                                                           Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Statistics and Data for Develop (P162621)



The results chain linking proposed activities, outputs, and outcomes was logical. Project activities addressed
the capacity constraints of the INE, supporting data collection, processing, storage, and analysis. User
feedback on the quality, relevance, and timeliness of INE statistical output was also collected to support the
dissemination, timeliness, and accessibility of data and statistics. Project activities also supported the
development of the NSS strategy to enhance the coordination and quality assurance of the data being
collected and processed. The subcomponent that was added to Component 1 activities (INE Institutional
Strengthening and Capacity Building) at the second restructuring to support economic research at the MEF’s
DNPED in support of evidence-based policymaking was intended to complete the results chain toward the
achievement of improving production and dissemination of quality socio-economic statistics to ensure
evidence-based policies.

Output and intermediate outcomes

All six intermediate results indicators (IRIs) measuring progress toward the achievement of Objective 1 were
met.

Staffing gaps, professional development strategies, and training on statistics: The INE skills
development training plan was developed and adopted by December 1, 2022. The number of INE staff
trained by the ENE (Escola Nacional de Estatística, National School of Statistics) increased from a baseline
of 0 on July 6, 2017, to 2,091 on March 31, 2022, against a target of 500. The project also supported the
strengthening of the technical and institutional capacity of INE by offering scholarships to 28 staff members of
the INE to pursue a master’s degree. Prior to the training, INE staff relied primarily on consultants to prepare
the sampling frame for surveys based on the National Census. After the training, INE staff were able to
prepare the sampling frame themselves.

Physical and statistical infrastructure: The project supplied the INE headquarters and its provincial
delegations, as well as the ENE, with the latest ICT equipment. The number of regional and central statistical
offices with data and video conference connectivity increased from a baseline of 0 in 2017, to 12 in 2022,
surpassing the target of 11. This limited the need for in-person meetings, supporting improved communication
and coordination of activities. The proportion of sample firms submitting data electronically through the SIEE
(Sistema Integrado de Estatísticas Económicas, Integrated System of Economic Statistics)—a portal where
firms are required to upload their data was an effort to increase the quality and frequency of firm-level data
and reduce the costs of collecting it—rose from a baseline of 0 in 2017), to 13 percent in 2022, well below the
target of 65 percent that was envisaged. The low achievement was explained by the fact that many firms did
not have access to the Internet or preferred to fill out physical questionnaires. The traditional paper-based
data collection system continued to be relied upon to ensure high response rates and the statistical
representativeness of the sample collected.

Data collection, processing, storage, and analysis: The number of statistical operations supported by the
project designed and implemented in line with international standards increased from 0 in 2017, to eight in
2022, surpassing the target of seven. This consisted of:

     i.   a Population and Housing Census;
    ii.   a Household Budget Survey 2019-2020;
   iii.   a High-frequency phone survey on the impact of covid-19 on households;
   iv.    Household survey on the impact of covid-19 on Firms;
    v.    Perception Survey on the Conflict in the North;
   vi.    National Accounts;

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Statistics and Data for Develop (P162621)




   vii. CPI; and
  viii. Informality Survey 2020.

Of these seven census and survey reports five were made available online (disaggregated by gender where
applicable) from a baseline of 0 in 2017. These included:

     i.    Population and Housing Census;
    ii.   Household Budget Survey 2019-2020;
   iii.   High-frequency phone survey on the impact of COVID-19 on households;
   iv.    Household survey on the impact of COVID-19 on Firms;
    v.    Informality Survey 2020.

The anonymized micro-datasets of these reports were published online, meeting the target of five by 2022.

The national accounts and consumer price index (CPI) data were improved through (i) the expansion in the
coverage of economic activity to include the informal sector, (ii) the rebasing of the national accounts data,
which could be accomplished through the sampling frame obtained from the 2017 Population and Housing
Census, (iii) the production of quarterly national accounts data, and (iv) the expansion in the geographic
coverage of the national CPI from three provinces to eight provinces. The project also supported the hiring of
four staff members at the MEF’s National Directorate of Economic Policies and Development (DNPED) to
support the completion of analytical studies to support evidence-based policymaking.

Dissemination, timeliness, and accessibility to data and statistics: Data user feedback on the quality,
relevance, and timeliness of INE statistical output being collected and responded to was achieved by March
31, 2022.

Outcomes

The NSDS 2020–2024 was drafted and adopted in 2020. This ensured that the statistical operations
undertaken under the strategy would be aligned with the data requirement needs of policymakers.

The SCI increased from a baseline of 71.10 in 2017 to 77.79 in 2022, exceeding the target of 76.00 by 2022,
with the Bank computing the SCI given that the SCI was discontinued by the project closing date and
replaced with the SPI. This outcome was achieved through the completion of the 2017 Population and
Housing Census (constituting the fifth national population census following the fourth national population
census conducted in 2015), the 2019/2020 Household Budget Survey (HBS) and the 2022 HBS, the 2021
Informal Sector Survey, 2022 Demographic and Health Survey, Surveys on the Impact of COVID on
Households and Firms, Perception Survey on the Conflict in the North, and Economic Surveys (annual and
monthly). These provided up-to-date statistics on the demographic and socio-economic composition of the
population, which could be used to guide evidence-based policymaking.

Further, the project supported the completion of two poverty surveys in 2020 and 2022. The shorter version of
the poverty survey, which was planned to be completed in between these two poverty surveys, was later
dropped, given the delays in completing the two poverty surveys.

The quality of national accounts statistics was improved from a baseline of 0 percent in 2017, to 100 percent
in 2020, as targeted. The improvement in the quality of national accounts statistics was assessed through the
expansion in the coverage of formal and informal sectors (25 percent of total weight), the expansion in the

                                                                                                 Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Statistics and Data for Develop (P162621)



CPI geographic coverage (from three to eight provinces) (25 percent of total weight), the publication of the
updated sources and methods for the calculation for the national accounts (25 percent of total weight), and
the rebasing of GDP (25 percent of total weight) based on the results of the 2017 Population and Housing
Census Survey.

The number of analytical studies prepared and disseminated by the MEF’s DNPED increased from a baseline
of 0 in 2020 to three studies by 2022, falling short of the target of six analytical studies (revised downwards
from 12 analytical studies). IEG finds, however, that this is not a meaningful indicator for assessing progress
toward the achievement of the objective.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve capacity for evidence-based spatial planning.

Rationale
The results chain linking proposed activities, outputs, and outcomes was logical. The development of
Mozambique’s SDP platform, which was supported by a stand-alone technical assistance project (i.e., the
Mozambique Spatial Development Planning Technical Assistance), lacked the new cutting-edge and hyper-
local spatial data and analytics needed for the government, private sector and others to make informed policy
and investment decisions. Further, the SPD platform, which was developed through proprietary GIS and data
management systems, was outdated, not user-friendly, and had restricted access for downloading and
manipulating data in machine-readable formats. IEG finds, however, that the relevance of this action is
questionable given the lack of clarity on how it responds to a specific problem. The project activities were
intended to improve SDP planning capacity across priority national government agencies—i.e., MEF, Ministry
of Health, National Roads Administration, Bank of Mozambique, Energy Fund, Ministry of Culture and
Tourism, Ministry of Agriculture and two municipalities (Matola and Vilanculos)—, to support the sustainability
and institutionalization of the SDP platform, and to support the integration and dissemination of geospatial
data and thematic maps from other agencies through the national GIS platform.

Output and intermediate outcomes

All nine IRIs measuring progress toward the achievement of Objective 2 were met.

Legal and institutional reforms: The project supported the passing by Parliament of the law for the creation
of Mozambique's National Spatial Data Infrastructure. The law would define an integrated set of
technologies, policies and institutional arrangements that aims to facilitate the creation, standardization,
exchange and use of spatial data and related information resources in an information sharing community in
Mozambique. Further, the project supported the creation of the National Agency of Spatial Planning (ADE), a
public institution charged with the promotion of spatial development initiatives, the development of socio-
economic analysis tools and important studies for the formulation of policies that influence the geospatial

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Statistics and Data for Develop (P162621)



planning process. The ADE replaced the functions which the Ministry of Transport and Communication
previously assumed. Another piece of legislation also formalized the National GIS Network as the official
Mozambique national geographic data portal, connecting institutions, people and resources for integrated
spatial analysis, and the ADE is managing this.

Staffing gaps, professional development strategies, and training on statistics: The number of
individuals in priority agencies who have completed training on SDP increased from one individual in 2017, to
66 in 2022, surpassing the target of 50. The number of new or improved training programs on SDP available
in national academic institutions increased from 0 in 2017, to two in 2022, as targeted. The number of
individuals in priority agencies that have completed training on the National GIS platform increased from a
baseline of 0 in 2018, to 167 in 2022, surpassing the target of 70.

Physical and statistical infrastructure: The number of external Geographic Information Systems integrated
into the Inter-Agency GIS Platform increased from a baseline of 0 in 2017, to 12 in 2022, surpassing the
target of five.

Data collection, processing, storage, and analysis: The number of registered institutional users that
provided georeferenced information under the SDP platform increased from a baseline of one in 2017, to 23
in 2022, surpassing the target of 15. The number of geospatial analytical tools available through an enhanced
SDP platform increased from a baseline of nine in 2017, to 24 in 2022, surpassing the target of 20.

Dissemination, timeliness, and accessibility to data and statistics: The number of registered institutional
users that utilize information under the SPD platform increased from a baseline of 0 in 2017, to 18 on
November 2, 2022, surpassing the target of 15. The number of thematic maps available through an enhanced
SDP platform increased from a baseline of 16 in 2017, to 989 in 2022, largely surpassing the target of 175.
The number of geospatial datasets available through an enhanced SDP platform increased from a baseline of
72 in 2018, to 860 in 2022, largely surpassing the target of 100.

Outcomes

Geographic spatial analysis was used for the first time in the preparation of the government’s Five-year
Program 2020-2024.

The number of priority institutions that utilize the Spatial Development Platform in the formulation and
monitoring of their policies as agreed under the Memorandum of Understanding increased from 0 in 2017, to
eight in 2022, surpassing the target of five. This indicator was measured by counting the number of
government institutions accessing and using geospatial data for internal government processes. As an
example of how data improvements supported by the project enabled evidence-based policymaking, the
project team highlighted the use of spatial data on COVID-19 hotspots enabled more effective deployment of
vaccines and other resources.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3

                                                                                                 Page 9 of 16
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               National Statistics and Data for Develop (P162621)




                            Objective
                            Improve capacity for foreign aid data management.

                            Rationale
                            The results chain linking proposed activities, outputs, and outcomes was logical. The training of relevant
                            officials on the improved version of the AIMS was intended to improve the capacity for foreign aid data
                            management. Component 4 activities also provided technical assistance to the National Directorate of
                            Planning and Budgeting and other public fiscal management institutions on best practices for using aid and
                            other data to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of national, sectoral, and geographic resource
                            allocation and use.

                            Output and intermediate outcomes

                            The results chain linking proposed activities, outputs, and outcomes was logical. The training of relevant
                            officials on the improved version of the AIMS was intended to improve the capacity for foreign aid data
                            management. Component 4 activities also provided technical assistance to the National Directorate of
                            Planning and Budgeting and other public fiscal management institutions on best practices for using aid and
                            other data to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of national, sectoral, and geographic resource
                            allocation and use.

                            Output and intermediate outcomes

                            One of the two IRIs measuring progress toward the achievement of Objective 3 were met.

                            Staffing gaps, professional development strategies, and training on statistics: The number of actors
                            trained to input, access, or use AIMS data increased from a baseline of 0 in 2017, to 35 in 2022, short of the
                            target of 300. Of the number trained, 18 were government staff and 17 development partner staff.

                            Physical and statistical infrastructure: The project facilitated the development of a prototype for the new
                            AIMS.

                            Outcomes

                            The final version of the AIMS was not adopted by the project closing date. None of the government
                            institutions systematically utilized AIMS data for decision-making, and the target for this indicator was not
                            achieved.



                            Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale


                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      National Statistics and Data for Develop (P162621)



  Overall efficacy is rated Substantial, with efficacy on Objective 1 rated Substantial, efficacy on Objective 2
  rated Substantial, and efficacy on Objective 3 rated Negligible.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
An economic analysis was not performed on an ex-ante basis at appraisal nor on an ex-post basis at project
completion. All project components, which were jointly implemented by the MEF’s Public Debt Department and
Economic Policy and Development Department, were implemented according to the established schedule,
except for Component 4 (External Aid Data Management) and Subcomponent 1.5 (Research Council-National
Department of Economic Policies and Development) which experienced delays. Delays related to Component 4
activities were caused by delays in hiring a Residence Consultant charged with international processes and
tenders, with the hiring process ultimately taking two years to complete. Delays of Subcomponent 1.5 activities
were related to the lack of the implementation agency’s absorptive capacity and led to only partial achievement
of the targeted analytical studies (see Section 4c).

The ICR also reports that while financial execution was slow during the first two years of project implementation,
increased Bank supervision and technical support, along with the project restructurings, allowed for progress to
be achieved from the second half of 2020 onwards.

The ICR reports that the per capita cost of the 2017 Population and Housing Census was US$2.6 (US$73.5
million divided by a population of 27.9 million individuals). This was high in comparison to estimated unit costs in
other countries, such as Madagascar (US$1.2 per capita), Sierra Leone (US$1.5 per capita), Comoros (US$1.7
per capita), and Ghana (US$3.0 per capita).


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Statistics and Data for Develop (P162621)




6. Outcome

The relevance of the objectives is rated High, given that the PDO was aligned with the government's and the
World Bank's development priorities for the country. Overall efficacy is rated Substantial, with efficacy on
Objectives 1 and 2 each rated Substantial, while efficacy on Objective 3 is rated Negligible due to low
achievement. The efficiency of the project is rated Modest, given that no economic analysis was performed at
appraisal and at project closing to measure efficiency. In addition, significant project implementation delays
were incurred. The project outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to sustaining development outcomes consist of the following:

    1. A potentially deteriorating macroeconomic framework could limit the availability of public resources
       dedicated to statistical operations;
    2. The lack of coordination and harmonization of statistical operations across institutions, such as the
       INE and the MTC, and the roles and responsibility of each institution, could limit data collection and
       dissemination.
    3. The fact that the final version of the AIMS was not adopted by the project closing date and that none
       of the government institutions systematically utilized AIMS data for decision-making undermines the
       development outcome of improving capacity for foreign aid data management.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At appraisal, the project had three implementing agencies, with INE implementing activities under
  Components 1 and 2, the MTC implementing Component 3 activities and the MEF implementing
  Component 4 activities. A Project Steering Committee (PSC), which was led by the MEF and comprised
  of representatives from each implementing agency, was established to oversee the implementation of the
  project through meetings which were planned to be held at least twice a year to review progress against
  annual work plans, facilitate collaboration across implementing agencies and resolve implementation
  challenges. Further, an Inter-Ministerial Committee led by the MEF was also established to oversee
  Component 3 activities due to the complex cross-sectoral nature of the activities, and an Inter-Agency
  Group was also established to address the technical issues on Component 3 activities.

  The Bank was able to leverage ongoing donor support in the development of Mozambique’s NSS. Donor
  support contributed to the implementation of the NSDS4 (2013-2017), which supported data collection

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Statistics and Data for Develop (P162621)



  and processing for the population and housing census, with the UNFPA providing technical assistance
  and coordinating donor assistance in close coordination with the Bank. UNICEF also provided bilateral
  financial support to the census. The project added three more consultants to the UNFPA team posted at
  the INE to assume the financial management, procurement, and technical advisory roles for the
  completion of the census. The Bank successfully sought the engagement of several development
  partners in the functional and technical assessment that was conducted to identify problems and
  solutions, including, the African Development Bank, the United Kingdom’s Department for International
  Development, the European Union, Korea’s Eximbank, the United Nations Development Program, the
  U.N. Office of the Resident Coorindator, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the World Health
  Organization, and the Embassies of Brazil, Canada, Finland, Germany, Italy, Japan, Portugal,
  Switzerland, and Sweden. Further, it sought the engagement of development partners to endorse the
  scope, objectives and the design of the project.

  Further, the Bank coordinated activities on aid data management with the United Nations Development
  Program and the Belgian Development Agency. The Bank conducted a functional and technical
  assessment of aid data management, consulting with the African Development Bank, the United
  Kingdom’s DFID, the European Union, Korea’s Eximbank, UNDP, the U.N. Office of the Resident
  Coordinator, United Nations Children's Fund, World Health Organization, and the Embassies of Brazil,
  Canada, Finland, Germany, Italy, Japan, Portugal, Switzerland, and Sweden during this assessment.
  Finally, development partners and all relevant PFM institutions in Mozambique were consulted and
  endorsed the specific activities for Component 4 activities. IEG finds, however, that the project might
  have not adequately captured activities to integrate aid data with budget data, which might explain why
  the AIMS was not adopted by project completion.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Four entities were charged with the implementation of the project, namely, the INE, the MTC (Ministério
 dos Transportes e Comunicações, Ministry of Transport and Communications), and two departments at
 MEF, i.e., the National Directorate of Public Debt (DNGDP) and DNPED. Two project implementation units
 (PIUs) were established to fulfill the fiduciary responsibilities of the project, with one being based at the INE
 and the other being based at MTC. The ICR indicates that infrequent meetings held by the PSC limited the
 coordination of activities.

 The Bank relied on a procurement specialist for missions in the first 18 months of project implementation,
 given the limited capacity of implementing agencies. There was a total of nine implementation support
 missions throughout project implementation, two mid-term reviews, one of which was external, and a final
 evaluation, also carried out by an external consultant.

 The completion of the 2017 Population Housing Census was delayed, with representatives from the INE
 being unable to travel to some areas in the North of the country to update the cartography of the census.
 This delayed the completion of the two poverty surveys.



                                                                                                      Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Statistics and Data for Develop (P162621)



 The utilization of virtual communication methods for project implementation played a crucial role in
 mitigating disruptions, particularly those created as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. This enabled the
 project to maintain its normal course of activities with only minor disruptions.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The INE’s project implementation unit (PIU) was charged with the M&E of Component 1 and 2 activities.
 The MTC’s PIU was charged with the M&E of Component 3 activities. The monitoring and evaluation
 arrangements across the various implementing agencies were sound, with each agency required to report
 on the agreed project indicators at the frequency outlined in the results framework. This was done in
 addition to implementing agencies reporting on the status of implementation of project activities through an
 annual work plan and an annual report, which included a detailed list of activities for each subcomponent,
 including their implementation schedule as well as planned, estimated, and actual costs and intermediate
 and final outputs.



b. M&E Implementation
  An M&E specialist for Component 3 activities was hired at the start of the project. There was no
  monitoring and evaluation specialist to monitor progress of Component 1 and 2 activities until the mid-
  term review. However, while the PSC met irregularly, implementation support missions and bi-weekly
  meetings led by the Bank filled some of the gap in M&E implementation.



c. M&E Utilization
  The Bank introduced mid-course corrections as necessary, with the three project restructurings
  resulting in only minor changes being made to the results framework. Changes included the cancellation
  of the SCI Indicator, with its calculation methodology having been changed only to consider variables
  that the project could influence, as well as the inclusion of a new indicator for the activities of the
  National Directorate of Economic Policies and Development of the MEF (i.e., number of analytical
  studies elaborated which were financed by the project). The target for this indicator, which was reduced
  from 12 to six, was the only target to become less ambitious.




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Statistics and Data for Develop (P162621)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project is classified as Category C for environmental safeguards. No safeguard policies were triggered.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   None noted.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None noted.



d. Other
   None noted.



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                      IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                   Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                                                                    Shortcomings in the design of
                                                                                    Component 4 activities that
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory             Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                    undermined the adoption of the
                                                                                    AIMS.
Quality of M&E                   Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

There are a number of lessons that can be derived from the ICR:


                                                                                                     Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       National Statistics and Data for Develop (P162621)



     1. The fragile and conflict-affected nature of a country should be carefully considered in
        establishing the level of ambition of a project. In this project, project implementation delays
        were incurred in completing statistical operations as a result of the fragile and conflict-
        affected context, with some areas being inaccessible due to conflict.
     2. Statistical operations, which largely rely on an adequate supply of technical capacity, require
        a stable source of funding. Projects supporting the development of statistical operations but
        which do not support the stable source of funding for statistical operations can undermine the
        development outcome that is being sought.
     3. The measurement of the use of statistics in policymaking does not lend itself to tracking by a
        results indicator, but its importance suggest the need for ongoing support and dialogue on
        how best to make use of newly available data.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The quality of the ICR is rated Substantial. Notwithstanding this, the ICR could have provided the full list of
statistical operations supported by the project. IEG also notes that the dates for two of the three restructurings
were misreported in the ICR, with p. 43 of the ICR indicating that the first restructuring was dated April 9, 2019,
when it was actually dated March 27, 2019, and that the third restructuring was dated July 2021, when it was
actually dated November 17, 2021.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 16 of 16
