     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Rural Inclusion (P106685)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023744

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P106685                                     AR Rural Inclusion

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Argentina                                   Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-80930                                  28-Feb-2021                                         50,610,675.99

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 11-Jun-2015                                 30-Nov-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            52,500,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             52,500,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         50,610,675.99                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Shashidhara Laxman          Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Kolavalli




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective is to increase the socio-economic inclusion of rural poor (small producers,
   indigenous people, and rural workers) by: (a) strengthening their organizational, planning and management
   capacity to achieve poverty-reduction goals; (b) improving their access to community infrastructure and
   services; and (c) piloting a new model for developing sustainable access to markets (Legal agreement (LA, p.
   5). The PDO formulation in the PAD was identical (p.4).



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Rural Inclusion (P106685)



   The PDO will be parsed as follows:
   The PDO formulation is: to increase the socio-economic inclusion of rural poor (small producers,
   indigenous people, and rural workers).

   This is expected to be achieved through the following sub-objectives:

   (a) to strengthen the rural poor’s' organizational, planning and management capacity to achieve poverty-
   reduction goals;

   (b) to improve rural poor’s' access to community infrastructure and services; and

   (c) to pilot a new model for developing sustainable access to markets.

   For the sake of the analysis in this ICRR, the three sub-objectives will be assessed as objectives in section 4,
   and an assessment of how and to what degree the achievement of these three sub-objectives have led to the
   achievement of the PDO will be provided in a summary paragraph in section 4.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Capacity Development (Appraised: US$13.83 million (Bank: US$2.10 million); Actual:
   US$1.57 (Bank US$0.4 million)).

   Capacity-building activities for the purpose of increasing the impact of development actions on targeted
   rural groups. It included two subcomponents:

        a. the provision of technical support to communities and organizations of small producers, indigenous
           peoples and rural workers, aimed at improving their organizational, planning, and management
           capacity; and
        b. the provision of technical support to strengthen the capacity of targeted rural groups through the
           preparation of studies, strategies and planning instruments for local development.

   Component 2: Rural Livelihood (Appraised: US$43.0 million (Bank: US$39.00 million); Actual:
   US$44.57 million (Bank US$41.31 million)).

   Demand driven investments/activities aimed at improving the living conditions of the targeted poor rural
   communities. It has two subcomponents:




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AR Rural Inclusion (P106685)



      a. support to demand driven investments/activities (rural investments subprojects (SIR)) for i)
         improving the living conditions of targeted poor rural communities; (b) small-scale rehabilitation or
         construction of rural community infrastructure; (c) support to improve agricultural production and
         marketing, (d) activities for food security and natural resource management; and (e) construction or
         improvement of household water and sanitation systems.
      b. Access to Infrastructure and Public Services: infrastructure, goods, and services for targeted
         communities.

  Component 3: Access to Markets (Appraised: US$16.27 million (Bank: US$11.00 million); Actual:
  US$10.7 million (Bank: 8.00 million)).

  Provision of support for the identification, formulation and implementation of Productive Alliances
  subprojects. It has two subcomponents:

      a. Alliance promotion and preparation: activities for the promotion and preparation of Productive
         Alliance Subprojects, including, inter alia,: (i) the realization of promotional campaign targeted at
         potential producer organizations and buyers, (ii) the formulation of alliance profiles reflecting joint
         expressions of interest of producer organizations and potential buyers; (iii) the provision of support
         for the process of evaluating , ranking and approving Productive Alliances subprojects; (iv) the
         provision of training to Producer Organizations on the design and negotiation of alliance business
         plans which may eventually result in Productive Alliances; and (v) the provision of support for the
         preparation of productive alliance subproject agreements and related documentation, all acceptable
         to the Bank; and
      b. Alliance implementation: carrying out productive alliance-driven investments/activities (such as,
         small scale civil works and the improvements of the production processes and production quality
         standards of production organizations) for purposes of developing sustainable access to markets for
         producer organizations based on productive alliances.

  Component 4: Project Management (Appraised: US$3.27 million (Bank: US$0.27 million); Actual:
  US$3.48 million (Bank: US$0.90 million).

  Provision of operational support to assist the Borrower in the coordination, implementation, administration,
  monitoring and evaluation of the Project.

  The following changes were made in two components during restructuring.

        Component 2: to maximize development impact, the financing of medium-scale scale works with a
         ceiling of USD800,000 per investment was included.
        Component 3: to generate additional demand for alliances and to diversify into different value
         chains, the geographical scope was expanded from two poor provinces to all the provinces
         participating in the project.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project costs



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 23
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  AR Rural Inclusion (P106685)



The project was appraised at US$76.5 million. The costs were revised to US$66.74 million, and actual costs
were US$59.98 million. The costs were revised down during the 2019 restructuring because of
the Government of Argentina’s (GOA) reduced ability to provide counterpart financing.

Financing

Investment project financing of US$52.5 million over a five-year period. The project was financed through
an IBRD loan (loan 8093-AR).

Borrower contribution

The total contribution from the borrower and the communities was US$ 9.4 million against the planned
US$24 million. The government contributed US$3.85 million against the planned US$16.6 million, which
was revised down to US$6.84 million. Local communities contributed US$5.5 million against the planned
US$7.4 million).

Dates

The project was approved on June 11, 2015, and became effective on April 07, 2016. A Mid Term Review
(MTR) was held on June 22, 2018. The project was restructured on June 06, 2019. It was to close originally
on February 28, 2021, but closed on November 30, 2022. The first extension by 16 months (from February
28, 2021, to June 30, 2022) was to maximize the probability of achieving the PDO targets. The second
extension, by five months, was to complete the ongoing investments and fully achieve the objectives of the
project.

The level two restructuring, done in 2019 when 15 percent of the funds had been disbursed, included the
following:

      Components: inclusion of medium scale rural investments under component 2 and expansion of
         geographical coverage of component 3
        Institutional arrangements; included the option of on-lending to provinces in addition to project
         transferring funds to provinces as grants
        Triggering of OP 7.50 and updating of safeguard instruments
        Disbursement categories and reallocation of funds;
        Procurement arrangements
        Results framework; and
        Inclusion of the safeguards incident response requirement

Split rating

The restructuring did not change the PDO. The World Bank’s commitments remained the same; Planned
funding for Component 1 declined from USD13.83 million to USD4.2 million primarily because of GOA’s
reduced ability to make counterpart funding available. The scope remained the same except for the
increased geographical coverage of one component. Some changes were made to outcome indicators,
largely to make them easier to measure. The project became more ambitious, although the target for one
indicator was decreased (no. of community organizations functional after 12 months). As the PDOs did not



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Rural Inclusion (P106685)



   change, same outcomes were expected, and the project became more ambitious, this review will not do a
   split rating.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context

After rebounding from the economic crisis in 2002, Argentina was successful in reducing poverty and
decreasing income inequality. The growth, however, was accompanied by macroeconomic imbalances,
inflation, fiscal deficits, and limited international reserves, which threatened the sustainability of the gains
made in reducing poverty and inequality. Argentina’s poverty and income inequality were some of the
lowest in Latin America, but regional disparities within the country in poverty and access to resources
persisted. The less well-developed and poorly integrated northern provinces had poverty rates two to three
times higher than the national average and lagged the rest of the country in social services and basic
infrastructure.

About 1.5 million people, a third of the rural population of about 4.5 million, who made up about 11 percent
of the total population, were poor despite an agricultural sector that made Argentina one of the top food
producers in the world. The rural poor are mostly small family producers, indigenous people, and rural
workers who share the rural space with larger landowners and producers of export commodities.
Indigenous people, who comprise 2.5 percent of the population, are present in all provinces of Argentina
but more so in the northern provinces. They are one of the largest and most vulnerable groups of the rural
poor in Argentina. Nearly a quarter (23.5 percent) of indigenous households live with unsatisfied basic
needs, compared to 13.8 percent for the rest of the population.

Country strategy

The government recognized that family farms play an important role in agricultural and rural development
and that small family producers are key actors in the national food system. The PDO aligns with the
Government’s commitment to promote growth with equity and inclusion. Argentina’s goals for the
agricultural sector (Agri-food and Agribusiness Strategic Plan (PEAA 2020)) emphasized supporting small
producers, increasing productivity through investments in basic rural infrastructure, provision of technical
assistance, the use of appropriate technologies, and increased access to markets. The Project was initially
designed in 2011 when Argentina prepared a series of projects to improve the livelihoods of the rural poor
and increase productivity and market access of family producers. Thus, the PDO complements the
objectives of other non-Bank financed projects implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture. The PDO
subsumes the priorities of the administration that came to power in 2019 to reduce hunger and improve
access to water.

Bank strategy

The PDO was consistent with several result areas within the three strategic themes of the Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS – FY15-18): raising the productivity of small and medium producers in lower-
income regions and increasing access to basic services for the bottom 40 percent in low-income provinces

                                                                                                       Page 5 of 23
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      AR Rural Inclusion (P106685)



               and areas, for example. At Project Closing, the PDO aligned with the Country Partnership Framework
               (CPF) for FY19-FY22, which sought to help Argentina achieve macroeconomic stability while reducing
               poverty through private sector-led growth. One of the objectives was to make the rural economy climate
               smart because Argentina’s position as a world leader in many food exports was threatened by the
               increasing frequency and intensity of climate events, with a large segment of farmers in Argentina,
               especially family farmers, remaining vulnerable to these risks. Although the PDO did not refer to climate-
               smart support, the Project’s activities, outcomes, and targeted beneficiaries are relevant to reducing small
               farmers' productive and social vulnerabilities to climate change.

               The PDO was also consistent with priorities in the 2022 Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR),
               the 2021 Water Security Diagnostic, and the 2018 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Argentina. The
               CCDR noted higher expected changes in temperature in northern Argentina, with its large vulnerable
               population. It identified water storage, irrigation, and deepening of waterways as immediate priorities for
               water security. Similarly, the Water Security Diagnostic identified priority investments to improve water
               security by 2030.

               The World Bank supported two projects since 1997: Small Farmers Development Project (PROINDER) and
               the Provincial Agricultural Development Project (PROSAP). Satisfied with the results of PROINDER, the
               Government requested the World Bank to continue the support, incorporating the previous projects' lessons
               and piloting an approach to improve market access for small family producers.

               The PDO is pitched at a level that adequately addresses a development problem, i.e., to increase the socio-
               economic inclusion of the rural poor. In addition, it clarifies the necessary and expected outcomes that will
               lead to the achievement of the PDO, i.e., (a) strengthening their organizational, planning, and management
               capacity to achieve poverty-reduction goals; (b) improving their access to community infrastructure and
               services; and (c) piloting a new model for developing sustainable access to markets. The ICR states that
               socio-economic inclusion would be achieved by (a) improvements in living standards and access to basic
               social infrastructure, mainly water for household consumption and production, and (b) the economic
               inclusion of rural producers based on new productive infrastructure, production and marketing equipment,
               and the acquisition of new knowledge.

               Aligned with country and bank strategies and pitched at an appropriate level to address a development
               problem, PDO relevance is rated high.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective


                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR Rural Inclusion (P106685)



To strengthen the organizational, planning and management capacity of rural poor (small producers,
indigenous people, and rural workers) to achieve poverty-reduction goals.

Rationale
Theory of Change

To strengthen the rural poor’s organizational, planning, and management capacity, the project's inputs were
technical support to targeted beneficiaries (communities and small producers’ organizations, indigenous
peoples, and rural workers’) and to prepare studies, strategies, and planning instruments for local
development. This was expected to lead to outputs such as beneficiaries’ organizations able to formulate
eligible subproject proposals and for them to be able to manage their organizations commercially and
technically. This was in turn expected to lead to the following outcomes: Beneficiary community organizations
would demonstrate sustained functionality.

Project outputs

      399 community organizations were strengthened by the project, (exceeding the target of 300). The
       ICR provides limited information as to how these organizations were strengthened including what
       criteria were used to measure “strengthened organizations”.

Project outcomes

      121 community organizations were functional 12 months after subproject completion, exceeding the
       target of 100, and
      84% subproject proposals were considered eligible for financing (over total number of proposal
       presented), exceeding the target of 80%

The project built capabilities of or strengthened community organizations – building both new ones and
developing those existing – exceeding the revised target for the number of community organizations that it
aimed to strengthen. The ICR does not provide information on what the project did to strengthen the
organizations or what “strengthening” meant. According to the bank team (discussed in a meeting on January
18, 2024) activities to strengthen organizations depended on their needs, which varied considerably, and they
used about ten different indicators relating to production, governance, and finance to determine whether the
organizations were strengthened. The outcomes, in terms of strengthened organizations, are measured in
terms of whether the community organizations continued to function 12 months after the completion of the
subprojects they undertook and the quality of subprojects they prepared, reflected by the proportion that was
eligible for financing. The project exceeded the target on both: more organizations than targeted were
functional after 12 months and a higher than targeted proportion of their proposals were eligible for financing.
This objective goes only so far as to build capabilities of community organizations to come together and put
up proposals to take actions that can improve their wellbeing. How that capability helped them would be
addressed by the next two objectives.

The ICR offers additional information from a survey of 349 of the 419 community organizations that
implemented special projects. The survey did not require the respondents to answer all the questions and
was completed by representatives, who, the ICR notes, may not have highlighted all the benefits. According
to the information, 56 percent of them claimed that they benefited from organizational improvements in terms



                                                                                                  Page 7 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR Rural Inclusion (P106685)



of formalization of their organization, increased participation of members, and improvements in administration
and management.

The project technically supported community organizations to improve their capacity to organize, plan, and
implement subprojects, thus strengthening them. The strengthened organizations were functional 12 months
after they implemented subprojects. Their improved capabilities were reflected by the quality of proposals
they had prepared to improve their livelihoods, measured by their eligibility for financing. Additional
information suggests that at least one half of the community organizations were satisfied with the project
benefits. The achievement of this subobjective is thus rated substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve rural poor’s (small producers, indigenous people, and rural workers) access to community
infrastructure and services.

Rationale
Theory of Change:

To improve the rural poor’s access to community infrastructure and services, the projects inputs were
investments in agricultural production and marketing, food security, natural resources management and in
household water and sanitation systems. This was expected to lead to outputs such as infrastructure and
services to improve agricultural production in place and household water and sanitation systems in place.
This was in turn expected to lead to improved agricultural productivity (increased volume of sales and
sustained market relationships) and improved living conditions.

Project outputs

      428 community subprojects completed, exceeding the target of 210
      111 indigenous people’s community subprojects completed, exceeding the target of 90

Project outcomes

      478 rural investment subprojects achieved at least 75% of the expected processes, exceeding the
         target of 240
        95 percent of the rural investment subprojects (SIRs) were operational), exceeding the target of 70
         percent73,150 direct project beneficiaries, exceeding the target of 50,000
        11,829 families benefited with at least one rural investment project, exceeding the target of 9,000
        37,020 beneficiaries of community projects, exceeding the target of 31,500
        22,125 beneficiaries of indigenous people subprojects, exceeding the target of 13,500



                                                                                                  Page 8 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR Rural Inclusion (P106685)



The project supported subprojects of communities that could potentially benefit them. It did so exceeding the
targets for the total number of projects completed and those of indigenous communities and the number of
families that potentially could benefit from the community subprojects. The outcome was measured by two
indicators. One of them is the number of subprojects that had completed at least the third stage of the four
implementation stages: i) approval by the committee, ii) agreement signed, iii) 100 percent of the amount
disbursed, and iv) the project completed, with final statement of expenditures. Before the indicator was
modified at restructuring, it better reflected how the communities benefited from subprojects: rural investment
projects that meet at least 75 percent of the expected results – expected results were to be individually
determined depending on the nature of the subproject. The modified indicator is of lower evaluative value
than an intermediate results indicator that gives the number of subprojects completed. The other outcome
indicator gives the proportion of subprojects that were operational 12 months after their completion –
‘operational’ is not defined. At the end of the Project, not all subprojects had reached the 12-month maturity
date post-disbursement. The outcome indicators do not suggest how and to what degree members of the
communities gained access to improved and/or new infrastructure and services.

The choice of investment was left to the communities, without prioritizing the infrastructure and services to
which access would be increased. The government’s request to fund two of its programs to increase access
to water and increase local food supplies to reduce hunger brought some focus to the investments made. The
ICR reports (p. 66) that around 85 percent of the subprojects supported were to increase access to water.
The subprojects targeted rural populations with little or no access to water and built concrete cisterns that
could also harvest water or developed other sources of water. The ICR notes anecdotally that this positively
affected the beneficiaries’ living condition, by increasing the surface areas of surrounding orchards. In some
cases, young families were reported to have returned to the project-supported communities. To suggest the
nature of outcomes, the ICR also draws on information from sources other than the project’s M&E system: the
borrower completion report, the bank’s ISRs, surveys completed by 349 community organizations, and 25
interviews with beneficiaries and local actors.

According to the additional information supplied by the ICR from the survey of community organizations,

      53 percent reported improvements in access to infrastructure,
      64 percent reported that their value chains had been strengthened in some way, and
      56 reported that productivity had increased

While there are no M&E measurements to verify or substantiate these figures, the results from these
beneficiary surveys suggest that the project had a positive effect on the communities. While the project
exceeded the target for the share of subprojects that benefited indigenous people, the target of 50 percent
female beneficiaries was not achieved: women participated in 37 percent of non-indigenous rural investment
projects, 42 percent of the indigenous person rural investments, and 45 percent of the beneficiaries of
productive alliances.

To help community organizations gain access to infrastructure and services – leaving it to them to decide
what they would be – the project supported community subprojects, exceeding the target for the number of
subprojects supported and the potential beneficiaries reached. The project has delivered the targeted outputs,
exceeding them in nearly all the cases. The evidence presented on whether the projects benefited members
of the communities is inadequate. It has met the target to include indigenous people but narrowly missed the
target to include women. The original indicator of how the communities benefited from subprojects i.e. rural
investment projects that meet at least 75 percent of the expected results better reflected the outcomes rather


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR Rural Inclusion (P106685)



than just the number of subprojects completed. The outcome indicator do not suggest benefits in terms of
improved access to infrastructure and services, but the outputs are likely to have led to the desired outcomes.
The rating for this sub-objective is modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To pilot a new model for developing sustainable access to markets (for small producers, indigenous people,
and rural workers).

Rationale
Theory of Change: To pilot a new model for developing sustainable access to markets, the project provided
the following inputs: identify, formulate, and pilot producer groups and market agents and buyers (Productive
Alliances, PAs), invest in small-scale civil works, production processes and quality standards. It was expected
to lead to outputs such as functioning pilot-Productive Alliances in place. This was expected to lead to
outcomes such as the PAs’ ability to demonstrate capacity to increase the volume of sales and to sustain
market relationships and to demonstrate sustainability of productive cycles without project support. The
project investments were to include a high ratio of the poorest and most vulnerable rural poor, i.e. women and
indigenous groups.

Project Outputs

      46 productive alliances completed, exceeding the target of 40

Project outcomes

      75 percent productive alliance subprojects operational and/or maintained 12 months after their
       completion, exceeding the target of 70, and
      90% increase in the volume of sales of the organizations participating in productive alliances
       exceeding the target of 30%. 2,801 producer families linked to markets through productive alliances,
       exceeding the target of 1,000
      14,005 beneficiaries of productive alliances, exceeding the target of 5,000.

The project assisted producer groups to get into alliances with market agents to gain access to markets,
exceeding both the number of alliances supported and the number of families and individuals expected to
benefit them. Twelve months after their completion, three quarters of the supported alliances were
operational, which is not clearly defined in the ICR. According to the bank team (discussed in a meeting
in January 2024) operational meant that the organizations were planning, carrying out their activities, sharing
information, and surviving beyond the initial support. The alliances are reported to have benefited the
organizations by helping them increase their sales by 90 percent. The ICR notes that the technical assistance
provided to alliances resulted in new products such as health certified honey for export, byproducts from dairy



                                                                                                Page 10 of 23
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                AR Rural Inclusion (P106685)



                            effluence, tea products for exports, resulting in increased volume of sale. It is not clear how increase in sales
                            volume was estimated for organizations that developed new products.

                            The project activity helped producer organizations get into alliances with market agents to improve their
                            access to market by providing them with material support needed to make the investments necessary for the
                            alliance to be effective. As a result, a higher number than the targeted alliances emerged. The alliances are
                            reported to have enabled organizations to supply to market products that they hadn’t supplied before. One
                            indicator suggests that the alliances were operational 12 months after completion and the other that the
                            groups were able to increase their sales. The additional evidence provided by the ICR (in addition to what can
                            be derived from the project’s M&E system), merits a Substantial rating for this sub-objective.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The PDO was to increase socio-economic inclusion of the rural poor by strengthening community
                            organizations and assisting them to provide themselves with infrastructure and services and get into alliances
                            with market agents. The PDO was defined at a broad level and the three subobjectives built on each other to
                            achieve socioeconomic inclusion: the first sought to strengthen the community organizations so that they are
                            better able to plan and implement projects that improve their living conditions; the second objective was to
                            support the subprojects proposed by community organizations to improve their access to infrastructure and
                            services, and the third was to help of the community organizations get into alliance with market agents to
                            improve their access to markets. The evidence on achievement of the subobjectives is mixed partly because
                            the project’s M&E system was relatively weak and provided limited evidence of relevant outcomes. The ICR
                            thus draws upon additional sources to document and demonstrate the project achievements. The overall
                            Efficacy rating is Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Efficiency:
   At appraisal, the analysis simulated the benefits from subprojects likely to be proposed by beneficiaries in
   different provinces of the country. As it was a pilot initiative, the analysis of Productive Alliances Subprojects
   was based on illustrative models for small-scale producers in the northeast of Argentina (NEA) Region. The
   simulations concluded that the marginal economic return on investment would range between 31 percent and 50
   percent for Rural Investment Subprojects and between 24 percent and 41 percent for Productive Alliance

                                                                                                                               Page 11 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AR Rural Inclusion (P106685)



Subprojects. The expected economic benefits were primarily associated with increased agricultural production
and producers’ income, estimated based on 11 production models (corn, cumin, orange, pepper, potato,
pumpkin, soybean, sugar cane, sunflower, tomato, and livestock) and the current structure of small-scale
production systems by province.

The ICR replicated the methodology. The required information was collected from a representative sample of 55
subprojects in agriculture (crops, horticulture, livestock, and milk production), handicrafts, yerba mate, and tea.
Information was also collected from groups that received support for increasing access to water, in which case
the analysis focused on the benefits such as reduced time spent fetching water and reduced transport
expenses.

The estimated IRR from rural investment subprojects ranged from 11 to 34. For productive alliance subprojects,
estimated IRR ranged from 13 to 38 percent. The estimates for the project and components were as follows: full
project: 16.90; production subprojects (component 2): 20.31; subprojects to develop water (component 2):
19.84; all investments in component 2: 18.94; and productive alliance subprojects: 24.56. Sensitivity analysis
showed that combining a cost increase of 10 percent and benefit reduction of 10 percent yields an IRR of 12.3
percent.

Productive Alliance subprojects (SAPs) under Component 3 were affected by inflation and exchange rate
fluctuations. The prices used during formulation of SAPs were no longer valid by the time procurement took
place. Around 78 percent of SAPs (18 out of 23) approved by September 2020 were unable to make the total
investments proposed in their business plans, resulting in the non-fulfillment of planned objectives. The PIU had
to fill the gaps and revised the operational Manual to incorporate an automatic price adjustment mechanism.

Administrative Efficiency:

A major drought in 2017, which impacted the agricultural sector and the fiscal revenues, worsened Argentina’s
challenging macroeconomic conditions soon after the project became effective. GOA’s efforts to reduce its fiscal
deficit limited the project implementation unit’s (PIU) ability to function effectively and its ability to make
counterpart contributions to execute the Loan. The delays in implementation, budgetary constraints at the
federal level, and various institutional reforms slowed down the project from the beginning.

The project was also impacted by broad institutional restructuring of GOA in 2018, which changed the
institutional arrangements for the project implementation unit (PIU).

The Bank restructured the Project in 2019 to enable the government to lend the funds to provinces rather than
transferring them as grants, without showing them on its books.

As the COVID-19 pandemic led to restrictions on interactions, the Project developed three initiatives to mitigate
the effects of social distancing on the pace of project implementation: (a) it established a temporary virtual
committee to evaluate and approve Component 2 Rural investment subprojects (SIRs) and Component 3 SAPs;
(b) it adopted prototypes of small water infrastructure works developed by National Agricultural Technology
Institute (INTA) for SIR-National Water Plan (PNAs); and (c) it developed an ad-hoc intervention plan for the
Patagonia region, which, due to the low density of family farmers, was not originally considered under the
project.

The program, however, was administratively efficient, despite the delays, because it reached more beneficiaries
at lower than planned costs.


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Rural Inclusion (P106685)




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                              Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   0
 Appraisal                                               0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
 ICR Estimate                                             0
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The PDO was highly relevant to priorities of the government and for the world Bank’s support strategy. Efficacy
was Substantial with shortcomings due to limited evidence of the achievements. Although many factors delayed
the implementation of the project, it reached the targeted number delivering acceptable returns, thus earning a
substantial rating for efficacy. The overall rating is thus moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Organizational Risk: Nearly all of the activities of this project were implemented through producer
organizations. Whether they are cohesive enough to survive the pressures of collectively managing
enterprises is a risk, although the project outcomes suggest that the organizations were operating 12 months
beyond the life of the project. The prospects of obtaining benefits might encourage individuals and
communities to come together, but continuing to work together, contributing to the group activities including
maintaining infrastructure where required may prove more difficult.

Business/Economic Risk: Economic uncertainty in terms of inflation and fluctuations in exchange rates put
the enterprises at risk. While the project was being implemented, inflation necessitated the project to
intervene with additional funds to help some groups implement their projects.

Strategic Risk: The strategy chosen to provide access to markets for the poor is to create and provide
productive alliances with traders or other market agents in which they would get into contractual
relationships. These relationships may not hold unless they continue to be mutually beneficial. Whether they

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AR Rural Inclusion (P106685)



will remain so depends on whether producers can increase productivity to reduce their production costs and
achieve the quality demanded.

Government Ownership Risk: The government has demonstrated commitment with its record of
implementing projects that seek socioeconomic inclusion. The macroeconomic difficulties the government
faces, however, poses risks to its ability to continue to support such projects.

Institutional Risk: Even if the federal and provincial governments commit to nurturing community
organizations, weak institutional capacity may limit the effectiveness of their interventions. The provincial
implementation units, for example, faced challenges paying competitive salaries to attract capable staff.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was strategically relevant, focusing on the most vulnerable rural populations. It also aligned
  with the priorities of the country to bring about social inclusion, by improving living conditions, production
  infrastructure and access to markets for the rural poor.

  The project was appraised in a way that the expected outcomes could be achieved by basing the strategy
  on a key lesson learned from the previous project that poor rural producers often lacked the level of
  organization needed to access formal markets. The project would therefore enable them to reach a
  minimum level of formalization they need; and those with preexisting links would be helped to develop
  formal linkages through productive alliances, a model which had been tested successfully in other
  countries in Latin America.

  Although the PDO was broad and high level, the project interventions conveyed what “socio-economic
  inclusion” meant and what was required to achieve it. However, the PDO outcome indicators measured
  mostly outputs and processes, rather than outcomes in terms of socioeconomic inclusion of vulnerable
  rural populations.

  Project preparation was lengthy, from an early concept in 2008 and a redesign in 2011 to approval in
  2015. It filled a space in GOA's development ecosystem that was not covered by other operations, which
  amounted to US$175.5 million in multilateral support. The risk of overlapping with other projects was
  identified in the PAD's Operational Risk Assessment Framework (ORAF). The final design, focusing on
  the areas in the northeast and northwest of Argentina and piloting of productive alliances, minimized the
  risk.

  The project identified several risks and assessed them as moderate: participation of and consultation with
  indigenous people may not be activated adequately; fiduciary risks from large number of subprojects, and
  that flow of counterpart funds may slow down activities at the provincial level. They took measures to
  minimize them: for example, representatives of indigenous people were included in provincial evaluation
  committees that made decisions on subprojects. Since the indigenous groups required specific attention,
  30 percent of the resources were earmarked for them. However, no such efforts were made to include
  women, except for reserving 20 percent of the capacity building for women.


                                                                                                      Page 14 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Rural Inclusion (P106685)



  There were some gaps in assessing risks. Fiscal constraints that the government may face and potential
  disruption from electoral change were not anticipated, despite Argentina’s history of macroeconomic
  instability. Potential counterpart funding shortfalls were mentioned but mitigation measures were generic.

  Institutional arrangements were well-considered but they turned out to be less effective. Implementation
  by provinces and collaborations with technical institutions to overcome the capacity limitations in
  provincial implementation units, which was done following the restructuring proved to be a better model
  for implementation.

  The project was designed in a way that the project outputs contributed to outcomes that addressed
  Argentina’s problems. The results framework was not adequate to assess the outcomes. The failure to
  anticipate the fiscal risks required a restructuring. The rating, therefore, is moderately satisfactory.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Adequate supervision was provided during implementation, with 19 supervision missions in all during the 8
 years of project operation. Missions were adequately staffed with appropriate skills. The COVID-19
 pandemic restrictions forced the GOA and Bank teams to conduct four missions virtually from July 2020 to
 May 2022. They were critical for analyzing the project’s progress and supporting implementation units at
 federal and provincial levels in advancing the identification, formulation, follow-up, and strengthening of
 subprojects.

 The Bank conducted a timely MTR which led to the 2019 Restructuring. The restructuring included effective
 solutions to the problems the project was facing. They included the provision for sub-lending funds to
 provinces – rather than transferring them as grants – and a bigger role for provinces in implementation in
 collaboration with technical institutions that could effectively support many of the subprojects. The projects
 also found ways to integrate water and hunger programs to align even more with the priorities of the
 country.

 Aide-memoires and follow-up documents suggest that the bank team increased the intensity of supervision
 to ensure that the project was on track to achieve its outcomes. However, two extensions were required to
 bring the sub projects to a stage where they could be counted as outcomes.

 The World Bank’s Country Management Unit also supported the project team in identifying viable options
 for making progress by communicating directly with the Ministry of Finance. The World Bank team failed to
 obtain an evaluation of the project because of limited availability of appropriate human resources in the PIU
 and the intense pressure to implement project activities by the closing date.




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Rural Inclusion (P106685)



 Although supervision resulted in an appropriate restructuring of the project, accommodating the changing
 conditions and priorities, because of the failure to suitably modify the RF during restructuring and organize
 an evaluation to assess the outcomes, supervision is rated moderately satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework was designed to track project outputs and outcomes to guide implementation. It
 reflected the theory of change but it was not sufficient to measure the projects’ expected results at higher
 levels. The outcome indicators primarily measured the status of community organizations, their
 subprojects, and alliances along with the number of individuals reached. They offered little or no
 information on whether they delivered the intended benefits. The key assumption behind the design, that if
 the organizations or subprojects are operational, they will automatically benefit the members –, does not
 always hold.

 The framework comprised PDO indicators that in some cases measured outputs with limited evaluative
 value. For example, the PDO level indicator, the share of subprojects that have achieved 75 percent of the
 processes, included subprojects that were not yet operational. The intermediate indicators were in most
 cases measures of project outputs. For example, community organizations strengthened or community
 subprojects completed. One of the project objectives was to improve access to community infrastructure
 and services, but the framework did not include any indicators to measure that. Even after the 2019
 restructuring when developing access to water became a priority, the framework lacked a core water
 indicator.

 No baseline was planned. In 2016, the Bank and the government agreed to apply a methodology that
 compared beneficiary cohorts via a specific survey to evaluate the impact of rural investment and
 productive alliance subprojects, with a focus on net income gains, cost reduction, and increased
 productivity.

 The MIS system was to be housed in Rural Sector Coordination Unit (UCAR) (later General Directorate of
 Sector and Special programs (DIPROSE)) which had the experience with previous operations (including
 Provincial Agricultural Services Project (PROSAP), PRODEAR, and Inclusive rural development program
 (PRODERI)). Provincial project teams were to monitor subproject implementation, collect data, and
 transmit the data to provincial coordination units within UCAR. Financing agreements under Component 2
 and Component 3 required beneficiary communities and producer groups to directly send M&E information
 to provincial coordination units.




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Rural Inclusion (P106685)



b. M&E Implementation
  Although inadequate to assess outcomes, the system generated information. Monitoring data was
  collected and analyzed directly from the execution report of each subproject and from information
  provided by provincial project teams to the provincial coordination units and UCAR/ DIPROSE. Given the
  steady stream of monitoring data, Bank Implementation and Supervision Reports (ISRs) rated the
  systems as satisfactory or marginally satisfactory.

  Although the project was modified to accommodate changing circumstances and priorities, the results
  framework and the M&E processer were not suitably changed. Some indicators that were hard to
  measure were modified but indicators were not introduced to reflect the new priorities.

  Not enough emphasis was placed on monitoring and evaluation in a difficult implementation context. In
  2018, the Bank proposed a with-and without-subproject evaluation survey of SAP beneficiaries, as they
  had baseline data for sales volumes, but the result was a weak impact evaluation with insufficient data. In
  2021, the PIU presented a plan for evaluating the sub-projects, but the delayed start-up of those SPs
  meant the achievements could not be measured. This is mainly due to the budget restrictions and
  institutional changes that limited DIPROSE’ resources, but both DIPROSE and the Bank failed to
  recognize that RF quality would impede a full accounting of the Project outcomes and richness. At
  closing, the Borrower Completion Report collected and evaluated robust data through questionnaires
  tailored to different beneficiary cohorts and types of investments, through random and representative
  sampling.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were communicated to stakeholders. Up to date data supported decision-making on
  project management and facilitated the transition of projects from the federal level to provincial levels.

  The M&E also influenced the direction of implementation. The results informed the 2019 project
  restructuring and provided the basis for collecting information to estimate the returns on investments.
  The M&E information also informed the design of the subsequent Climate intelligent and Inclusive Agri-
  food system Systems Project (CIAF) Project (P176905) and is feeding into broader WB analytic work on
  the PA model, including a study related to gender.

  The M&E system was designed to monitor project implementation and facilitate an assessment based
  on the theory of change, but there were significant shortcomings that limited its value for examining
  impacts. It wasn’t modified adequately with restructuring. It, nevertheless, informed the design of a
  subsequent project. The rating is Modest.

  The ICR provided additional evidence from beneficiary surveys which was used to justify a Substantial
  (with shortcomings) rating of Efficacy despite the Modest rating of M&E Quality.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest



                                                                                                     Page 17 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Rural Inclusion (P106685)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental

   The Project was classified as Category B. It triggered the following environmental safeguard policies:
   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Pest Management (OP
   4.09), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), Forests (OP/BP 4.36), and Safety of Dams (OP/BP
   4.37). The 2018 restructuring triggered Projects on international waterways (OP 7.50)

   International waterways (OP 7.50): an exception to the notification requirement under paragraph 7 of OP
   7.5 was authorized on May 3, 2019. Safeguard instruments, Environmental and Social Management
   Framework (ESMF) and Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) and Resettlement Policy
   Framework (RPF) were updated.

   As the location and type of subprojects, because they were demand-driven, would not be known before
   Project implementation, the Borrower prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework
   (ESMF), dated October 21, 2014, and disclosed in Argentina and on the World Bank Group's external
   website.

   By 2018, the Bank reported persistent limitations in compliance with the Project’s environmental and social
   (E&S) commitments and was concerned about counterparts' limited knowledge of the safeguards
   instruments. The Bank and DIPROSE developed a plan to strengthen safeguards performance, including a
   workshop to strengthen capacity for early identification of environmental and social issues during the
   formulation of subprojects, to ensure they were addressed with the support of safeguards specialists.

   By June 2021, the Bank recommended that DIPROSE, in preparation for Project Closing, record the
   adjustments made in environmental and social (E&S) aspects during special projects formulation, resulting
   in better quality special projects being presented for financing.

   The Bank noted in 2022 that the environmental impact of Socio-Economic Inclusion in Rural Areas
   (PISEAR) subprojects was low but that additional studies were needed to document impacts and mitigation
   measures.

   The following findings are relevant for each safeguard:

   Natural Habitats (OP 4.04): Training and TA on management and preservation of natural resources was
   provided in SPs to ensure compliance.

   Pest Management (OP 4.09): Many SPs, notably those that improved crop production, received training and
   TA in biological or environmental control methods to reduce reliance on chemical pesticides, as well as
   agroecological technologies such as green manure and traditional practices, thereby minimizing or avoiding
   the use of agrochemicals.

   Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11): No works were carried out on physical patrimonial sites of cultural
   or religious significance, nor did any surveyed works come across archaeological or paleontological remains
   that required the intervention of specialized institutions for their protection.


                                                                                                 Page 18 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AR Rural Inclusion (P106685)



  Forests (OP 4.36): Subprojects did not affect forest areas, nor did they reduce them: no clearing of native
  forests or large-scale removal of vegetation was carried out.

  Safety of Dams (OP 4.37): Although subprojects to improve access to safe water were appraised, none of
  them involved dam construction, relying instead on drilling and constructing wells, or on confinements on
  slopes.

  Social

  PISEAR was expected to achieve mostly positive social development outcomes and impacts. Project design
  specified that, as a cross-cutting concern in all project activities, PISEAR would pay attention to social
  inclusion, specifically of vulnerable groups (indigenous people, women, and youth). Mechanisms to promote
  social inclusion comprised: (a) earmarking 30 percent of Component 2 for indigenous people, community
  Subprojects; (b) reserving a minimum 20 percent of Component 1 for capacity building of women/youth; and
  (c) adopting positive discrimination (affirmative action) in SP prioritization.

  PISEAR triggered both social safeguards, namely Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) and Involuntary
  Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12),43 although there was no involuntary resettlement of individuals caused by
  Project works and activities.

  The Borrower prepared an Indigenous People’s Planning Framework (IPPF) to address activities which
  could potentially affect/involve indigenous people. In addition, each province with subprojects targeting
  indigenous communities, designed its specific plan observing their needs and characteristics. Prior, free,
  and informed consultations were carried out as well as participatory diagnoses following the planned
  protocol. The informed participation of IP in developing projects of interest to their communities in itself
  represented enhanced social inclusion.

  Grievance Response Mechanism (GRM): The Project rolled out a citizen engagement system at the
  ministerial level, accessible online, by phone, and by mail, at the beginning of 2020. Beneficiaries were
  informed about this system by the provincial Implementation Units (UEPs). Stakeholders were also able to
  process grievances at specific addresses associated with Plan Agua and the PAs. By November 2022, the
  Project's GRM had processed 193 grievances, of which none remained outstanding at Closing.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement

  Procurement under PISEAR was affected by the broader challenges of restrictions on budgets and human
  resources, with personnel reductions in UCAR through to 2019. Subsequently, efforts were made to hire
  more staff, but barriers to hiring specialized personnel and acute salary restrictions caused further attrition
  of the project team, including procurement specialists, which seriously delayed procurement processing.
  By late 2021, the Project lacked a Procurement Specialist. The Bank reiterated the importance of having a
  designated specialist and a consolidated Procurement team to conduct planned processes and avoid
  implementation delays in the closing stages.



                                                                                                    Page 19 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AR Rural Inclusion (P106685)



  Moreover, with average annual inflation during the Project's lifetime close to 50 percent per year, suppliers
  presented budgets with a validity of no more than one month, i.e., less than the time required to process
  the relevant contracts. Without adjustment mechanisms in medium-term contracts, the high rate of inflation
  discouraged the presentation of offers.

  The 2019 Restructuring revised the institutional structure for project implementation, adding an execution
  modality that resulted in both centralized and decentralized procurement.49 UCAR was responsible for
  procurement at the central level, while UEPs coordinated and supervised procurement by beneficiary
  communities under SAPs and SIRs.

  Although procurement was rated MS for most of the Project, the last two periods evaluated saw a drop in
  the rating to MU, due to the inflation and staffing factors mentioned above. During its last two years,
  PISEAR managed to reverse the slow pace of execution, with all procurement processes completed by
  Project Closing, but the exit rating for procurement remained MU.

  Financial Management

   Financial Management was rated Satisfactory throughout the Project’s lifetime. UCAR generally
  maintained financial management practices acceptable to the Bank, project accounts were regularly
  updated, and Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) were submitted on time. The Bank team supervised FM
  processes closely, facilitating and requiring adjustments as needed to guarantee the correct evolution of
  the Project. DIPROSE’s capacity to manage and monitor project implementation was affected by
  budgetary and staffing restrictions, and an action plan was put in place to correct these deficiencies.
  Following the change in Administration, the Bank recommended a marked acceleration in requests for
  reimbursement to release loan resources and maintain the pace of project execution/disbursement in the
  closing stages of the Project. As of end-March 2023, all the funds were fully documented by SP
  beneficiaries to DIPROSE, so there is no amount to be reimbursed to the Bank.

  Compliance with the project’s Financial Management (FM) arrangements were maintained throughout
  project implementation ending with a Satisfactory FM rating and a Substantial FM risk. Interim financial
  reports (IFRs) and financial audits were submitted as requested by the financing agreement and were
  accepted by the Bank. Some IFRs and financial audits were delayed but it did not affect the capacity to
  provide timely and reliable provision of information required to manage and monitor the execution of
  project´s activities.

  According to the bank team (discussed in a meeting on January 18, 2024) the final audit is still pending.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  New institutional relationships were generated at the territorial level. Provincial governments began to
  coordinate with territorial and national institutions on livelihood activities, as they took on project
  implementation.



d. Other
   ---

                                                                                                  Page 20 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Rural Inclusion (P106685)




11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                  IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                               Inadequate risk assessment and
Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory   mitigation; and weak results
                                                                               framework
Quality of M&E                  Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons are derived from the ICR with some modification of language.

Even when targeting of vulnerable groups is explicitly included in the objectives and the
results framework, the desired outcomes may not be achieved if those priorities are not
mainstreamed in decision making processes at all levels. Many community organizations
requested capacity strengthening for women and youth and opportunities for them to develop
subprojects. The project organized training for them but left the rest to the provinces, where local
priorities ruled. A specific gender sub-indicator included in the framework was not achieved. The
seemingly simple step of including representatives of indigenous persons in the provincial evaluation
committees helped in reaching their targeted share.

If the result framework is designed primarily to monitor project execution and an impact
study is depended on for information on outcomes and to link them to outputs, the prospects
for a completed evaluation can be improved if an independent evaluation with a baseline
study is commissioned at the beginning of the project. When project implementation is pushed
to the closing date with tightening financial and capacity constraints, doing an evaluation becomes
the last priority. The Bank’s efforts to have a study done were not successful.

Wherever provision of technical assistance to individuals or groups of beneficiaries is critical
to a project activity, the prospects of delivering relevant assistance and maintaining it
beyond project life may be improved by engaging technical and development organizations
that already work with beneficiaries, rather than build the capabilities in project
implementation units. When budgetary limitations were faced, the activities to strengthen
beneficiaries’ technical capacities were the first to be cut, or delegated to provincial implementing
units, which also lacked the required technical knowledge. Outsourcing technical assistance and
training to technical organization (INTA and SAFCI) made it possible to close the knowledge gap,
although the opportunity was missed to engage more local organizations with a presence in the
territory and with contact with local producers. Such linkages could have increased technical support
to ensure the development of strong subprojects and their sustainability after project closing.




                                                                                                 Page 21 of 23
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       AR Rural Inclusion (P106685)



This review adds another lesson:

Where there are considerable doubts about whether a onetime project support to individuals
or groups is adequate to achieve the project objective, the chances of success can be
improved by considering options to deliver support and monitor outcomes beyond the life of
the project. Success of this project depends on continued functioning of community organizations,
the viability of whatever enterprises they are engaged in, and maintained alliances to deliver the
project outcomes. Closing the project before the outcomes are achieved jeopardizes the outcomes
as well as the learning.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR comprehensively elaborates on project design, restructuring, project activities, outputs, and outcomes.
The report is candid in noting that the PDO was too broad and the results framework was not comprehensive
enough to effectively assess the project impact, taking a results orientation.

The report is informative, offering details in footnotes and annexures and cross-referencing wherever
necessary. It is internally consistent.

In the absence of an impact study and valuable information for assessing outcomes from the results framework,
the report draws on various other sources. However, they may not be adequate to rate various aspects of the
project suitably. In discussing the ratings, it focuses on the outcomes of the projects.

The lessons are based on the experience of the project, but they could have been better articulated.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 22 of 23
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
AR Rural Inclusion (P106685)




                                                                  Page 23 of 23
