     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Sustainable Rural WSS Project (P148970)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023779

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P148970                                    HT Sustainable Rural WSS Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Haiti                                      Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D0680,IDA-D2010                        30-Sep-2021                                          65,558,249.91

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 26-May-2015                                31-Mar-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              50,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                               65,962,900.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                           65,024,429.98                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally                Peter Nigel Freeman          Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Sustainable Rural and Small Towns Water and Sanitation
   Project as articulated in the Financing Agreement (FA, page 4) was identical to the one stated in the Project
   Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 20) and aimed to:

   "(i) increase access to improved water supply and sanitation in targeted rural areas and small towns
   in zones affected by cholera; (ii) strengthen the Recipient’s water and sanitation service delivery


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Sustainable Rural WSS Project (P148970)



   mechanism at the deconcentrated level; and (iii) improve the Recipient’s capacity to respond promptly
   and effectively to an eligible emergency."

   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on the following four objectives:

   1. To increase access to improved water supply in targeted rural areas and small towns in zones affected by
   cholera.

   2. To increase access to improved sanitation in targeted rural areas and small towns in zones affected by
   cholera.

   3. To strengthen the Recipient’s water and sanitation service delivery mechanism at the deconcentrated level.

   4. To improve the Recipient’s capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  01-Jun-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Institutional Strengthening, Capacity Building and Project Management (appraisal estimate:
   US$17.00 million, actual cost: US$16.00 million). This component included: (a) Strengthening
   the National Water Supply Directorate's (DINEPA) capacity to develop and manage a national programming
   mechanism for deconcentrated WSS service delivery in rural areas and small towns; (b) Strengthening the
   fiduciary, sanitation and social mobilization capacity of selected Regional Office for Water and Sanitation
   (OREPAs); (c) Strengthening local stakeholders in rural and small towns to improve the Water Supply and
   Sanitation (WSS) services delivery sustainability; (d) Supporting design of a joint monitoring mechanism
   between Haiti and the Dominican Republic (DR) to respond to trans-boundary pandemics and water- and
   excreta-related disease outbreaks as part of an island-wide strategy; and, (e) Supporting project
   management, monitoring and evaluation.

   2. Water Supply and Sanitation (appraisal estimate: US$50.00 million, actual cost:
   US$46.07 million). This component included: (a) Increasing access to safe water and sanitation at the
   local level; and, (b) Increasing access to safe water and sanitation in schools, health facilities and public
   spaces (including bi-national markets in selected communes).




                                                                                                       Page 2 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    HT Sustainable Rural WSS Project (P148970)



  3. Contingent Emergency Response (appraisal estimate: US$3.00 million, actual cost: US$2.95
  million). This component was included to respond to a Government request in the event of an eligible
  emergency given the high risk of a catastrophic event.

  Revised Components Changes to the components reflected the additional activities funded by the
  Additional Financing (AF) as follows:
  Component 1. The AF added US$2.00 million to support additional activities, including: (i) hydrogeological
  studies to inform system rehabilitation designs for more robust and resilient solutions; (ii) strengthened
  sector planning and deconcentration capacity in priority areas, such as in the case of natural disasters; (iii)
  piloting innovative approaches for conserving and restoring watersheds that supply water to small towns
  benefiting from Project activities.
  Component 2. The AF added US$14.00 million to support additional activities, including: (i) expanding the
  project area and works to zones affected by Hurricane Matthew, focusing on small repairs to bring water
  supply systems back into operation; (ii) construction and rehabilitation of additional latrine blocks for public
  institutions or spaces; and, (iii) responding to DINEPA’s chlorine needs for small town water supply systems
  across the country and supporting consolidation of its procurement and distribution.
  Component 3. The AF added US$4.00 million to support additional activities, including: (i) further
  strengthening DINEPA’s ability to rapidly respond in the event of an eligible emergency; (ii) finance needs
  identified by DINEPA’s following the passage of Hurricane Matthew.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost was estimated at US$50.00 million. The actual cost was US$65.02
  million (ICR, Data Sheet, page 2). The difference was because the project received Additional Financing
  (AF) (see below).

  Financing. The project used Investment Project Financing (IPF) as its financing instrument. This
  included an IDA grant worth US$30.00 million equivalent from Haiti’s IDA allocation and a grant from the
  IDA Regional Program worth US$20.00 million equivalent, over six years. Total financing at appraisal was
  US$50.00 million. In 2017, the project received an Additional Financing (AF) worth US$20.00 million. This
  brought the total financing amount to US$70.00 million. The actual amount disbursed was US$65.02 million,
  with US$4.04 million cancelled at closing. In a further communication, the project team explained that the
  cancellation of funds was necessary because: "those IDA funds, if uncommitted and not cancelled before
  the closing date, would be returned to the general IDA and be lost for the Government of Haiti."

  Borrower Contribution. The project was fully financed through an IDA Grant and no Borrower contribution
  was expected.

  Dates. The project was approved on May 26, 2015 and became effective seven months later on December
  16, 2015. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on March 18, 2019, which was about three years
  and three months after effectiveness. While the PAD did not state a specific MTR date, this Review finds
  that the MTR was conducted timely and in line with other World Bank-funded projects. The project closed
  on March 31, 2023 which was 18 months beyond the original closing date on September 30, 2021. This
  extension was needed to accommodate the activities under AF, and difficulties of implementation in a fragile
  environment and a succession of unanticipated crises that resulted in implementation delays (ICR,
  paragraph 42). The project received an AF and was restructured four times all Level 2 as follows:


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Sustainable Rural WSS Project (P148970)



   1. On June 1, 2017, when the amount disbursed was US$7.31 million, in order to approve AF worth
   US$20.00 million. As part of the AF the Results Framework (RF) was revised and funds
   were reallocated between disbursement categories.

   2. On December 22, 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$37.11 million, in order to revise the Results
   Framework, change components and costs, reallocate funds between disbursement categories, and change
   disbursements arrangements.

   3. On July 12, 2021, when the amount disbursed was US$44.62 million, in order to extend the loan closing
   date by 12 months to September 30, 2022, and change the implementation schedule.

   4. On September 30, 2022, when the amount disbursed was US$58.47 million, in order to extend the loan
   closing date by six months to March 30, 2023, and change the implementation schedule.

   5. On March 31, 2023, when the amount disbursed was US$61.86 million, in order to change components
   and costs, cancellation of Financing worth US$4.04 million, and reallocate funds between disbursement
   categories.

   A split rating will not be applied because the PDO remained unchanged during implementation with no
   major changes in the PDO indicator definitions or values.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. At Project appraisal (May, 2015), Haiti was both the poorest country in the Americas
and a fragile state. Poverty was highest in rural areas where 52% of the population and 63% of the
extremely poor resided. The country continues to be highly exposed to natural disasters-hurricanes, floods
and earthquakes. A devastating earthquake struck the country in January 2010, killing 230,000 people. In
this fragile environment, cholera broke out in 2010, facilitated by flooding and heavy rain, coupled with
limited access to clean water and improved sanitation. Eliminating new cholera outbreaks could only be
achieved by substantially increasing access to Water Supply and Sanitation (WSS) and health services,
underpinned by institutions capable of delivering these services. With Only 13% of DINEPA’s central level
operating costs covered by the domestic budget, development of WSS services was heavily dependent on
external financing.

Previous Bank Experience. The project scaled up World Bank support to the WSS sector in Haiti. It built
on a previous smaller operation (US$10 million) - Haiti Rural Water and Sanitation Project (P089839, 2010-
2015), but with a more ambitious scope to improve WSS and avoid another cholera outbreak.

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with World Bank's Interim Strategy
Note (ISN) for Haiti (FY13-FY14). Specifically, the project contributed to the ISN’s overarching objective to
support the Government of Haiti (GoH) in shifting from emergency response to development, with a focus
on: (i) reducing vulnerability and increasing resilience, including to cholera outbreaks; (ii) encouraging
sustainable reconstruction; (iii) building human
capital; and (iv) promoting inclusive growth, while improving governance. At completion, the PDO continued

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 23
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      HT Sustainable Rural WSS Project (P148970)



               to be in line with World Bank's Country Partnership Framework for Haiti (CPF, FY2016-FY2021).
               Specifically, Area of Focus 2: Human Capital, objective 3: to control cholera in priority communes, and Area
               of Focus 3: Resilience, objectives 1: to strengthen natural disaster preparedness, and objective 2: to
               improve disaster prevention and strengthen climate resilience. Also, the Priority Area: Preserving Basic
               services and Human Capital, improving access to water and sanitation was identified as a priority spending
               area.

               Consistency with Government Strategies/Priorities. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the priorities
               identified and formed a central part of the Government of Haiti’s (GoH) strategy for addressing the cholera
               epidemic and achieving universal access to WSS and health services. The PDO was also in line
               with DINEPA's sector reform that was initiated in 2009 with a vision to develop the WSS sector and tackle
               the low levels of service. At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the priorities of the
               Government of Haiti (GoH), including the Strategic Development Plan of Haiti (PDSH), which prioritized
               improving WSS services as a major axis to promote social, economic and political integration; and the
               DINEPA Water and Sanitation Strategy (2014 – 2018), which emphasized the importance of encouraging
               behavior changes in sanitation practices.

               Summary of Relevance of Objectives. The PDO statement was slightly ambitious relative to country
               capacity and the fragile implementation environment. All elements of the PDO were sufficiently monitorable
               with relevant PDO-level indicators to adequately measure outcomes that were exclusively attributable to the
               activities financed by the project. At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the Bank's strategy
               and with Government priorities for the WSS. Therefore, Relevance of Objectives is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase access to improved water supply in targeted rural areas and small towns in zones affected by
                             cholera.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported the following activities: (i)
                             the identification of priority works, development of preliminary and detailed engineering designs, supervision
                             of works and social mobilization activities, as well as the construction and rehabilitation of water systems in
                             the selected localities; (ii) financing small repairs and expansions to consolidate access to safe water in
                             localities of the Bank-financed Haiti Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project (EPAR) program, including the
                             technical evaluation of the systems built or rehabilitated under the previous DINEPA EPAR Program; and (iii)
                             supporting water supply solutions in the selected localities’ public schools, health facilities and public spaces
                             such as markets (including bi-national markets). The expected outputs of the project activities were an

                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HT Sustainable Rural WSS Project (P148970)



increase in the number of new piped household water connection, and improved community water points
constructed or rehabilitated. The expected outcome was an increase in people (and female) in rural areas
provided with access to improved water sources under the project. Anticipated long-term impact
was substantially increasing access to sustainable Water Supply and Sanitation (WSS).

The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following three critical assumptions: 1. DINEPA would
absorb the sizeable/multifaceted capacity increase required to implement the project; 2. Local stakeholders
would adopt the participatory, management approach for sustainably delivery of WSS services; and 3.
Extreme social, governance instability would not prevent capacity strengthening and investments in WSS
services.

The ToC reflected relevant activities that were directly connected to the outputs and outcome in a plausible
causal chain. Also, the stated critical assumptions were logical and realistic.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      6,576 new piped household water connections resulted from the project intervention. While this was
       substantial, it fell short of the target of 7,750.
      133 improved community water points were constructed or rehabilitated under the project exceeding
       the target of 135.

Outcome

By project completion, 570,558 people in rural areas and small towns were provided with access to improved
water sources under the project almost achieving the revised target of 588,000 and significantly exceeding
the original target of 235,000 people (PDO indicator 1). Although,152,319 people were provided with access
to improved water sources under the project (excluding the areas affected by hurricane Matthew) this was
below the target of 197,000 people (PDO indicator 2); some 75,900 people in rural areas were provided with
access to improved water sources in zones affected by hurricane Matthew exceeding the target of 71,000
people (PDO indicator 3). Finally, 75,900 project beneficiaries benefitted from small repairs of water systems
in the context of the COVID-19 emergency fully achieving the target.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project was successful in increasing access to improved water
supply in targeted rural areas and small towns through supporting new household water connections and
constructing and/or rehabilitating community water points. As noted above, the project exceeded its targets
for PDO outcome indicators 3 and 4, substantially achieved its target on PDO outcome indicator 1, but fell
short of meeting its target for PDO outcome indicator 2. Overall, the efficacy with which this objective was
achieved is rated Substantial with minor shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective


                                                                                                 Page 6 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HT Sustainable Rural WSS Project (P148970)



To increase access to improved sanitation in targeted rural areas and small towns in zones affected by
cholera.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported the following
activities: financed consulting services, training and operating costs to support DINEPA in finalizing the
operationalization of sanitation marketing and behavioral change and tailoring them to Haitian rural areas and
small town consumers and supply chains; also the project financed consulting services for assessing the
sanitation features of selected communities, including hydrogeological and soil conditions; the assessments
would be used to select the options that would be environmentally and socially acceptable for household
sanitation; financed the construction of latrine blocks for selected localities’ public schools, health facilities
and public spaces such as markets (including bi-national markets) taking into account gender-informed
preferences. The expected outputs were an increase in households with latrines built during project
implementation and for which use was verified; and the construction and/or rehabilitation of latrine blocks for
public institutions or spaces with management and maintenance arrangements in place under the project.
The expected outcome was an increase in access to improved sanitation in targeted rural areas and small
towns in zones affected by cholera. Anticipated long-term impact was substantially increasing access to
sustainable WSS.

The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following three critical assumptions: 1. DINEPA would
absorb the sizeable/multifaceted capacity increase required to implement the project; and 2. Extreme social,
governance instability would not prevent capacity strengthening and investments in WSS services.

The ToC reflected relevant activities that were directly connected to the outputs and outcome in a plausible
causal chain. Also, the stated critical assumptions were logical and realistic.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      5,449 households had latrines built and were in-use during project implementation significantly
       exceeding the target of 1,900 households.
      135 improved community water points were constructed and/or rehabilitated under the project slightly
       exceeding the target of 133.
      300 masons were trained on latrine construction (no target provided).
      Training of latrine emptier and setup of an association of emptier (target achieved).
      Students’ notebooks containing sanitation awareness information were produced and distributed (no
       target provided).
      Sanitation awareness campaigns in schools were developed and implemented (target achieved).
      Training on sanitary block management for schools was developed and implemented (target
       achieved).
      Awareness-raising campaigns, based on a participatory community approach (ACAT) all over Haiti, in
       collaboration with the Ministry of Public Health and UNICEF. These campaigns promoted the benefits
       of sanitation and financed the training of 300 personnel at involved entities
      Notable achievements under the projects that were not part of the Results Framework included: (a) A
       hydrogeological study defining a zoning plan for sanitation interventions, laying out appropriate
       sanitation infrastructure solutions by zone and helping to transfer knowledge to local actors; and
       (b) Completion of works and operation of a wastewater treatment plant in the south region,


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HT Sustainable Rural WSS Project (P148970)



       complemented by providing a truck to support the latrine emptier’s association and ensuring safe
       disposal of fecal sludge in the plant.

Outcome

By project completion, 30,900 people were provided with access to improved sanitation facilities exceeding
the target of 30,000 (PDO outcome indicator 5). The project also conducted innovative activities to promote
sanitation improvements and leverage additional resources. The implemented activities (noted
above) provided important knowledge and tools that were needed to support sustained long-term sanitation
improvements.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project was successful in increasing access to improved sanitation
in targeted rural areas and small towns through supporting households to build latrines, and through
supporting the construction and/or rehabilitation of improved community water points. The project
also conducted innovative activities to promote sanitation improvements including awareness raising
campaigns, a sanitation study, provision of training on latrine construction, maintenance, and safe disposal.
The project exceeded its target for the PDO outcome indicator as well as its targets for its intermediate
outcomes. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To strengthen the Recipient’s water and sanitation service delivery mechanism at the deconcentrated level.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported the following
activities: strengthening DINEPA’s capacity to develop and manage a national programming mechanism for
deconcentrated WSS service delivery in rural areas and small towns. This would prepare DINEPA for a shift
from a project approach to a programmatic approach and build on the strategic orientations included in the
Framework Law and further developed in
the Sector Strategic Plan (SSP) to provide the sector with a common framework for unit costs, service
delivery standards, validation of population growth hypotheses, technologies, and annual service objectives.
In addition, this programming mechanism would help DINEPA plan investments and address the need to look
for additional financing to achieve universal WSS access. Also, the project would strengthen the capacity of
the selected Regional Offices for Water and Sanitation (OREPAs) to manage WSS assets and
deconcentrated personnel including: (i) the planning, identification, contracting and supervision of WSS
works; (ii) supervision of delegated service delivery contracts with OPs. Strengthening the capacity of these
OREPAs in sanitation, procurement, FM, social mobilization for behavioral change, gender mainstreaming,
and participatory monitoring through formal and non-formal beneficiary assessments, by contracting and
training additional dedicated consultants. In addition, the project would strengthen the local stakeholders in
rural and small towns WSS to improve service delivery sustainability. This would include capacity building and
training activities in the management and monitoring of rural and small town water supply systems and public
sanitation facilities. The expected outputs were: departments covered by WSS baseline information, DINEPA

                                                                                                Page 8 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HT Sustainable Rural WSS Project (P148970)



conducts an annual joint Government/partner’s sector review, a national programming mechanism for
deconcentrated WSS service delivery would be operationalized, number of OREPAs among the 4 existing
ones, using the baseline developed under the project to prioritize, number of OREPAs among the 4 existing
ones that have installed an accounting system which facilitates the consolidation of financial information at
the central level, the Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Committees (CAEPAs) that include at least 20%
of female representation in project area, fecal sludge management service chain for rural areas and small
towns would be defined, and a grievances registered related to delivery of project benefits addressed. The
expected outcomes were the delivery and the operationalization of a national programming mechanism for
deconcentrated WSS delivery, and the required functions to targeted OREPA deconcentrated. All this
combined was expected to contribute to strengthening the Recipient’s water and sanitation service delivery
mechanism at the deconcentrated level. Anticipated long-term impacts included substantially increasing
access to sustainable WSS.

The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following three critical assumptions: 1. DINEPA would
absorb the sizeable/multifaceted capacity increase required to implement the project; 2. Local stakeholders
would adopt the participatory, management approach for sustainably delivery of WSS services; and 3.
Extreme social, governance instability would not prevent capacity strengthening and investments in WSS
services.

The ToC reflected relevant activities that were directly connected to the outputs and outcomes in a plausible
causal chain. Also, the stated critical assumptions were logical and realistic.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      10 departments were covered by WSS baseline information (target fully achieved).
      DINEPA conducted an annual joint Government/partner sector review (target achieved).
      5 national programming mechanism for deconcentrated WSS service delivery was operationalized, as
       evidenced by tools in place (target achieved).
      4 OREPAs among four existing ones, were using the baseline developed under the project to prioritize
       (target achieved).
      129 CAEPAs included at least 20% female representation in project area exceeding the target of 70.
      Notable achievements not reflected in the RF included: the development and adoption of a multiyear
       Program and Budget Process including a pricing system by DINEPA. The ICR noted that this became
       a key tool in the high-level dialogue between donors supporting the WSS sector in Haiti. Also, the
       Integrated Water and Sanitation Information System was developed and operationalized, as well as
       the new computerizing accounting system. The Groundwater Management System was also
       configured, with training provided to DINEPA technicians, and data was collected.

Outcome

By project completion, 17 piped water systems were managed sustainably by a professional operator (PO)
under the project which fell short of meeting the end target of 24 systems (PDO outcome indicator 6). The
shortcoming in achieving the target for established POs managing water systems was attributed to delays in
concluding work, which delayed PO recruitment and subsequent launch of commercial activities (ICR,
paragraph 33). Also, 6 required functions were deconcentrated to targeted OREPAs fully achieving the end
target of 6 (PDO outcome indicator 7). These functions included procurement and financial management, as
well as payroll control for both the Rural Departmental Units and communal technicians. This transfer allowed

                                                                                                 Page 9 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HT Sustainable Rural WSS Project (P148970)



most project contracts to be procured and managed at the OREPA level (ICR, paragraph 34). Also, the
reporting by each OREPA on implementation of the region’s CAEPAs/POs management contracts was in
progress at project closing, with initial reporting from OREPAs on technical and operational issues and
financial management were all well advanced, according to the ICR (paragraph 34).

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The evidence provided in the ICR point to the partial success of the
project in strengthening the Recipient’s water and sanitation service delivery mechanism at the
deconcentrated level. This was achieved through strengthening DINEPA’s capacity to develop and manage a
national programming mechanism for deconcentrated WSS service delivery in rural areas and small
towns, strengthening the capacity of the selected OREPAs to manage WSS assets and deconcentrated
personnel, and strengthening the local stakeholders in rural and small towns WSS to improve service delivery
sustainability. Of the two PDO outcome indicators, the first was partially achieved at 71% and the second
PDO outcome indicator was fully achieved. The project also fully achieved its targets for four intermediate
results indicators, and exceeded the target on the fifth. Overall, the efficacy with which this objective was
achieved is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings related to the underachievement of the target
for first PDO outcome indicator.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
To improve the Recipient’s capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported the creation of an
Emergency Response Directorate directly overseen by DINEPA’s General Directorate. The project would also
facilitate the rapid re-categorization of financing and additionally financing request under streamlined
procedures during an emergency, should the Government so request. Specific activities supported by the
project included: (i) the preparation of an agreed upon preliminary emergency recovery Action Plan of
activities; (ii) compilation of a positive list of eligible critical imports/needs; (iii) terms of reference and
contracts for technical services to support the scoping and design of the emergency recovery and
reconstruction sub-projects; and (iv) preparing a list of firms (national and regional) with a demonstrable track
record in emergency response activities related to the anticipated nature and scope of those required. In
addition, this objective would also benefit from capacity building activities supported by the project under
objective 3. The expected output was the use of DINEPA’s Integrated Water and Sanitation Information
System (SIEPA) to map damages and plan and monitor post-earthquake water and sanitation interventions in
the framework of the post-disaster needs assessment and the government’s recovery plan. These activities
combined were expected to strengthen the Government's emergency response capacity.

The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following two critical assumptions: 1. DINEPA would
absorb the sizeable/multifaceted capacity increase required to implement the project; and 2. Extreme social,
governance instability would not prevent capacity strengthening and investments in WSS services.



                                                                                                  Page 10 of 23
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               HT Sustainable Rural WSS Project (P148970)



                            The ToC reflected relevant activities that were directly connected to the output and outcome in a plausible
                            causal chain. Also, the stated critical assumptions were logical and realistic.

                            Outputs/Intermediate Results

                                  24 latrine blocks for public institutions or spaces were constructed or rehabilitated with management
                                   and maintenance arrangements in place in zones affected by Hurricane Matthew exceeding the
                                   original target of 20.
                                  270,019 people benefitted from consolidation works (small repairs and expansions) in zones affected
                                   by hurricane Matthew slightly exceeding the revised target of 270,000 but falling short of the original
                                   target of 300,000.
                                  SIEPA was used to map damages and plan and monitor post-earthquake water and sanitation
                                   interventions in the framework of the post-disaster needs assessment and the government’s recovery
                                   plan (target achieved).

                            Outcome

                            The project activities supported the Government of Haiti’s emergency response capacity through DINEPA’s
                            Emergency Response Directorate. In particular, it was used in the aftermath of Hurricane Matthew to carry
                            rehabilitation on 68 water systems. It is also worth noting that the institutional capacity developed under the
                            project was useful following the August 2021 earthquake. This was demonstrated through the authorities
                            improved capacity to coordinate and contribute to national earthquake recovery efforts, especially in informing
                            the national damage and cost assessment with greater accuracy and efficiency when compared to previous
                            emergencies (ICR, paragraph 36). Furthermore, the ICR (paragraph 36) noted that the project-supported
                            institutions played an important role in overseeing coordination with other water and sanitation partners
                            involved in post-disaster recovery efforts in Haiti.

                            Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project supported the creation of an Emergency Response
                            Directorate directly overseen by DINEPA’s General Directorate. The project also supported emergency
                            response measures including an emergency recovery Action Plan of activities, in addition to capacity building
                            activities that benefitted the project institutions under objective 3. By project completion, the project achieved
                            its PDO outcome target of establishing a DINEPA’s system in place to respond to major emergencies. The
                            recipients capacity was put to test after hurricane Mathew and the 2021 earthquake, where the project-
                            supported institutions demonstrated improved capacity to handle emergency situations compared to previous
                            emergencies prior to the project intervention. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is
                            rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale

                                                                                                                               Page 11 of 23
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        HT Sustainable Rural WSS Project (P148970)



  Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings. The project was successful
  in increasing access to improved water supply in targeted rural areas and small towns through supporting
  new household water connections and constructing and/or rehabilitating community water points. The project
  also succeeded in increasing access to improved sanitation in targeted rural areas and small towns through
  supporting households to build latrines, and through supporting the construction and/or rehabilitation
  of improved community water points. However, there were moderate shortcomings in the achievement of
  the objective related to strengthening the Recipient’s water and sanitation service delivery mechanism at the
  deconcentrated level. Finally, the project contributed to improving the Recipient’s capacity to respond
  promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency as demonstrated by the Government's response
  to hurricane Mathew and the 2021 earthquake.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Efficiency Analysis (EFA)

ex ante

     The Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of the water-related activities was estimated at 11% and
        their Net Present Value (NPV) using a discount rate of 10% was estimated at U$1.9 million. The EIRR
        and NPV of the sludge handling and removal activities were estimated at 11.9% and US$0.1 million,
        respectively. No overall EIRR was provided for the entire project.
       A cost-benefit analysis was carried out for all water supply-related project activities and for the sanitation
        activities related to sludge handling and removal. The economic analysis encompassed approximately
        63% of the total project costs.
       The financial impact of project activities was assessed by the Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR)
        derived from the costs-benefits analysis. The FIRR was estimated at 1.8%, which evidenced the need to
        continue to subsidize the development of the rural water supply sector. The difference between the EIRR
        and the FIRR was attributable to the substantial portion of economic benefits that accrue to the
        consumers (cost savings and consumer surplus), which amount to one third of total economic benefits
        (PAD, paragraph 47).
       It is worth noting that the EIRR of the water-related activities did not quantify the impact of reduced
        morbidity related to water borne diseases, hence the EIRR estimate significantly undervalued the full
        impact of the project.
       The assessment of the water benefits was based on: (i) the actual willingness-to-pay as a proxy of the
        value of water; (ii) the cost savings accruing to beneficiaries; and (iii) the surplus accruing to (previously
        unconnected) beneficiaries. The assessment of sanitation benefits was based on the cost savings
        accruing to households who would be offered the possibility of adequately emptying their latrines instead
        of being obliged to build a new latrine.




                                                                                                       Page 12 of 23
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         HT Sustainable Rural WSS Project (P148970)



      The sensitivity analysis showed that the project outcome is above all sensitive to investment cost
         overruns.

ex post

      The Economic Rate of Return (ERR) of the water-related activities was estimated at 41% over a 20 year
         period, and the Net Present Value (NPV) was estimated to be US$94.2 million at a 12% discount
         rate. The ex post ERR was significantly higher than the discount rate at 10%.
        The ex post economic analysis was based on the consumer surplus associated with better access to
         water and the monetized value of reduced morbidity due to water-borne diseases. The analysis was
         based on total disbursements under component 2 of US$46.07 million, equivalent to 71% of the full
         project value. Activities under components 1 and 3 were not included since their results were difficult to
         precisely identify and quantify as they consisted primarily of studies, technical assistance, and capacity
         building activities.
        The project investments not only reduced cholera rates, but also those of diarrhea and other water borne
         diseases. According to the ICR (paragraph 41), the project activities were expected to result in
         a 5% reduction in morbidity associated with water borne diseases amongst the project beneficiaries.
        The sensitivity analysis showed that a two-year lag in benefits, and a reduction of morbidity benefits by
         50% would reduce the EIRR to 25% and 22%, respectively.
        Implementation Efficiency. The project experienced an eighteen month extension beyond its original
         closing date. This was needed to accommodate the delays that resulted from external events including
         the impacts of socioeconomic and political turmoil, hurricane Matthew and the COVID-19 pandemic. It is
         also worth noting that the project was implemented in a fragile environment, and received additional
         financing to help the Government address the emergency need following hurricane Matthew. The project
         disbursed 92% of its funds, and US$4.04 million were cancelled.

Summary of Efficiency Analysis. The ex post and ex ante EIRRs were not directly comparable because the
EIRR at appraisal did not reflect the impact of reduced morbidity related to water borne diseases. Also, the ex
ante analysis relied on a cost-benefit analysis, while the ex post was based on the consumer surplus
model. That said, the project demonstrated strong economic returns from the water and sanitation investments
under component 2 with an ex post EIRR estimated at 41%, which was significantly higher than the discount
rate at 10%. With additional financing and multiple exogenous challenges (COVID-19, Hurricane Matthew, 2021
earthquake, political turmoil and security situation), the project required an 18 months extension, which was
reasonable given the fragile implementation environment. The ex post economic analysis provided a convincing
justification for the project investment. Therefore, Efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      HT Sustainable Rural WSS Project (P148970)



                                                                                         63.00
Appraisal                                                     11.00
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         71.00
ICR Estimate                                                  41.00
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial with moderate
shortcomings. The project was successful in increasing access to improved water supply and sanitation in
targeted rural areas and small towns. However, there were moderate shortcomings in the achievement of
objective related to strengthening the Recipient’s water and sanitation service delivery mechanism at the
deconcentrated level. Finally, the project contributed to improving the Recipient’s capacity to respond promptly
and effectively to an eligible emergency as demonstrated in hurricane Mathew and the 2021 earthquake.
Efficiency was rated Substantial. The project demonstrated strong economic returns from the water and
sanitation investments under component 2 with an ex post EIRR at 41%, which was significantly higher than the
discount rate at 10%.

Based on the assigned ratings for the three outcome criteria, the project outcome is rated Moderately
Satisfactory due to moderate shortcomings pertaining to the achievement of the PDO as noted above.




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following risks could potentially impact the Development Outcome:

1. Financial risk. This relates to users not willing to pay for water, which would eventually result in a
deterioration of services. Despite the project’s efforts, commercial activities of the WSS investment cycle
could not be fully consolidated, especially for larger systems that were delivered toward the end of the
project. That said, it is known in the sector that when customers experience running water (even in rural
areas and when people are not used to paying for water services), they appreciate the service and are more
open to paying. The presence of the Regional Office for Water and Sanitation (OREPAs), Rural
Departmental Units (URDs), and Communal Technicians (TEPACs) at the local community level, is likely to
contribute to the operational and commercial support needed by the operators.

2. Institutional risk. This relates to the limited ability of DINEPA to maintain its overall institutional structure
and functions. This risk will remain a structural issue, largely beyond the project scope, as long as DINEPA




                                                                                                         Page 14 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      HT Sustainable Rural WSS Project (P148970)



remains highly dependent on external financing for both sector development investments and operational
expenditures.

The above-mentioned risks were expected to be partially mitigated through the on-going Bank-funded
Decentralized Sustainable and Resilient Rural Water and Sanitation Project (P178188, approved on May 17,
2023). This new project was expected to continue providing support to the sector to help prepare the
proposed transition toward commercial operations. The new project will also introduce performance-based
conditions given the need to encourage continued improvement in DINEPA’s institutional performance and
capabilities.

The following risk is emphasized by IEG:

3. Political and security risk. The political and security environment in Haiti continues to be highly
challenging (ICR, paragraph 56). Political turmoil could result in instability and deteriorating security
conditions in the country. In turn, these events could undermine the sustainability of the development
outcome and reverse the achievements of the project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic relevance and approach. The project was strategically relevant and in line with the
          goals of the Government of Haiti for addressing the cholera epidemic and achieving universal
          access to WSS. The PDO was clearly defined and in line with the Bank strategies and
          Government priorities (see section 3 for details). However, the PDO was ambitious given that the
          project was to be implemented in a fragile environment.
         Technical, financial, and economic aspects. The project was designed to scale up the Bank's
          support to the WSS sector in Haiti through building on the lessons from the previous operation
          (see section 3 for details). It focused on scaling-up support and continuity to address the issue of
          performance of piped water schemes. Design also featured capacity building activities to improve
          water service delivery and emphasized solid coordination with other donors, which allowed for a
          division of labor, such as a focus on urban and rural areas, and strengthened the
          coordination between the water and health sectors. However, the service payment
          approach featured under the project was difficult to implement in the face of social and community
          resistance to accept the basic principles of payment for water services. The economic analysis at
          appraisal underestimated the project's ERR because it did not quantify the impact of reduced
          morbidity related to water borne diseases.
         Poverty, gender, and social development aspects. The project was expected to benefit the
          poor through improving service delivery and access to improved water sources to rural areas and
          small towns. The project would also have a significant impact on women and children, as fetching



                                                                                                      Page 15 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HT Sustainable Rural WSS Project (P148970)



         water was a task mostly undertaken by women and girls. Also, the provision of safe water and
         sanitation was expected to reduce water-borne disease, especially among children.
        Environmental and fiduciary aspects. The project would result in positive environmental
         impacts to the population. The project design included appropriate environmental and social risk
         assessments with adequate mitigation strategies. The project used the existing financial
         management framework in place at DINEPA for on-going projects financed by the IDB, Spanish
         Agency for International Development Cooperation, UNICEF and the Swiss Agency for
         Development and Cooperation. However, the partial delegation of fiduciary processes made the
         decision-making process and flow of information more complex. This was evident in terms of
         financial management reporting and withdrawal applications to the World Bank (ICR, paragraph
         57).
        Implementation arrangements. The project took advantage of existing engineering designs
         financed under the previous Bank-financed operation (Haiti Rural Water Supply and Sanitation
         Project-EPAR). While these designs needed an update, they were expected to allow infrastructure
         delivery in the first and second years of implementation. Overall, implementation arrangements
         could have benefited from more autonomy to the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) since
         embedding the PIU into DINEPA’s organizational structure resulted in implementation being
         subject to DINEPA’s time-consuming internal processing.
        Risk assessment. While this project builds upon strong prior experience acquired under the
         previous Bank-funded EPAR project, its overall risk was assessed as Substantial. Seven main
         risks were identified at appraisal, most notable were climate and disaster risks, political and
         governance risks, and stakeholder risk, among others. While several risks were identified at
         appraisal, the risks related to socioeconomic and political turmoil, financial management, limited
         implementation capacity, and insecurity, were all underestimated, and shortages of construction
         supplies and high fuel price were not anticipated at appraisal. All of which materialized during
         implementation and significantly impacted the project activities.
        M&E arrangements. The M&E system was to be overseen by the project team in the DINEPA
         Technical Department, which would consolidate all reports and provide the necessary outputs
         with support from DINEPA’s departments and sub-national structures. While the project the
         project would track the evolution of the incidence of water- and excreta-related diseases
         (including cholera) in the selected communities, the project did not include direct interventions in
         support of health actors coordinating response and treatment. Therefore clear attribution links
         between the WSS interventions and their impacts on disease incidence could not be made. The
         M&E design reflected an adequate Results Framework that included relevant indicators to track
         the project activities. However, M&E design was complex in the context of the limited
         implementation capacity (see section 9 for details).

Summary of QAE Assessment. The project was strategically relevant, with a clearly defined yet
ambitious PDO. Design adopted an integrated approach through combining structural and nonstructural
measures and reflected adequate environmental aspects. However, fiduciary aspects needed attention
during implementation. Implementation arrangements could have reflected more autonomy for the
PIU and risk assessment underestimated and did not anticipate several risks as noted above. M&E
arrangements were adequate, but attribution links between the WSS interventions and their impacts on
disease incidence could not be made. Overall, Quality at Entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory due to
moderate shortcomings as noted.




                                                                                                  Page 16 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Sustainable Rural WSS Project (P148970)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The project was implemented under a number of challenging exogenous events including political
          turmoil and insecurity, hurricane Mathew in 2016, an earthquake in 2021, and the outbreak of the
          COVID-19 pandemic with the associated restrictions.
         The Bank conducted 24 implementation support missions (8 physical and 16 virtual) over the
          course of the project implementation. The project implementation benefitted from close supervision,
          where the Bank provided prompt technical support to the Government team to address any
          implementation issues. Close supervision was also facilitated by the presence of the Task Team
          Leader (TTL) in Port au Prince from 2016 to 2021.
          In 2016, the Bank prepared an additional financing to support the Government in addressing the
          impact of Hurricane Matthew. The project also mobilized support for the COVID-19 and 2021
          earthquake responses.
         The Bank also supported the mobilization of additional technical and financial resources, making
          available the Global Water and Sustainable Sanitation Partnership (GWSP) strategic support, which
          contributed to enhancing project’s institutional strengthening efforts. Further, the Public-Private
          Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF) and the International Finance Corporation (IFC) were also
          mobilized, providing complementary institutional strengthening activities that focused on private
          sector participation and sustainable provision of WSS services.
         The Bank facilitated four project restructurings to adjust the design to the realities on the ground.
          This enabled the project to respond to emergencies and adapt to the changing implementation
          environment. However, financial management and procurement were both downgraded to
          Moderately Unsatisfactory by project closure. Safeguards were also downgraded to Unsatisfactory
          and two planned surveys did not take place.
         While M&E implementation faced shortcomings, these were mostly addressed except for
          conducting the planned surveys due to the security situation. Also, a physical mission could not
          take place for ICR preparation due to safety issues.

 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. The Bank supervision guided the project through a
 challenging implementation environment. Implementation benefitted from close Bank support and timely
 restructuring of the project to adapt to changes on the ground. Overall, and despite local insecurity and
 travel restrictions, the Bank provided sustained and effective supervision to successfully guide the project
 to achieve its outcomes. However, financial management, procurement and safeguards compliance faced
 challenges. Therefore, Quality of Supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

 Overall, Bank performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory due to moderate shortcomings pertaining to the
 Quality at Entry and Bank supervision.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

                                                                                                   Page 17 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Sustainable Rural WSS Project (P148970)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) since it was not yet required by the Bank at the
          time of appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR included a ToC the reflected the relationship between the
          project activities, outputs, outcomes and long-term impacts in a plausible causal chain. This Review
          reconstructed a ToC for each objective based on the detailed project description in the PAD (Annex
          2).
         The PDO was composed of four objectives (see section 2). Those were assessed based on the
          following 7 PDO outcome indicators: Objective 1: "To Increase access to improved water supply in
          targeted rural and small towns in zones affected by cholera": (1) The number of people provided
          with access to improved water sources under the project – rural, disaggregated by sex; (2) The
          number of priority cholera communes targeted under the Project; (3) The number of project
          beneficiaries-including women in localities on the border with the Dominican Republic including by-
          national markets; Objective 2: "To increase access to improved sanitation in targeted rural and
          small towns in zones affected by cholera": (4) The number of people provided with access to
          improved sanitation facilities; Objective 3: "To strengthen the Recipient’s water and sanitation
          service delivery mechanism at the deconcentrated level": (5) A national programming mechanism
          for deconcentrated WSS service delivery is operationalized, as evidenced by tools in place; (6)
          Required functions deconcentrated to targeted OREPAs; (7) The number of piped water systems
          managed sustainably by a Professional Operator (PO) under the project, and finally Objective 4:
          "To improve the Recipient’s capacity to respond promptly and efficiently to an Eligible Emergency"
          had no assigned PDO indicator(s) in the PAD.
         The outcome indicators for objectives 1, 2 and 3 were directly connected to the stated objectives,
          measurable and with reasonable targets. However, it was not clear how sustainability would be
          measured for outcome indicator 7. The lack of any PDO outcome indicator(s) for the fourth objective
          is a design shortcoming.
         The Results Framework included 17 intermediate results indicators (IRIs) to track the progress of
          the different project activities. The IRIs were measurable, reflected reasonable targets, and were
          connected to the project activities.
         The M&E system also included two beneficiary surveys (mid-term and by the project closing).
         Overall, M&E design included well defined indicators that were connected to the project activities
          and objectives. However, M&E design was relatively complex for a project in a fragile country. The
          project PDO statement included four separate objectives that were measured through 7 PDO
          outcome indicators, in addition to 17 IRIs that needed to be tracked during implementation. Such
          level of complexity needed a well-developed M&E capacity within the implementing agency, which
          was not the case.




                                                                                                  Page 18 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Sustainable Rural WSS Project (P148970)



b. M&E Implementation
       The overall responsibility for M&E implementation was under the DINEPA Technical
         Department. DINEPA developed two monitoring systems (to monitor performance indicators and
         water quality which were going to be used under the project.
        To follow up on the WSS sector indicators, a national water and sanitation platform (SIEPA) was
         developed, with support from the project and other donors. However, updating M&E data was
         challenging due to the lack of people on the ground to regularly collect information and/or people
         to enter the updated information on the system. Also, the large number of works financed under
         the project were dispersed in a large territory, which posed challenges to improve the information
         collection frequency.
        Restructuring and revision of indicators. The PDO indicators were slightly revised by both the
         2017 AF and the 2020 restructuring. These changes reflected additional activities and targets
         supported by the AF, along with improvements to streamline and reduce the complexity of the
         Results Framework (RF). Also, a PDO outcome indicator was assigned to objective 4 which
         lacked an outcome indicators in the original design.
        The two surveys planned in the PAD could not be conducted mainly due to security and travel
         limitations.



c. M&E Utilization
       The M&E system provided key information to the investment planning phase and also
         contributed to monitor implementation progress (ICR, paragraph 62). The ICR did not provide
         specific examples to demonstrate that M&E data helped in project management decisions.
        The ICR (paragraph 62) noted that while M&E data suffered from a lack of accuracy in detailed
         information, this was mitigated by DINEPA and OREPA personnel based on their practical
         experience.

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. M&E design had a complex RF with a relatively large number
  of indicators for a fragile country. While design shortcomings were mostly rectified during
  implementation, limited capacity and difficulty to access project areas negatively impacted the collection
  and accuracy of M&E data. M&E utilization could have been better if the two planned surveys were
  conducted as planned. Overall, M&E Quality is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
        The project was classified as an environmental Category B because the proposed interventions
          (small-medium scale civil works) were not likely to result in significant negative impacts. The project
          interventions were of limited scale in dispersed locations, and the nature of the potential impacts
          were mostly temporary and easily mitigated with known management techniques. The project

                                                                                                    Page 19 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    HT Sustainable Rural WSS Project (P148970)



         triggered four environmental safeguards: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats
         (OP/BP 4.04), Forests OP/BP 4.36 and Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37), and one social
         safeguard: Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).
        An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy
         Framework (RPF) were developed for the project to manage environmental and social risks during
         implementation.

  Compliance with environmental Safeguards. The policies on Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) and Forests
  (OP/BP 4.36) were triggered as
  a precaution, given that the sites for works were unknown and natural habitats may be found around water
  sources. The ICR (paragraph 65) reported that while safeguards performance was rated Moderately
  Satisfactory most of the implementation, the rating was downgraded to Unsatisfactory before closing. This
  downgrade was due to "due to concerns over unfinished works" however, those were eventually
  accomplished prior to closing (ICR, paragraph 65).

  Compliance with Social Safeguards. 17 Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs) were prepared
  and implemented during project implementation. A total of 226 Project Affected People (PAPs) were
  compensated for losses in agriculture cultures; three PAPs were compensated for losses of a portion of
  land; and all compensations were paid by DINEPA. a project specific Grievance Redress Mechanism
  (GRM) was established. A total of 101 grievances were received, mostly related to loss of crops, and all
  were addressed during implementation (ICR, paragraph 67).

        While the ICR did not explicitly report that the project fully complied with Bank's safeguard policies, it
         is evident that the project faced compliance issues since the rating for environmental compliance
         was downgraded as noted above.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). While the project FM was rated Moderately Satisfactory for most of
  implementation period, it was downgraded at closing to Moderately Unsatisfactory due to persistent
  deficiencies in the internal control system. This undermined the FM ability to efficiently monitor budget
  execution, prepare accurate financial and treasury reports, document expenditures and advances, and
  delays in submitting the audit reports on time (ICR, paragraph 69). Further, the OREPAs submitted their
  expense documentation with a delay to DINEPA, which hindered the latter's capacity to follow and monitor
  advances and capacity to detect and address issues. Fund advances that were still to be documented
  accounted for over US$4 million prior to closing. Despite that the OREPA's staff received training on a new
  accounting software, this effort was undermined by continuous staff turnover (ICR, paragraph 69).

  Procurement. Procurement activities suffered from delays, turnover of procurement specialists and
  weakness in the processes. To increase capacity, the United Nations Office for Project Services
  (UNOPS) provided specific support on technical validation and preparation of bidding documents and to
  participate in the evaluation committees during 2019-2020. Similar to FM above, procurement performance
  was rated Moderately Satisfactory for most of implementation period, but was downgraded to Moderately
  Unsatisfactory prior to closing. This downgrade was due to the risk that a few ongoing contracts would not
  be concluded in due time and numerous pending updates in the procurement system. By closing, however,


                                                                                                    Page 20 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Sustainable Rural WSS Project (P148970)



   all contracts were concluded except one large contract for Lascahobas. It was not clear in the ICR how the
   Lascahobas contract was handled after project closure.

   In a further communication regarding the Lascahobas contract, the project team explained that:
   "Considering the strategic importance of the Lascahobas water system (an important “small town” with
   growing population, initiative with IFC to develop a PPP) and expectations from authorities and the
   communities after the early termination of the contract (January 2023), it was agreed to finance the
   remaining of the work through the new water operation that was at the time being appraised. A specific
   budget line was including for this purpose, including works and environmental and social measures to
   ensure compliance with the post-closure action plan (cf. item 4 above). Direct contracting was approved by
   the Bank in May 2023 shortly after the new project approval by the Board. The new contract, including
   technical and environmental and social requirements, was approved in June 2023 and implementation of
   works resumed shortly afterwards, in the framework of the new operation."




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
        The project supported integrated water management and knowledge on water resources through
          financing a pilot intervention combining watershed protection and community participation, in
          particular farmers. This was a relevant experience for DINEPA in designing and implementing
          investments aimed at water resource management. In parallel DINEPA worked with the University of
          Haiti to improve knowledge of hydrogeologic resources to inform planning of future water resources
          investments (ICR, paragraph 49).
         The project also supported the use of renewable energy sources in the designs of offices and non-
          gravity water supply systems, all of which adopted solar energy as their renewable energy source.
          The necessary equipment was adequately purchased and installed under the project.
         Designs of all sanitation work financed by the project included appropriate solutions ensuring
          accessibility for persons with disabilities, and these solutions were properly executed by the
          contractors (ICR, paragraph 49). This was a notable achievement for a project implemented in a
          fragile country.




11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                             Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory



                                                                                                Page 21 of 23
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       HT Sustainable Rural WSS Project (P148970)



                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included six lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. Projects implemented in fragile environments must thoroughly and candidly assess the
expected implementation challenges to ensure realistic technical solutions and institutional
arrangements that are identified and adopted. The project financed a large number of activities in
eight out of the 10 administrative regions under challenging implementation conditions combined
with weak capacity. While most activities were of small size, accessing implementation areas was
difficult. Also, implementation arrangements involved numerous entities with weak capacity, which
exacerbated implementation difficulties and required more activities to help them fulfill their
roles. Such challenges needed to be carefully assessed at the preparation stage to ensure smooth
implementation and a successful outcome.

2. Sustainability of WSS investments requires implementation of intense and multifaceted
activities before, during and after conclusion of the works. These activities were part of the
project implementation strategy and were partially implemented; however, as difficulties in meeting
deadlines increased, a focus on concluding the works prevailed. As a result, although the project
concluded most of the investments in water and sanitation systems and facilities, there was limited
evidence to indicate sustainability. It is therefore recommended that implementation arrangements of
similar projects clearly demonstrate that the full range of activities required to support sustainability
is assured.

3. To successfully and effectively tackle crises that need rapid responses on various
fronts, strengthening collaboration of joint World Bank's practices combined with design
flexibility is necessary to ensure coordinated and innovative support. The project benefited
from joint work of WB practices – primarily water and health, but also education and energy,
especially during crises that needed rapid responses on various fronts. Early in the project, a joint
response to cholera outbreaks was replicated in a project in Yemen. During implementation, the WB
water team worked with the education team on the design of school latrines. In the last months of
the project, a health project incorporated WSS activities due to a new cholera outbreak. Flexibility in
design is conducive to innovative practices, especially during a crisis response.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No



                                                                                                     Page 22 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Sustainable Rural WSS Project (P148970)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. While the ICR provided an evidence base to support the achievements reported, it was
barely enough to assess the project outcomes due to M&E implementation challenges. There were also
concerns on the accuracy of the M&E data collected.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings to the extent possible
and used the evidence base to serve the arguments under the different sections.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Results Orientation. The ICR included an adequate discussion on the achievement of the four elements of
the PDO. However, the outcome discussion was slightly skewed towards reporting on the achievement of
outcome indicators over what the project actually achieved on the ground.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the available data to justify most of the assigned ratings.

Conciseness. The ICR provided adequate coverage of project activities and candidly reported on most
shortcomings in a concise form. However, some sections could have benefited from further details including the
sections on Quality at Entry and M&E design.

 Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. The ICR’s assessment of outcomes was adequate, and the
lessons drawn by the ICR were relevant. Most sections were concise and reflected relevant
information. Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 23 of 23
