     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Capacity Injection (P149971)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023764

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P149971                                    Somalia Capacity Injection

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Somalia                                    Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A0415,TF-A5472,TF-B0692                 30-Jun-2020                                         34,122,132.72

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 11-Aug-2015                                31-Dec-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           36,415,000.00                                    36,415,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            36,148,605.40                                    34,122,132.72

 Actual                                        34,122,132.72                                    34,122,132.72




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Dimitri Tsarouhas           Clay Wescott                 Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) for the Somalia Capacity Injection Project (CIP) was “to strengthen
   the staffing and institutional capacity of selected line ministries and central agencies to perform core
   government functions” (PAD, p.11).

   This project was part of a series of projects (SOP) aimed at boosting Somalia’s public sector capacity
   development and strengthening core Government functions. The Second Public Finance Management
   Capacity Strengthening Project aimed at establishing systems for more transparent and

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Capacity Injection (P149971)



   accountable management and use of public funds, while the Second Phase of the Recurrent Cost & Reform
   Financing Project (RCRF) financed recurrent costs of core government functions and support to expert
   services. This included the payment of civil service salaries in non-security sectors, and advisors and civil
   servants recruited under the CIP.

   Objective: For this review, the PDO will be parsed into three objectives that will be referred to as Objectives
   1, 2 and 3, as follows:

         Objective 1: Support the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) and Puntland State of Somalia (PSS)
          in developing civil servants’ capacity to perform key government functions.
         Objective 2: Support the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) and Puntland State of Somalia (PSS)
          in strengthening civil service management through clear frameworks and procedures.
         Objective 3: Support the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) and Puntland State of Somalia (PSS)
          in improving policy coordination and monitoring capabilities at the center of Government.

   Split Rating: a split rating was considered due to the downward revision of one outcome target (the number of
   staff to be appointed in key positions by the FGS was reduced from 210 to 110). The reduction took place
   because of an FGS initiative to stay within the available fiscal space. It was decided not to apply a split rating
   for the following reasons. First, a split rating would have hardly affected project outcome ratings since it
   reflected only a modest reduction in the ambition of the project. Second, and given the duplication of outcome
   targets throughout the project cycle for two jurisdictions, the outcome target on numbers of staff was only
   revised for the FGS, whereas it remained unchanged for PSS. Third, following the revision, neither the theory
   of change nor the PDO were revised. One of the outcome targets, the number of staff appointed to key
   positions in the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) by CIM, was revised downwards in the 2021
   restructuring. The project was restructured six times in total, and the main reason behind frequent
   restructuring was the need to accommodate multiple rounds of donor funding. This was due to the project
   using a basket-funding mechanism by establishing a multi-donor trust fund (MPF); financing occurred
   incrementally through several grant amendments, and in line with the depositing of the contributions into the
   main trustee fund. Hence, and in the interest of clarity, a split rating has not been applied.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  11-Nov-2019

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Developing Capacity for Key Cross-Cutting Government Functions (US$13 million at
   appraisal, US$8.6 million actual). The primary objective of this component was to support the recruitment,

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Somalia Capacity Injection (P149971)



placement, and management of qualified Somalis in critical functions in targeted institutions at the
federal government level (FGS) and Puntland State government level (PSS). The targeted institutions
included institutions in both jurisdictions. Regarding the FGS, targeted institutions comprised the Ministry of
Finance, Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation, Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs, National
Civil Service Commission, Office of the Prime Minister, Office of the President, Central Bank of Somalia,
Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Energy and Water, and Ministry of Public Works, and Reconstruction.
Regarding Puntland State, the institutions in question were the Office of the President, Ministry of Finance,
Ministry of Planning Economic Development and International Cooperation, Ministry of Labor, Youth and
Sports, Ministry of Livestock and Animal Husbandry, Ministry of Environment, Agriculture and Climate
Change, Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources, Civil Service Commission, and the State Bank.

Sub-Component 1.1: Supporting harmonized and Government-led capacity injection in priority institutions.
This sub-component aimed to identify several institutions benefitting from the Capacity Injection Modality
(CIM) in the first year of operation, as they were considered critical for project success. CIM was set up for
the CIP project and intended to inject capacity at senior advisor and mid-managerial levels in both
jurisdictions, setting up a central mechanism for that purpose. At the federal level, priority institutions
included the Ministry of Finance, the Central Bank of Somalia, the Prime Minister’s Office, the Ministry of
Planning and International Cooperation, the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs, the National Civil Service
Commission, the ministries of Energy and Water, Public Works, and Agriculture. At the Puntland State level,
these included the Ministry of Finance, the State Bank of Puntland, the Office of the President, the Ministry
of Planning, the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs, the Puntland Civil Service Commission, the Ministry of
Livestock and the Ministry of Fisheries. A set of criteria was identified to designate beneficiary institutions.
The criteria used stressed the role played by the institution in strengthening core Government processes,
whether the institution delivers flagship programs and/or visible benefits to the Somali people, whether it
has a clear mandate and management process, and whether it is committed to reforms and in line with the
World Bank/UNDP joint effort to avoid donor effort duplication and waste.

Sub-Component 1.2: Providing specialized training and coaching support for recruits and their teams. This
sub-component aimed to develop and implement training modules for short-term training of senior advisors
and managers of the civil service and specialized short-term training courses for staff performing common
functions in FM, procurement, HRM and policy management. Short-term training included a. induction
training for all recruits to familiarize them with the basics of working in the Somali public service; b. senior
management training targeting senior managers to improve policy development, strategic planning, and
change management, and c. specialized technical training courses targeting Government staff to equip
cadres with the skills to carry out their tasks in line with the Government’s rules and regulations. Long-term
training through curricula development and training modules was envisaged to develop the capacity of
Somali training and development providers, including in the tertiary education sector. Processes of
certification and evaluation, and training of trainers were also envisaged for both FGS and PSS in
conjunction with partner institutions in Africa.

Component 2: Strengthening the Policies and Procedures for Civil Service Management (US$12.25
million at appraisal, US$12.4 million actual). The primary objective of this component was to support the
Federal Government and the Puntland State of Somalia to manage and implement their civil service and
capacity development agenda. It would further support the restructuring of selected ministries and agencies
and establish the basis for recruitment and staff placement.

Sub-Component 2.1: Supporting Priority Ministries in Re-organization and change management. This sub-
component aimed to define mandates, functions, and institutional responsibilities, develop staffing plans for

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Somalia Capacity Injection (P149971)



a select set of priority Ministries and support the implementation of a re-organization and
change management on the basis of new mandates and strategic functions. A change management team
would be established in each selected implementing ministry/agency to guide and oversee the process. At
the federal level, these would include the Ministry of Finance, the Central Bank of Somalia, the Prime
Minister’s Office, the Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation (statistics and M&E function), the
Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (training and workforce planning), the National Civil Service Commission
(personnel management), the ministries of Energy and Water, Public Works, and Agriculture. At the
Puntland State level, these would include the Office of the President, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of
Planning, the Ministry of Labor, the Ministry of Livestock, the Ministry of Agriculture, and the Ministry of
Fisheries.

Sub-Component 2.2: Strengthening Basic Policies for Civil Service Management. This sub-component
aimed to develop, for both FGS and the PSS, basic policy, and management frameworks to provide the
enabling environment for civil service performance. It sought to improve the legal, regulatory, policy and
administrative environment for fiduciary, human and policy management, and other civil service
administration functions. The two basic policies envisaged by this sub-component were pay and grading
and pension policy. On the former, the sub-component would support the development of a civil service pay
policy and an action plan to include the reclassification of civil service jobs through a pay and grading
exercise. On pension policy, the sub-component would fund the development of a pension policy for civil
servants, bringing together the Government (employer), civil servants (employees), and representatives of
the business community and civil society.

Sub-Component 2.3: Civil Service Work Force Management. This sub-component aimed to support the
FGS and Puntland in developing a civil service staff rationalization policy to ensure optimal civil service
establishment and processes for maintaining and reviewing establishment positions in accordance with
demands of ministries and agencies and budget allocations in support of wage bill management. The
project would support three major activities under this sub-component, namely (i) fund a human resource
audit across the civil service to identify gaps in critical and strategic positions that are vacant or filled
temporarily by unqualified and absentee staff, (ii) set up a credible personnel data management system and
consequent strengthening of controls on the payroll process and management of civil servants, and (iii) fund
a severance policy with participation of key stakeholders including affected retired staff, in support of
severance packages and systems and procedures for administration of the packages.

Sub-component 2.4: Strengthening the Ethical Foundation of the Civil Service. The sub-component aimed
to promote dialogue and discussion on ethical standards for public service; develop a civil service code of
ethics; (iii) ensure ethical standards are reflected in the revised civil service legal and regulatory framework;
(iv) mainstream the code of conduct in the ministry-level change management processes; (v) support the
establishment of adequate mechanisms for enforcement, accountability and complaints, and (vi) develop
and implement a communication strategy to disseminate and socialize the code of conduct among civil
servants, civil society, business community and international partners.

Component 3: Strengthening Policy Management, Coordination and Monitoring Capabilities at the
Center of Government (US$6.75 million at appraisal, US$3.5 million actual). The primary objective of this
component was to strengthen aid coordination and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) capacity by the
ministries of planning at both federal and PSS levels. It would do so by funding the establishment of a policy
coordination and monitoring oversight unit in the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) of the FGS and in the




                                                                                                    Page 4 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Somalia Capacity Injection (P149971)



Office of the President (OOP) of Puntland, policy planning units in targeted ministries and agencies, and
capacity building and leadership development training for senior officials.

Sub-Component 3.1: Strengthening Capacity for Aid Coordination and Monitoring and Evaluation of
the Somali Compact. The sub-component aimed to support aid transparency and effectiveness under the
Somali Development and Reconstruction Facility (SDRF) and build capacity for monitoring the
implementation of the Somali Compact, a framework partnership between Somalia and the international
community aiming at peace- and state-building priorities, agreed upon during the 2013 Brussels Conference
on Somalia. The Compact recognized capacity development as a key enabler in that process. On aid
coordination, an Aid Coordination Unit (ACU) would be set up in the Ministry of Finance at the federal level
to collect, curate, analyze and publish aid data; to record aid against the Government’s chart of accounts, to
facilitate budget planning; and to track allocations at the sub-national level. On monitoring and evaluation,
support would be provided to the Ministries of Planning both at the federal and at the Puntland level and
respective units in charge of national M&E and statistics.

Sub-Component 3.2: Developing Basic Policy Management Capabilities. The sub-component aimed to
improve capabilities to plan future policy development, coordinate key policies across the Government, set
and enforce policy development standards, and monitor policy implementation. Specifically, support would
be offered to the FGS Prime Minister’s Office (PMO) and Puntland’s President's Office to set and enforce
policy standards, support the Capacity Development Units in the FGS Prime Minister’s Office and
Puntland’s President’s Office in staffing, training, and office equipment, and help each line Ministry to
establish a "focal point" to act as counterpart for policy-related requirements.

Sub-Component 3.3: Strengthening leadership for change and delivery. The sub-component aimed to build
trust and consensus on priority reforms, strengthen a focus on results, resolve issues between agencies
and across Government, and build the capacity of ministry-based reform teams to implement rapid results.

Component 4: Project Management and Coordination (US$6 million at appraisal, US$12 million actual).

Sub-Component 4.1: Project Management. This sub-component would set up a central Project Coordination
Unit (PCU) in the Prime Minister’s Office at the Federal Government level and in the Office of the President
at the Puntland State Government level to fund the salaries of key staff and support project-related
procurement processes.

Sub-Component 4.2: Demonstrating results (Monitoring and Evaluation). This sub-component would fund
the hiring of an M&E firm to monitor the project and assist in capacity development at the Ministry's level to
collect and analyze data.

Restructurings:

The project underwent a total of six restructurings for reasons already discussed. The project’s duration was
extended twice for a total of 30 months and pushed the completion date from June 2020 to December 2022.
This led to the corresponding extension of project indicators and the downward revision of one PDO
indicator on the number of staff to be hired (see below). Restructurings were also used for funds’
reallocation under Component 4, with the originally foreseen budget of US$6 million for project
management and administration increasing to US$12 million after the last restructuring.

The revised components were as follows:


                                                                                                  Page 5 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Capacity Injection (P149971)



   Under Component 1, the Young Graduate Scheme that would see young graduates recruited in common
   functions and selected professional fields with further transition into junior civil service posts was dropped.
   One of the outcome targets, the number of staff appointed to key positions in the Federal Government
   of Somalia (FGS) by CIP, was revised from 210 to 110.

   Under Component 4, the allocated budget for this component was increased.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The Project's original cost at appraisal was US$ 40 million, to be committed through the
   Somalia Multi-Partner Fund (MPF). A total of US$ 36.4 million was disbursed, and actual project cost at
   closure was US$ 34.1 million.

         A US$ 40 million commitment from Somalia Multi-Partner Trust Funds financed the project.
          Borrower Contribution: The Federal Government of Somalia and the Puntland State Government did
          not contribute financially to the project.

   Dates: The Bank approved the Project on August 11, 2015, and became effective on October 13, 2015.
   The original closing date was June 30, 2020; however, this was revised twice, and the project closing date
   was extended by 30 months to December 30, 2022. The Project Mid-term Review was completed on
   December 10, 2017. The first extension was due to the need for a wider time window to complete project
   activities in priority areas such as the human resources information management system (HRMIS), the pay
   and grading and pension system for civil servants as well as the function and implementation of training
   institutes. The second extension was due to implementation delays associated with the outbreak of COVID-
   19.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The ability to hire qualified personnel in the civil service and offer them training and budgetary
support would boost public trust in the government’s capacity to deliver essential services. The lack
of clarity on the mandates and functions across federal government institutions and between the federal
and subnational levels of government in Somalia hindered service delivery capacity. The necessary legal
and regulatory frameworks to guide ministries’ work were frequently not implemented and, in some cases,
were non-existent. Somalia’s political and economic instability has had consequences in terms of material
infrastructure since equipment and records of most government agencies and ministries were destroyed or
heavily damaged during the civil war. The civil service was heavily understaffed due to a mass exodus of
qualified personnel during the long years of civil conflict, diminishing the pool of qualified labor. Senior civil
service levels remained understaffed, and some of them were occupied by staff without the requisite
qualifications and skills. There was also a shortage of technical and policy expertise, and almost all FGS
institutions recruited advisors to support senior management in highly technical functions.

Informed by the Somalia Risk and Resilience Assessment and Systematic Country Diagnostic (2018), the
theory of change emphasized that a clear definition of ministerial roles and responsibilities, alongside the

                                                                                                       Page 6 of 20
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Somalia Capacity Injection (P149971)



development of solid training curricula and a needs-based skills development process for senior staff
personnel, would boost civil service management and allow for the effective execution of key
core Government functions, in turn enhancing popular trust towards state institutions. The project would
also support the improvement of policy coordination between and across the civil service, linking the federal
government of Somalia to sub-national levels of government to boost service delivery.

The theory of change was clear and outcome-oriented, premised on a realistic set of critical assumptions.
Most intermediate results indicators were relevant, specific, measurable, and achievable. Still, the IRIs did
not incorporate foreseen spending on hardware and office equipment that would be budgeted through CIP,
and such spending was not part of the results framework. The IRIs used to assess staff satisfaction with
training provided were limited to training without seeking to measure its content and quality. There is no
evidence of a possible attempt to include certain measurement standards to gauge the effectiveness of the
training provided.

The Project Development Objectives were highly relevant and well-aligned with WB-supported
strategies. The FY2014-2016 Interim Strategy Note (ISN) focused on two areas: (i) strengthening core
economic institutions and (ii) expanding economic opportunity. CIP’s focus on increasing staff numbers,
revamping the pay & grading as well as pension systems in the civil service and offering training that will
allow for long-term retaining of highly qualified staff in core institutions aligned fully with the ISN’s call to
boost institutions such as the Ministry of Finance, the Central Bank of Somalia, and the Ministry of Planning
and International Cooperation. The project contributed to the Somalia Multi-Partner Fund's objective of
fostering socio-economic recovery and stabilization by supporting the payment of civil service salaries and
the running costs of government institutions and financing technical assistance. The project also aligned
with the Somalia Compact’s emphasis on the need to build core public sector capacities as a precondition
for rebuilding trust in Somalia’s institutions. The Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY2019-23,
launched when the project was active, included a 'Strengthening Institutions to Delivery Services' focus
area, reflecting the increased focus on service delivery reflected in the revised PDO indicators. CIP
contributes to and is mentioned under Objective 1.1. Improve public finance management and institutional
effectiveness regarding its contribution to training and staffing the civil service as well as boosting the pay
and grading, pensions, and severance country framework. The focus on institution-building and financing
services was maintained in the CPF after the mid-term PLR review. Additionally, the strengthening of the
Somali state apparatus and functioning is a crucial contribution to addressing the drivers of conflict and
Somalia's main development constraints, as identified by the SCD.

The project was consistent with the Somalia Flagship Program on building resilient and efficient
institutions. The federal government set out the 2014 Somalia Flagship Program in partnership with the
WB and the United Nations. It was premised on three components: developing capacity for core
Government functions, strengthening the frameworks and procedures for civil service management, and
strengthening capacity at the center of Government to coordinate policy and lead reform effectively.
Further, the Federal Government’s Financial Governance Program identified civil service reform and
institutional capacity building as an invaluable reform layer on the path toward the sustainable economic
recovery of Somalia.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


                                                                                                       Page 7 of 20
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Somalia Capacity Injection (P149971)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Support the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) and the Puntland State of Somalia (PSS) in developing
               civil servants’ capacity to perform key government functions.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change: The overall theory of change (TOC) was that government-led capacity injection in priority
               institutions and training provision would translate into a reinforced capacity by the civil service to perform key
               government functions. The TOC was premised on a realistic assessment of shortages in qualified personnel
               and staff by the FGS and PSS and the difference that training provisions would make in the recruitment and
               upkeep of qualified personnel. However, some of the outputs expected to result from planned activities were
               far-fetched for Somalia’s FCV context: implementing as well as developing a CIM pay scale implied the
               institutional capacity to harmonize pay scales in the civil service, which was lacking in Somalia.

               Intermediate results and outputs

                     The percentage of injected staff with salaries compliant with the harmonized pay scale rose from 90 to
                      100 percent in both the FGS and PS, achieving the set target.
                     The number of staff who state that they have used the training they received on the job rose to 90
                      percent from 80 percent in the FGS, exceeding the 80 percent target and reaching the 80 percent
                      target in PSS.
                     The percentage of staff who reported adequate training was 75 percent in FGs against a 70 percent
                      target; the equivalent percentage in PSS was 80 percent, but staff’s self-reporting in PS concerned
                      “improvement” rather than training adequacy.

               Outcomes Against Targets

               The share of CIM staff appointed to key positions in FGS by project closure did not hit the initial or reduced
               target after restructuring, as it reached 86 percent of the revised and reduced project target (95 out of 110).
               The proportion of staff that remained in the service after 12 months exceeded the target of 70 percent for both
               FGS and PSS. Although the total number of staff recruited by FGS through the CIM mechanism over the
               project life was 151, that number was subsequently reduced through attrition. Some CIM staff have departed
               from their posts, while some CIM positions were canceled and replaced with consultants or civil servants. CIM
               staff retention indicators were exceeded: while the target retention rate was 70 percent for both FGS and
               PSS, the actual retention rate reached 94 percent and 97 percent in FGS and PSS, respectively.

               Staff training was facilitated through the setup of civil service training institutions and the development of
               training programs, namely the School of Management and Public Administration (SOMPA) in the Somalia
               National University, Mogadishu, and the Institute of Public Administration and Management (IPAM) in the
               Puntland State University, Garowe. SOMPA delivered 24 courses and trained 960 middle and senior-level
               management staff, while IPAM trained 110 CIM recruits. Twenty-four courses were delivered, and 688 middle


                                                                                                                    Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Somalia Capacity Injection (P149971)



and senior-level management staff were trained. The e-learning course materials prepared by SOMPA
and IPAM were neither digitalized nor tested by project closure.

The project contributed to strengthening the staffing of selected line ministries and central agencies. One IRI
was not achieved at closure.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Support the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) and the Puntland State of Somalia (PSS) in strengthening
civil service management through clear frameworks and procedures.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The overall theory of change (TOC) was that support offered to key ministries in managing
the civil service workforce and revamping their organizational mandate would enable the formation of a
transparent, efficient, and accountable civil service. The theory of change of the second objective was less
articulate than the one for the first objective, primarily because it relied on an overtly ambitious set of outputs
to accomplish a new civil service management culture. The establishment and enforcement of a civil service
code necessitated not only governmental commitment (a critical assumption incorporated in the TOC) but
also the institutional capacity to hold policy-makers accountable and use transparent evaluation criteria, which
were both lacking at the time of operation.

Intermediate results and outputs

      A new pay policy for the civil service has been prepared and submitted for Cabinet approval at the
         FGS, although not in PS.
        The percentage of senior staff in supported institutions with job descriptions reached 100 percent in
         both FGS and PSS.
        The percentage of civil servants with complete electronic personal records in participating ministries
         reached 100 percent in FGS against a 95 percent target and reached the target in PSS.
        Guidelines for the recruitment and performance appraisal of civil servants have been developed and
         approved by a Steering Committee in both the FGS and PSS.
        A new pension policy and phased plan for implementation has been developed and submitted for
         Cabinet approval in both FGS and PS.

Outcomes Against Targets

The number of agencies and ministries with operational Human Resources (HR) and Financial Management
(FM) functions that are fully staffed and operational was met (in FGS) and exceeded (in PSS) at the project
closure. The proportion of injected staff with salaries compliant with a harmonized pay scale exceeded 90
percent in both FGS and PSS, reaching 100 percent in both. In contrast, the target of seven change



                                                                                                     Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Somalia Capacity Injection (P149971)



management plans being formulated and implemented by project closure was exceeded in both FGS (9) and
PSS (10).

A pension policy has been prepared in both FGS and PSS, but a new civil service pay policy in PSS was
completed after project closure.

The project contributed to strengthening the institutional capacity of selected line ministries and central
agencies. It allowed for the formulation of new pension and civil servants’ pay and grading policies while
preparing a new HRMIS system. However, neither the pay nor pension policy has been implemented by
project closure, raising concerns about the fiscal sustainability of the civil servants’ wage bill. HRMIS
implementation has been delayed, potentially leading to backtracking in establishing new HR rules and
procedures.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Support the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) and the Puntland State of Somalia (PSS) in improving
policy coordination and monitoring capabilities at the center of Government.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The overall theory of change (TOC) was that results-based project management
strengthened M&E, and better aid coordination would allow for better policy coordination and monitoring at
the center of Government. The TOC was premised on a realistic assessment of the policy coordination
needs of the FGS and PSS and the added value that WB intervention could make. It did not adequately
consider the sustainability dimension of expected outcomes, given the overt dependence of Somali
authorities on external support to maintain civil service operations.

Intermediate results and outputs

      In FGS, 35 Ministries, agencies, and institutions produce bi-annual progress reports against a target of
       eight, whereas the equivalent number of agencies in PS is 8, equal to the target.
      In FGS, the ACU publishes aid data annually.
      Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) and Office of the President (OOP) guidelines for policy
       submissions to the Cabinet have been developed and approved in both FGS and PS.
      The percentage of participants in the Executive Leadership Program in FGS exceeded the set target
       of 50 to reach 141, with 20 percent being female trainees against a target of 10 percent. The target
       was not reached, however, in PSS.

Outcomes Against Targets

Operational plans and clusters have been set up for all key Ministries, and the relevant targets have been
exceeded by closure. The Puntland Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation System (PIMES) has been set up to


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 20
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Somalia Capacity Injection (P149971)



                            track the performance of ministries and agencies. Aid data was annually published until 2021, and it is
                            unclear why this has ceased since. Guidelines for the submission of policy proposals to the Offices of
                            President and Prime Minister in the two jurisdictions have become operational as well. The project
                            strengthened the policy monitoring, evaluation and coordination capacity of key ministries and agencies in the
                            two jurisdictions. The use of statistical data for monitoring and performance evaluation has increased as well,
                            although some disruptions in service have occurred, such as the post-2021 aid data flow. Once intermediate
                            indicator in PSS on Executive Program Leadership trainees (IRI-10) was not achieved at closure.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The PDOs were substantially relevant to the project's overarching objective. All but one of the set PDO
                            targets were met and/or surpassed. Ten out of twelve intermediate indicators were met, with the remaining
                            two met or exceeded in FGS but not met in PSS, namely those on establishing a civil service pay policy and
                            training at least 50 participants in the Executive Leadership Program.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Traditional measures of efficiency, such as financial rate of return and cost per unit of input or output,
   are hardly applicable to the project given the lack of economic data, the ongoing conflict and fragility in
   southern Somalia, and the uncertainty in determining costs and benefits. What is possible is to determine the
   extent to which available resources were put to as good a use as possible and whether cost-effectiveness was a
   guiding criterion in Somalia’s FCV context and the project’s funding modalities.

   The project was implemented within budget, and most of the project funding was used at closure—
   US$34.1 million out of US$36.4 million, or 93.7 percent. The unallocated amount of US$2 million was to be used
   for contingencies that did not prove necessary and has been reallocated to the SERP Project instead to
   fund non-achieved CIM training activities. Several reallocations allowed for better resource use, and costs for
   three out of the four core project components ended up using fewer resources than originally allocated.
   Component 1 on Developing Capacity for Key Cross-Cutting Government Functions absorbed 66 percent of
   allocated resources since salaries for CIM staff injected in the civil service in both FGS and PSS were funded by
   a different project. Reduced expenditure is also linked to the FGS decision to reduce the end target of the
   number of staff appointed to key positions from 210 to 110 by project closure.


                                                                                                                            Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Somalia Capacity Injection (P149971)



Under Component 2, the headcount of the civil service staff conducted as part of the audit enabled the
elimination of ghost staff from the payroll, potentially allowing for significant fiscal savings that would have
otherwise not materialized. The project also funded the acquisition of hardware – office furniture, computers,
other ICT equipment, biometric attendance registration systems, and vehicles – that facilitate the performance of
functions in the FGS and PSS civil service in line with the PDO.

Implementation and procurement delays, as well as task duplications, reduced overall efficiency. The 30-
month extension of the project (38 percent) raised the administrative costs for the World Bank. Although the
outbreak of the pandemic essentially caused the second 18-month project extension, the original project
extension in 2019 was down to a lengthy and often inconclusive procurement process that negatively affected
project efficiency as it ran up spending. A crucial element was the allocated budget to PCU expenditure, the
costs of which proved much larger than originally anticipated and eventually led to the doubling of cost overruns
for project management and coordination (from US$6 million to US$12 million). The ICRR concurs with the ICR
assessment that implementation delays suggest the project’s economic rate return was lower than otherwise
possible relative to the timely project completion scenario.

At appraisal, it was decided that project implementation would occur through two PCUs, one for FGS
and another for PSS. The result was that technical assistance activities were often duplicated, leading to a
waste of resources and overspending. Work was effectively supplied by twin consultants’ teams working in the
two jurisdictions, often implementing the same set of TA activities, and ending up with the same deliverables.
The sustainability of Somalia’s civil service wage bill would have benefited from the operationalization of HRMIS,
which was not complete by project closure and, therefore, an ineffective use of committed resources.

Based on the above, the project’s overall efficiency is rated as Modest. The project was implemented within
budget, but implementation required a 30-month extension, and the target of staff hired via CIM was reduced for
FGS in the last restructuring. The estimates at appraisal had to be revisited, especially those for project
administrative costs. Sustained success of initiated reforms will require further donor support.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Capacity Injection (P149971)




CIP achieved significant gains in a difficult environment. The project injected new staff into the civil service,
achieved significant retention rates beyond the first year of employment, and enabled the staffing and full
operationalization of units on human resources and financial management in both jurisdictions. CIP also offered
valuable technical assistance to develop merit-based staff recruitment and placement modalities, advertisement,
selection, and onboarding. It facilitated significant progress in defining the mandates, vision, mission, and
functions of beneficiary ministries, and project support was extended beyond the originally envisaged Ministries
and Agencies, enhancing the number of beneficiaries. The project also allowed for the setup of civil service
codes of conduct in FGS and PSS. Most importantly, CIP showed that it was possible to work with government
systems in Somalia rather than the off-budget approach taken by most international donors. This helped to
strengthen the Somali state and increase its legitimacy, thus tackling some of Somalia's drivers of conflict.

Key project deliverables were not implemented by project closure, and the scale of the project’s
ambition had to be retroactively lowered. The goal set for the number of competent staff hired through a
merit-based recruitment process was not reached in both jurisdictions, even after restructuring and the
downsizing of the relevant target. The approval of new staff ceilings was pending on project closure, and such
approval corresponds to the fulfillment of core aspects of the project’s developmental objectives pertaining to
limiting ad hoc hiring in the civil service, managing the wage bill, and improving civil service management.
Progress on formulating concrete policies for pay and grading as well as pensions was made, yet had not been
implemented by project closure, and challenges pertaining to off-budget financing for personnel costs and the
distinction of donor-funded staff between those who belong to the civil service and those who do not continues
to exist.

The Relevance of the PDO is rated High, the overall efficacy is Substantial, the efficiency is rated Modest, and
the overall outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to the project's development outcomes is significant. It spans most risk categories, primarily
due to Somalia's status as a fragile state marked by weak institutions, limited state capacity, and
ongoing conflict. These challenges pose significant obstacles to continuing capacity-strengthening
implementation and long-term sustainability. An escalation of the security risk could erode the government's
effectiveness, potentially draining resources required for civil servant salaries. A potential breakdown in
relations between the PSS and the FGS would undermine the progress made in hiring and training
competent staff. Competing interests and power struggles characterize the political landscape in Somalia,
further jeopardizing the sustainability of development outcomes. One of the most important risks
to development is the modest financial capacity of the government of Somalia and its continued dependence
on donor support to foot the wage bill. This includes not only the hiring of competent staff and the regular
wage remuneration of civil servants but also the provision of technical capacity and training needed to
sustain and enlarge the sphere of civil service competence in both jurisdictions. The Somali central
government, as well as state governments such as the PSS, remain largely in an embryotic state, and clan-



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Somalia Capacity Injection (P149971)



based rivalries can undermine political leadership in support of project reforms and associated policy. Policy
implementation remains a key challenge in the country's context.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project design focused on core capacity-building activities. The project team recognized that
  building trust in Somali institutions and enhancing state legitimacy went through the setup of a capable,
  merit-based and well-resourced civil service, as argued by the Somalia systematic country diagnostic.
  Given the lessons derived from the Somalia SCD, more emphasis on merit-based recruitment could have
  been attempted. The project rationale departed from the sound argument that institutional capacity-
  building in FCV contexts is a long-term exercise, in line with the WDR of 2011, and CIP was the first in
  SOP aiming at that goal. CIP was implemented through government systems rather than creating a
  parallel system, which was essential for building institutional capacity.

  Project design reflected lessons from other FCV country contexts in terms of capacity injection,
  civil service reform and project implementation. Drawing from lessons learned in Afghanistan, Timor-
  Leste, Liberia and South Sudan, the project team adopted a “domestic ownership” approach through
  which externally funded staff would be accountable to the Government to avoid the formation of a parallel
  civil service and a proliferation of ad hoc and asymmetric arrangements. To keep costs under control, the
  project team also concentrated operations and outputs in a core number of ministries and agencies to
  selectively build capacity first and expand beneficiaries (which indeed happened) only once technical and
  institutional standards had risen sufficiently in core institutions. The unallocated US$ 2 million to be used
  as contingency reflected sound budgetary planning in that it allowed for potential flexible use to cover
  unexpected costs expected in FCV contexts.

  Project sequencing did not take adequate account of contextual constraints, resulting in
  inefficient implementation arrangements. Existing data at preparation pointed to the fragility of
  Somalia, the political tensions that existed in the country and the need to make efficient use of resources
  to maximize output towards the PDO. The project did not avoid the effective duplication of tasks in FGS
  and PSS since it established two separate PCUs that essentially doubled Component 4 costs, resulting in
  efficiency losses pertaining to two different consultants and experts’ teams.

  Lessons derived from previous FCV operations were not always reflected in implementation. The
  project aimed not only at boosting the existing capacity of the civil service to perform its tasks adequately
  but also to ensure sustainability through(re)training and the adoption of pay and pension policy that will
  reduce dependence on external funding and boost state legitimacy. The adoption and implementation of
  such policies is a long and often arduous process that depends, among other things, on government buy-
  in and adequate technical and administrative capacity. Policy development on pensions and pay was
  declared a priority area in the PAD. By project closure and despite the 30-month extension, none of the
  two flagship sustainability policies were implemented, and delays were linked to anticipated political
  factors associated with ongoing election cycles in 2021 and 2022. This then had knock-on effects,
  reflected in the non-retirement of civil servants and the inability to recruit new staff. Component 1 was
  originally about “the recruitment and placement of a small number of highly qualified advisors and civil
  servants to core Government agencies” (PAD, p. 46). The focus on a small number of advisors and civil

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Capacity Injection (P149971)



  servants was replaced by the hiring, management, and training of “qualified Somalis” in both the FGS
  and PSS.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Political support at the highest level enabled the implementation of difficult reforms. The close
 engagement with high-level government officials allowed the World Bank to have a strategic dialogue with
 the government on reforms and continue supporting the reform process despite frequent changes in
 government and associated priorities. Securing availability of the WB-executed part of the Trust Fund used
 to fund high-frequency and as-needed implementation support.

 The Bank’s ongoing dialogue with the government frequently facilitated effective monitoring
 despite security challenges. Security constraints increased the difficulties for implementation and
 supervision. It was difficult to organize in-country missions due to security threats, including implementation
 support missions, and the onslaught of the pandemic made on-site visits for supervision and control very
 difficult.

 The Bank offered close support to implementing agencies throughout project implementation,
 including during the preparation of the procurement documents, review of deliverables, discussions with
 consultants, and technical advice and support in implementation related to the pay and grading, pensions,
 and HRMIS reforms. Supervision required significant engagement from the Bank, and the Bank ensured
 continuity and in-house knowledge by proceeding with only one TTL change through the project’s life cycle.
 The Bank also maintained an active hands-on dialogue supplemented with frequent face-to-face meetings
 and consultations with the client government in a frequently changing and volatile environment.

 Capacity constraints inhibited project implementation. Institutional capacity is weak due to the lack of
 defined processes and responsibilities, which the project sought to address, as well as the lack of
 familiarity with World Bank procedures, especially regarding local vendors and their ability to bid for World
 Bank contracts. This led to multiple requests for clarifications to the PCUs, in addition to complaints. Many
 suppliers also faced challenges with bidding documents published in English and not in Somali.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Capacity Injection (P149971)



a. M&E Design
 The project’s theory of change was clear and outcome-oriented, although it entailed some logical
 gaps. The core PDO on strengthening staffing and institutional capacity of selected line ministries and
 central agencies was measured by quantitative indicators on the number of staff appointed by the Capacity
 Injection Modality (CIM), the share of staff remaining in service, and the number of line ministries with
 operational HR and FM functions. One of the ToC’s critical assumptions on the salience of international
 commitment was at odds with the criticism of a donor-dependence culture in Somalia. As discussed under
 components, the 2019 restructuring reduced the reform agenda on FGS staffing at core ministries and
 agencies with no corresponding reduction in financial commitments. Most intermediate results indicators
 were relevant, specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and time-bound, although IRI-10 on participation
 in the Executive Leadership program had to be dropped for PSS. The IRIs did not incorporate foreseen
 spending on hardware and office equipment that would be budgeted through CIP, and such spending was
 not part of the results framework. The IRIs used to assess staff satisfaction with training provided did not
 attempt to measure its content and quality, and the lack of a pre-training baseline to gauge results made
 the developmental impact of the training provided uncertain. There is no evidence of a possible attempt to
 include internationally accepted evaluation standards to gauge the effectiveness of the training provided
 (e.g., Evaluating Training Programs: The Four Levels (3rd edition) by Donald L. Kirkpatrick, 2006). This is
 an important logical gap since it remains hard to confirm whether the training offered to civil servants has
 indeed led to institutional strengthening.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E was well carried out through the two PCUs who produced regular reports based on WB
  templates. The Results Framework was adjusted in 2021 to align one of the PDO targets with the
  revised project’s scope. Reporting on IRI-3 on measuring results of on-the-job training and IRI-4 on
  achieving improvements in skills and knowledge compared to the pre-training baseline (IRI-4) was
  focused on absolute numbers of staff satisfied with training in the first years of the project’s duration,
  including in relevant ISRs, and that shifted to percentage towards the final years. That constituted an
  improvement in methodology over time. Exit interviews suggest high satisfaction levels with training
  offered by beneficiaries. The CIM methodology used in the project became a template used by
  international donors in Somalia.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E framework was well utilized. Capacity constraints in an FCV context notwithstanding, data
  collected by the project were used in the preparation of the mission reports and ISRs. M&E results
  pertaining to gender indicators informed the development of the FY2019-22 CPF (extended to FY23)
  regarding the desire by the government to increase female recruitment into middle and upper
  management positions under a new National Public Sector Reform Strategy to 30 percent of the
  total intake, up from 20 percent under the project. In addition, the PCU used the data collected by the
  project to increase project visibility through the project website and social media.

  Frequent restructurings did not lead to more ambitious indicators, which could have enhanced the
  reform drive associated with the PDO-level indicators.



                                                                                                   Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Capacity Injection (P149971)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category C, and no environmental or social compliance issues occurred
   during implementation. No specific environmental or social safeguard instruments were required, and no
   safeguard policies were triggered.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The project maintained adequate financial management arrangements, with performance rated Moderately
   Satisfactory through its lifetime cycle. Both PIUs, in FGS and PSS, were headed by experienced
   accountants and were supported by the team from the External Assistance Fiduciary Section within the
   Accountant General’s office. The project submitted all interim financial reports within the stipulated
   timelines. The project maintained one designated account (DA) at the Central Bank of Somalia for
   disbursements related to the FGS-level activities and another DA at the First Community Bank for
   disbursements to Puntland. The overall level of disbursements at the date of closure was noted to be
   highly satisfactory. Internal control gaps in the system of internal control were noted, and the project
   continued to address these issues progressively. The overall project procurement performance is rated as
   Moderately Satisfactory.

   Project procurement was conducted in accordance with the WB’s procurement guidelines under IBRD
   loans and credit and in accordance with the approved Procurement Plan. Since the national procurement
   law was not fully operational, customized Bank standard procurement documents were used to approach
   the national market. PCUs implemented the CIP in FGS-OPM and PSS-OOP. Procurement delays were
   mostly due to the challenging operating environment and weak capacity of procurement staff as well as
   unfamiliarity with the WB’s procurement requirements. Additional procurement support was offered as
   implementation progressed, including hands-on support by the WB procurement and technical teams.
   Recommendations made during implementation support missions, combined with the training, resulted in
   improved processes and a reduction in procurement processing turn-around time. In 2020/2021,
   procurement delays were experienced mainly due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Mitigation measures taken
   included extensions of contracts and bids, allowing bidders, suppliers, and consultants to submit their bids
   or proposals electronically with secured passwords, and online opening of bids and proposals.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   An unintended benefit of the CIP was that the CIM methodology became the foundation for comparability
   of pay structures across donors operating in Somalia. The CIM methodology is currently being used by
   many United Nations partners to set salaries for their PIUs.


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia Capacity Injection (P149971)




d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                Task duplication through two
                                                                                separate PCUs and delays in
                                                                                the development and
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   implementation of flagship P&G
                                                                                and pension policy reform
                                                                                reduced the project’s
                                                                                developmental impact.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Front-load tough reform areas to build momentum. At appraisal, the project envisaged the
capacity to design and then implement both P&G and pension policy within the lifetime of the
project, which proved unrealistic. As one of the ICR lessons rightly underlines, such long-term, and
inherently difficult reforms face multiple veto players, opposed coalitions, and entrenched interests
set against change. In the presence of government commitment to reform, they should be
introduced at the very early stages of any reform drive. This will convince reform beneficiaries (who,
in the case of pension reform, are many but dispersed and hardly speak as a pressure or interest
group) that the developmental impact of the reform will be positive and thus enlarge the pro-change
constituency. The same lesson applies to staffing core Government: the RF envisaged gradual
hiring of staff through the CIM, and this proved unrealistic. IEG concurs with the ICR that
frontloading such hiring under conducive budgetary conditions would have allowed for other reform
priorities to follow.

By the same token, and given the country context, it would have been important to consider a focus
on merit-based recruitment in the civil service and focus on a system that goes beyond dividing civil
service jobs according to clan and minority group status, instead of emphasizing pay and
pension policy aspects.

Consider the administrative implications of duplicating tasks in a federal system. The ICR
rightly draws attention to PCU cost. The setup of two PCUs in FGS and PSS reduced efficiency and
run-up costs to a disproportionate extent, not allowing for a cost reduction after the fourth
restructuring reduced the project scope. In federal systems, it is imperative to rely on one PCU for



                                                                                                   Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Somalia Capacity Injection (P149971)



both fiscal and administrative reasons, and it is best to incorporate this into project design from the
outset.

The ICR rightly emphasizes the need for additional resource commitment to FCV states
during implementation. The project led to substantial gains in development pertaining to
institutional capacity building, and one of the main reasons was the devotion of substantial WB
resources to supervision and oversight. This is a precondition for success in FCV contexts where
instability is endemic and a light-touch approach unlikely to work. Future FCV operations could well
draw inspiration from the hiring and utilization of country experts to assist implementation.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR offers an in-depth summary of the project, substantiating its ratings with available data and evidence. It
maintains a largely consistent alignment with the project's developmental objectives. It adheres to most of the
established guidelines and maintains a results-oriented focus. Lessons drawn from the project are articulated
clearly, are practical, and are mostly substantiated by the evidence presented in the ICR.

Although the quality of the evidence and analysis is generally robust, there are gaps in data completeness and
information. The report does not include a discussion of the project's theory of change, since none was
formulated at approval, instead outlining a retroactive ToC through a diagram. It would have been very
beneficial to outline further how the ToC looks ipso facto, aiding the reader in comprehending the basis for the
given ratings. The ICR’s risk section could have more strongly acknowledged the existential risks to the
sustainability of the project results. Also, the ICR doesn't give much sense of the difficult context for carrying out
the operation. For example, due to security risks, Bank project staff had to be based in a neighboring country
(Kenya), and visiting missions mainly resided and worked at the airport, considered the most secure location.
Visits to ministries were accompanied by armed convoys.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                       Page 19 of 20
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Somalia Capacity Injection (P149971)




                                                                    Page 20 of 20
