     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SAFI (P171886)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0023707

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P171886                                     SAFI

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Afghanistan                                 Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D7230                                   31-Oct-2025                                             23,820,711.96

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Sep-2020                                 31-Oct-2025

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            100,000,000.00                                                  0.00

 Revised Commitment                             100,000,000.00                                                  0.00

 Actual                                           23,820,711.96                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Antonio M. Ollero            Christopher David            Avjeet Singh                      IEGSD (Unit 4)
                              Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (page 5), the project development objective of the Strengthening
   Afghanistan's Financial Intermediation Project was "to strengthen institutional capacity for financial stability
   and to enhance access to finance for micro, small and medium enterprises."

   This ICR Review parses the objective as:



                                                                                                       Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SAFI (P171886)



   1. To strengthen the institutional capacity for financial stability.
   2. To enhance access to finance for micro, small, and medium enterprises.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project had seven components.

   Strengthening the Credit Guarantee Fund (US$20 million estimated at appraisal) aimed to incentivize
   greater financial intermediation through risk-sharing and technical assistance: (a) the committed capital
   stock of the Credit Guarantee Fund would be increased (US$15 million) to facilitate further growth of partial
   credit guarantees and to increase lending by participating financial institutions to micro, small, and medium
   enterprises (MSMEs); and (b) technical assistance (US$5 million) would be extended to the Afghan Credit
   Guarantee Foundation (the charitable organization created in 2014 to strengthen the emerging financial
   sector in the territory), the SME Client Support Afghanistan LLC (the foundation's local subsidiary), and
   participating financial institutions to improve their capacity for product development, loan origination, project
   appraisal, monitoring, risk management, and adherence to environmental and social standards following
   international good practices.

   SME Matching Grants Program (US$40 million estimated at appraisal) aimed to support SMEs with
   capital and non-capital costs (including working capital) for COVID-19 adaptation - including retrofitting and
   retooling, market re-engagement, operational recovery, productive capacity development across sectors -
    and to strengthen the pipeline of bankable firms and the demand for banking services through: (a)
   matching grants to SMEs (US$29.5 million) to help fund fixed capital and working capital costs (in alignment
   with ongoing programs); and (b) technical assistance (US$10.5 million) to SMEs for capacity building and
   grant administration support to the Afghan Credit Guarantee Foundation and the SME Client Support
   Afghanistan LLC for matching grant management, due diligence activities, and marketing and public
   awareness campaigns.

   Strengthening Deposit Insurance (US$17 million estimated at appraisal) supported the establishment and
   implementation of a credible and explicit (i.e., established under a formal legal act) deposit insurance
   scheme for deposit taking financial institutions following international good practices though: (a) technical
   assistance and capacity building activities (US$2 million) focused on drafting a law on deposit
   insurance, preparing related regulations, and building capacity at the Afghanistan Deposit Insurance
   Corporation; and (b) the capitalization of Deposit Insurance Fund (US$15 million) to help increase the
   deposit insurance coverage, promote the sustainability of the fund, and preserve its payout capacity.

   Strengthening the Regulatory and Supervisory Capacity of the Da Afghanistan Bank (US$5 million
   estimated at appraisal) supported strengthening the core regulatory and supervisory function of the central

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SAFI (P171886)



   bank to help facilitate financial stability by: (a) developing bank resolution and crisis management
   frameworks; (b) strengthening banking supervision (e.g. audits of select commercial banks, risk-based
   supervision, review and development of policies, procedures, manuals, and supervisory training);
   (c) strengthening the regulation and supervision of non-bank financial institutions; (d) supporting the
   implementation of select actions under the National Risk Assessment Action Plan related to anti-money
   laundering and combating the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT); (e) operationalizing the financial consumer
   protection supervision function; and (f) the conduct of accounting assessment, strengthening internal audit,
   and adoption of risk based internal audit.

   Enhancing the Information Technology Infrastructure of the Da Afghanistan Bank (US$16 million
   estimated at appraisal) supported investment in information technology (IT) hardware and software for the
   central bank, including for: (a) the modernization of the Core Banking System to strengthen the central
   bank's oversight and risk management capacity; (b) the automation of vital aspects of banking supervision;
   (c) the operationalization of the deposit insurance function; and (d) the modernization of the Collateral
   Registry and the Public Credit Registry to facilitate financial intermediation.

   Project Management (US$2 million estimated at appraisal) would fund the project management activities
   of the Financial Sector Strengthening Projects Directorate at Da Afghanistan Bank.

   Contingent Emergency Response - to be activated in case of an emergency event and for which the
   funding allocation would be determined that time. The component would contribute to providing immediate
   and effective response in the event of an emergency or a crisis that affected the financial sector.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost and Financing. The project was estimated to cost SDR 70.8 million (US$100 million
   equivalent) at appraisal. The project was financed by a grant of an equal amount from the IDA to the
   Islamic Republic of Afghanistan. The amount of US$27.3 million was disbursed by August 15, 2021.

   Dates. The project was approved on September 28, 2020 and became effective on January 6, 2021. The
   Bank suspended all disbursement to Afghanistan on August 25, 2021, following the takeover by the Taliban
   of the government on August 15, 2021. The original project closing date was October 31, 2025.

   Split Evaluation. This ICR Review will conduct a reverse split evaluation of the project to account
   for the takeover by the Taliban of the government in August 2021. Following the takeover of
   government in mid-August 2021, the World Bank paused its disbursements and suspended its
   operations in Afghanistan.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Binding Constraint to Development. The Afghanistan Systematic Country Diagnostic 2016 (SCD)
identified a "weak financial sector" as constraining economic growth and jobs creation. The SCD explained
that the financial sector was nascent and fragile, with credit being a constraint especially to agricultural

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 17
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       SAFI (P171886)



production (a third of GDP). The SCD echoed the findings of the 2014 Enterprise Survey for Afghanistan
where firms reported that the "largest obstacles" to the investment climate included the limited access to
finance (the others being political instability, corruption, poor access to land, and poor access to electricity):
(a) the capacity of the central bank to supervise the banking sector was in question; (b) the banking
industry suffered from major fraud and money laundering issues highlighted by the Kabul Bank crisis in
2010; (c) domestic credit to the private sector was a measly 4.2 percent of GDP, compared to the regional
average of 42 percent; (d) only two percent of firms used banks to finance investment; and (e) the
microfinance sector, which counted on about 374,000 active borrowers in 2008, had suffered a delinquency
crisis. In response, the SCD (pages 33-34) recommended a three-pronged strategy: (a) improve the
governance of the banking sector and boost accountability; (b) strengthen the regulatory and supervisory
capacity of the Da Afghanistan Bank; and (c) increase access to finance without the government being a
direct provider of financial services.

Country Priorities. The project objective was consistent with the national development strategy of the
Government. The Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework 2017-2021 (ANPDF)
advanced three development priorities: Governance and state effectiveness, Social capital and national
building, and Economic growth and job creation. The third ANPDF priority focused on eleven national
priority programs. The project objectives were consistent with the third national priority program, Private
Sector Development Program, which argued for financial sector reform, among others. The ANPDF (page
22) stated: "Successful development of any type requires a stable, efficient financial sector. We have a two-
pronged strategy for financial sector reform. First, it must consolidate financial stability by addressing
sectoral weaknesses, and provide a credible system for banking regulation and oversight to rebuild public
confidence. These actions will advance the banking sector and provide incentives for growth-friendly
initiatives. We will focus on improving sustainability, increasing efficiency and facilitating access to financial
services."

Bank Group Strategy. The project was aligned with the Bank Group Strategy in Afghanistan. The
Country Partnership Framework for the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan for the Period FY17 to FY20 (CPF)
committed Bank Group support for the country's development priorities organized around three pillars:
Building strong and accountable institutions, Supporting inclusive growth, and Expanding and deepening
social inclusion. The first project objective to strengthen the institutional capacity for financial stability
was aligned with the first CPF pillar, specifically with the goal for an "improved performance of key
government ministries." The second project objective to enhance access to finance for micro, small, and
medium enterprises was aligned with the second CPF pillar, specifically with the goal for an "improved
business regulatory environment and access to finance."

Because the project objectives are strongly aligned with the country priorities advanced by the ANPDF and
the Bank Group strategy articulated in the CPF, the relevance of the objectives is rated high.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)



                                                                                                        Page 4 of 17
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  SAFI (P171886)


EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To strengthen the institutional capacity for financial stability

               Rationale
               Theory of Change. The theory of change is sound. Afghanistan's nascent financial system was weighed
               down by institutional gaps and capacity constraints. The country lacked an explicit deposit insurance scheme
               and a formal deposit insurance authority. The central bank needed to strengthen its regulatory and
               supervisory capacity and modernize its IT infrastructure even as it faced high-risk weak banks and
               unregulated financial transactions. The enactment of a new law on deposit insurance would create an explicit
               deposit insurance scheme to replace the implicit system introduced in 2010 and formalize the Afghan Deposit
               Insurance Corporation, until then a thinly-staffed department of the central bank. Moreover, the capitalization
               of the Deposit Insurance Fund (created ex-ante) by an additional US$15 million would enable coverage
               initially of a minimum 15 percent of the value of all deposits and eventually of 20 percent under the 90:20 rule
               (coverage level of a minimum 90 percent of all deposit accounts and a minimum 20 per cent of the value of
               total deposits). Separately, institutional capacity building at the Afghanistan Bank and technical capacity
               upgrading, with investments in the Core Banking System (back-end system that processes daily banking
               transactions and posts updates to accounts and other financial records), the Collateral Registry (the record of
               legal claims to personal property used as collateral for a loan), and the Public Credit Registry (the credit
               reporting system and database containing information about borrowers and used for macroprudential
               regulation and oversight) would strengthen regulation and supervision by the central bank. An explicit deposit
               insurance scheme, a formal deposit insurance authority, and a better-capitalized deposit insurance fund
               would stabilize the financial system in case of bank failures, assuring depositors immediate access to their
               insured funds, and reducing the incentive for a "run" on banks. Better central supervision and regulation
               would help protect depositor funds, protect bank consumer rights, and maintain a stable, efficient, and
               competitive banking system.

               Outputs. The activities related to the objective to strengthen the institutional capacity for financial stability -
               strengthening deposit insurance, strengthening the regulatory and supervisory capacity of the Da Afghanistan
               Bank, and enhancing the IT infrastructure of the central bank - were not started by August 15, 2021. Hence,
               the outputs defined for this objective were not achieved.

                     The minimum coverage ratio of the deposit insurance scheme (the ratio of the Deposit Insurance Fund
                      capital and reserves to total insured deposits) remained at 12 percent (August 2021) as in the
                      baseline (July 2020), equal to the target of 12 percent (September 2025). Although the target appears
                      to have been met, the deposit insurance scheme in Afghanistan remained an "implicit deposit
                      insurance scheme" without the enactment of the enabling law and the operationalization of the Afghan
                      Deposit Insurance Corporation as an independent deposit insurance authority (i.e., an entity
                      empowered with a deposit insurance mandate).
                     The Core Banking System of the Da Afghanistan Bank was not modernized, failing to achieve the
                      target. The target would have been achieved if the required core banking IT system were acquired
                      and installed.
                     The core credit infrastructure at the Da Afghanistan Bank was not modernized, failing to achieve the
                      target. The target would have been achieved if the required upgrades to the IT system of the
                      Collateral Registry (the record of legal claims to personal property used as collateral for a loan) and


                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SAFI (P171886)



        the Public Credit Registry (the database with detailed information of the credits granted by financial
        intermediaries, created to support bank regulation and supervision) were acquired and installed.

Outcomes. The outcomes defined for this objective were also not achieved. Hence, the project did not
strengthen the institutional capacity for financial stability.

      The bank resolution and crisis management frameworks were not established. The achievement of
       this indicator was to be assessed by the World Bank based on international good practices.
      The legal and regulatory framework for the deposit insurance scheme was not established. The
       achievement of this indicator was to be assessed by the World Bank based on the alignment of the
       national system with the Core Principles for Effective Deposit Insurance developed by the Basel
       Committee on Banking Supervision of the Bank for International Settlements and the International
       Association of Deposit Insurers.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To strengthen the institutional capacity for financial stability

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change. The project development objectives and the theory of change remained the same
following the Taliban takeover of the government and until the suspension of the project.

Outputs. The project outputs remained the same following the Taliban takeover of the government and until
the suspension of the project.

Outcomes. The project outcomes remained the same following the Taliban takeover of the government and
until the suspension of the project.



Revised Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To enhance access to finance for micro, small, and medium enterprises

Rationale
Theory of Change. The theory of change is sound. Afghanistan was characterized by low financial
intermediation and poor financial inclusion, which was highly detrimental to MSMEs. Two interventions
would unlock finance for MSMEs, helping those enterprises that were underserved by financial institutions

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SAFI (P171886)



and bridging the credit gap in financial markets characterized by market failures and imperfections. Credit
guarantees would provide third-party credit risk mitigation to lenders through the absorption of a portion of the
lender’s losses on the loans made to SMEs in case of default, typically in return for a fee. Matching grants
would provide short-term, temporary subsidies to private enterprises on a firm-level and cost-sharing basis;
they would help building capacity and knowledge through the procurement of business development
services - including consultancy and advisory services, marketing and information services, technology
development and diffusion, and management and employee training. An increase in the capital stock of the
Credit Guarantee Fund and technical assistance to the Afghan Credit Guarantee Foundation (ACGF)
would facilitate the expansion of partial credit guarantees and increase lending by participating financial
institutions to MSMEs. Meanwhile, matching grants would help MSMEs directly to overcome
underinvestment in business development services due to market failures..

Outputs. The credit guarantee operation was started after the project became effective in January
2021. The targets for the outputs defined for this credit guarantee operation and for the objective to enhance
access to finance for MSME were achieved in varying degrees, although the outturns were measured as of
August 15, 2021 while the targets were set for closing on October 31, 2025. The matching grants program
was not launched by August 15, 2021, although several preparatory activities were completed - the
development of the Matching Grants Operations Manual, the development of the Project Financial
Management Manual, and the organization and staffing the regional offices. Hence, the outputs defined for
the matching grants program were not achieved.

      The number of MSME loans facilitated by ACGF increased from 89 in the baseline (May 2020) to 976
         (March 2022), amounting to 27 percent of the target of 3,557 (September 2025).
        The number of MSME loans facilitated by ACGF to women-owned or women-managed
         MSMEs increased from 2 in the baseline (May 2020) to 351 (March 2022), exceeding the target of 142
         (September 2025).
        The number of participating financial institutions in the ACGF portfolio increased from two in the
         baseline (May 2020) to 4 (August 2021), half the target of 8 (September 2025).
        The number of participating financial institutions that received technical assistance and reviewed their
         policies, products and/or processes to improve access to finance increased from two in the baseline
         (May 2020) to 4 (August 2021), half the target of 8 (September 2025).
        The MSME portfolio quality (the portfolio-at-risk at 30 days (PAR 30), calculated as annual average of
         monthly PAR>30 days of the outstanding guaranteed loan portfolio) deteriorated from 15 percent in
         the baseline (May 2020) to 71 percent (August 2021), failing to achieve the target reduction to 5
         percent (September 2025).
        There were no SMEs supported with matching grants, against the target of 1,000 (September 2025).
        There were no SMEs owned or managed by women that were supported with matching grants,
         against the target of 50 (September 2025).
        There were no SMEs receiving bank loans that supported with matching grants, against the target of
         100 (September 2025).
        No report on a survey of MSME borrowers and matching grant recipients was prepared and disclosed.

Outcomes. The low partial achievement of one of two outcomes defined for this objective is mainly due to
the premature suspension of the project and merits a modest rating for the achievement of the objective
to enhance access to finance for MSMEs.



                                                                                                   Page 7 of 17
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 SAFI (P171886)




                                    MSME loans facilitated by ACGF rose from US$5.03 million in the baseline (May 2020) to US$12.24
                                     million (August 2021), amounting to only 8 percent of the target of US$154.54 million (September
                                     2025).
                                    There was no private capital mobilized through SME matching grants, against the target of US$29.5
                                     million (September 2025).



                              Rating
                              Modest


                              OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
                              Revised Objective
                              To enhance access to finance for micro, small, and medium enterprises

                              Revised Rationale
                              Theory of Change. The project development objectives and the theory of change remained the same
                              following the Taliban takeover of the government and until until the suspension of the project.

                              Outputs. The project outputs remained the same following the Taliban takeover of the government and until
                              the suspension of the project.

                              Outcomes. The project outcomes remained the same following the Taliban takeover of the government and
                              until the suspension of the project.



                              Revised Rating
                              Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project did not achieve the first objective to strengthen the institutional capacity for financial stability. The
                            outputs under the second objective to enhance access to finance for micro, small, and medium enterprises
                            were achieved to varying degrees. The achievement of the second objective is rated as Modest. The low
                            achievement is mainly due to the premature suspension of the project. Overall, efficacy is rated as Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                     Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                      External shock
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1

                                                                                                                                    Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SAFI (P171886)




  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
  For the Revised Project, efficacy is Negligible because no additional progress was made or measured due to
  the premature suspension of the project, and any future progress is highly unlikely.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                        Primary Reason
  Negligible                                                External shock


 5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency. The Project Appraisal Document estimated an economic rate of return (ERR) of 35
percent for the Strengthening the Credit Guarantee Fund component of the project (comprising 20 percent of the
project cost), and 17 percent for the SME Matching Grants component (comprising 60 percent of the project
cost). Based on this, the weighted average ERR at appraisal would be 23 percent for 60 percent of the project
scope. As the SME Matching Grants Program was never launched, the ICR did not compute an ERR for this
component. Neither did the ICR compute an ERR for the Strengthening the Credit Guarantee Fund component,
although some progress was made with a couple outputs and outcomes for this component (see Section
4). Thus, there is no basis for judging the economic efficiency of this project when it was suspended due to lack
of data.

Operational Efficiency. The project quickly disbursed US$27.3 million (27.3 percent) of the project funds by
August 15, 2021, after which the Bank suspended all disbursement to Afghanistan on August 25, 2021 (see
Section 2.E). The original project implementation period was reduced from four years and 10 months to just
seven months. In addition, although the component implemented by ACGF picked up very quickly, after MOF
signed the Implementing Partner Agreement with ACGF, the components implemented by Da Afghanistan
Bank faced implementation delays, due to lack of alignment between the project activities and the priorities of
Da Afghanistan Bank management and frequent staff turnover.

Despite the lack of evidence for economic analysis, the project's efficiency is rated modest based on the quick
disbursement during the seven-month implementation period.




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     60.00
 Appraisal                                                 23.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SAFI (P171886)



                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



                                                               Pre-August 2021 Post-August 2021
Relevance of Objectives                                        High
Efficacy                                                       Modest          Negligible
Objective 1 - To strengthen the institutional capacity for     Negligible      Negligible
financial stability
Objective 2 - To enhance access to finance for micro, small, Modest              Negligible
and medium enterprises
Efficiency                                                   Modest
Outcome Rating                                               Moderately          Unsatisfactory
                                                             Unsatisfactory
Amount Disbursed, cumulative, US$ million                    27.3                0
Amount committed, cumulative US$ million                     100
Disbursement, percent                                        27.3/100 = 27.3%    100 - 27.3 = 72.7%
Weight Value                                                 3 x 0.273 = 0.819   2x 0.727 = 1.454
Total Weights                                                2.27
Outcome Rating                                               Unsatisfactory

*Commitment , US$ million, as of August 15,2021.


a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Afghanistan's financial system has been in deep turmoil since August 15, 2021 following the imposition by
many foreign states of wide-ranging sanctions against the de-facto government run by the Taliban
militia. According to the ICR (pages 14-15) and the Bank's monthly Afghanistan Economic Monitor (various
issues published since October 2021): (a) the freezing by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York of assets
of the Da Afghanistan Bank immediately after the Taliban takeover triggered a liquidity crisis that has not
since abated - individuals still face a weekly withdrawal limit of Afghan afghani (AFN) 50,000 (US$719
equivalent), and businesses, AFN 4 million (US$57,500 equivalent), on deposits made before August 2021;
(b) the liquidity crisis has been exacerbated by the physical deterioration of a sizable portion of notes in
circulation and by the loss of correspondent banking relationships; (c) the Da Afghanistan Bank is struggling
to fulfill its core central banking functions, unable to serve the demand for hard currency or to control

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SAFI (P171886)



inflation; (d) meanwhile, all banks (except one) are reporting significant losses despite regulatory
forbearance by the central bank - deposits are down, interest collections on outstanding credit have ben nil,
and non-performing loans range from 6 to 40 percent; (e) microfinance institutions are equally crisis stricken
– one has left the market and others are reporting solvency issues; and (f) to further complicate the crisis, a
plan to immediately introduce Sharia-compliant financing (a central bank committee was created to amend
banking laws in March 2022) – including prohibiting the collection of interest on outstanding loan portfolio –
 exacerbates the disruption, risking a collapse of the conventional banking system.

Against this background, it would be difficult to argue that the modest outcomes achieved by this project
could survive sustainability risks. Plans to formalize and operationalize the deposit insurance scheme,
improve the regulatory and supervisory capacity of the central bank, upgrade the IT infrastructure of the
central bank, and support MSMEs with matching grants were never implemented, so there are no
sustainability issues to consider with regard to these reforms. However, the project made headway with
strengthening the Credit Guarantee Fund. There are currently no legal barriers to the ACGF resuming its
operations in Afghanistan, according to the ICR. Even then, it would be difficult to conceive how ACGF's
credit guarantee operation would survive the current liquidity and banking crisis.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Analytic Underpinnings. The project design was informed by additional analytic work produced by the
  Bank and others, apart from the Afghanistan Systematic Country Diagnostic 2016, the 2014 Enterprise
  Survey for Afghanistan, and the Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework 2017-2021
  cited earlier (see Section 3).

         Strengthening Deposit Insurance – Core Principles for Effective Deposit Insurance Systems
          (International Association of Deposit Insurers, 2009) sets the framework for effective deposit
          insurance practices.
         Strengthening the Credit Guarantee Fund and SME Matching Grants Program – (a) The 2017
          Enterprise Finance Gap (IFC) found that 54 of Afghan MSMEs were financially constrained; (b)
          the Assessment of Women-Owned SME Borrowers (ACGF, 2018) reported that women-owned
          MSMEs were highly underserved, representing only 2 percent of MSME financing; (c) An
          Assessment of ACGF’s Performance and Impact (Steward Redqueen, 2019) concluded that the
          ACGF had a positive track record facilitating access to finance but that its capital would be fully
          leveraged by mid-2020; and (d) An Analysis of World Bank Financed Matching Grants (Hristova
          and Coste, 2016) noted that most of the 160 programs studied permitted in-cash contributions
          while only a few allowed in-kind contributions.

  Link to Other Bank Operations. The project aimed to build on the achievements of prior Bank
  operations supporting the development of the financial sector in Afghanistan.

         Strengthening Deposit Insurance, Strengthening the Regulatory and Supervisory Capacity of the
          Da Afghanistan Bank, and Enhancing the Information Technology Infrastructure of the Da
          Afghanistan Bank would expand the reforms initiated by the Financial Sector Rapid Response

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SAFI (P171886)



       Project (and two Additional Financing) (P119047, 2011-2019) which assisted the Da Afghanistan
       Bank to develop the country's financial sector infrastructure and strengthen the
       institutional capacity of the central bank. .
      Strengthening the Credit Guarantee Fund would continue with efforts started under the Access to
       Finance Project (P128048, 2013-2021) to improve access to credit for MSMEs by expanding the
       Afghan credit guarantee facility and providing technical assistance to the facility and partner
       financial institutions.

Operational Risks and Mitigation Measures. The Project Appraisal Document assessed the risks to
the project to be substantial overall and across a wide range of risk categories - political and governance
(owing to insecurity, political uncertainty, and fragility, macroeconomic (a GDP contraction of up to 5.5
percent was expected in 2020, exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic), sectoral policy (the financial
sector reforms were complex for Afghanistan's nascent financial system), technical (related to the
administration of the matching grants program), and fiduciary (the Da Afghanistan Bank had limited
capacity for procurement and contract management). The Bank recommended several mitigation
measures, but noted that residual risks remained significant (e.g., insecurity and political fragility was
beyond the project's control).

      Legislation – The Bank would engage Parliament, the Da Afghanistan Bank, and the Ministry of
       Finance early to plan the legislative agenda and timeline for the development of a law and the
       related regulations on deposit insurance and institutional strengthening of the Afghan Deposit
       Insurance Corporation.
      Administration – The AGCF had a strong performance record (under the Access to Finance
       Project) and its selection as manager and administrator of credit guarantees and matching grants
       would help mitigate technical risks.
      Procurement – Procurement above US$100,000 would be the responsibility of the National
       Procurement Authority provisionally (i.e., for one year, after which the capacity of the Da
       Afghanistan Bank for procurement would be reassessed).
      Financial Management – Disbursements would be based on statements of expenditure (SOEs),
       which would be reviewed by the Third-Party Monitoring Agent of the Bank.

Lessons from Previous Bank Operations. The Bank introduced project elements drawn from previous
Bank operations.

      Based on experience with the Access to Finance Project, this operation included results indicators
       measuring the outreach of credit guarantees and matching grants to women-owned and women-
       managed MSMEs.
      Based on lessons from the Financial Sector Rapid Response Project, this operation introduced
       provisions requiring the Government and the Da Afghanistan Bank to increasingly
       shoulder operational costs of assets acquired under the project, thereby securing the authorities’
       ownership of infrastructure financed under the project and discouraging continued reliance on
       donor financing of operational costs after project closing.
      Also based on the experience with the Financial Sector Rapid Response Project, which
       exposed difficulties attracting qualified consultants to work in Afghanistan due to worsening
       security problems, the Bank authorized remote work by qualified consultants using ICT tools
       where feasible (e.g., audio and video conferences). The Bank also considered complementing



                                                                                                 Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SAFI (P171886)



         technical assistance activities supported by the project with Bank-executed advisory work (which
         was found to be helpful for the Financial Sector Rapid Response Project).




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank did not field any formal supervision mission as the project had only been effective for seven
 months before it was suspended. However, according to the ICR (page 14), the Bank project team held
 monthly virtual meetings with the Da Afghanistan Bank and the Ministry of Finance during this period. The
 meetings allowed the Bank to "understand and address" issues and problems raised by the implementing
 entities. The Bank filed two Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) through August 15, 2021,
 and another five through April 17, 2023 - the purpose of the latter ISRs was "to report progress as of
 August 15, 2021," according to the documents.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results indicators were appropriate to measure the impact of the project activities and were relevant to
 reflect the achievement of the project objectives.

 The M&E plan called for the Da Afghanistan Bank and the ACGF to monitor progress with the first and
 second project objectives respectively and for the Government to submit a Project Report to the Bank no
 later than 45 days after the end of each calendar quarter, for which the Ministry of Finance would hire an
 M&E specialist.



b. M&E Implementation
  Because the project activities related to operationalizing the deposit insurance system, strengthening the
  institutional capacity of the central bank, and building the IT infrastructure of the central bank were not

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SAFI (P171886)



  started by August 15, 2021, the M&E plan for these project components and for the first project objective
  were not implemented as planned. Similarly, the project activities related to the SME matching grants
  program were not launched and the associated M&E plan was not implemented. Only the activities
  pertaining to capitalizing the credit guarantee fund were implemented, and for this purpose the ACGF
  regularly reported on the results indicators for the related component and second project
  objective. Meanwhile, the Ministry of Finance was unable to hire an M&E specialist by August 15, 2021.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data supplied evidence that the project achieved some progress with the credit guarantee
  activities but no progress elsewhere.

  Although the project had a well-designed M&E framework, the framework could not be utilized to any
  significant degree because of the abrupt closure of the project. The overall quality of M&E is rated
  modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards. The Financing Agreement (page 11) required the adherence by
   the project to the Bank's Environmental and Social Standards (ESS) of October 2018. The Project
   Appraisal Document (page 33) determined that ESS Standard 1 - Assessment and Management of
   Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts, ESS Standard 9 - Financial Intermediaries, and ESS
   Standard 10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure applied to the project. Accordingly, an
   Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) was completed in August 2020 prescribing measures
   to address potential environmental and social risks and impacts of the project. The ACGF, which would
   provide credit guarantees to participating financial institutions to encourage lending to MSMEs and which
   would separately provide matching grants to MSMEs, would be responsible for: (a) ensuring that
   participating financial institutions under the credit guarantee project component followed applicable ESS
   rules in their MSME lending activities; and (b) directly managing environmental and social risks under the
   matching grants program. The ICR (page 13) determined that the project complied with the ESS and the
   ESCP during its brief implementation period.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement. Procurement by the Da Afghanistan Bank of hardware and software for the central bank IT
   infrastructure was not completed by August 15, 2021 (planning for the procurement was
   delayed). Procurement by the Ministry of Finance of the services of a project coordinator, financial
   management specialist, and M&E specialist was initiated but not completed either. Procurement was rated

                                                                                                 Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SAFI (P171886)



   satisfactory in the ISR of August 8, 2021, but the assessment would be questionable if, as the ICR reports
   (page 13), procurement planning was inordinately delayed, with the Da Afghanistan Bank even
   "reconsidering some of the major IT procurement" originally planned at project design.

   Financial Management. The financial management plan for the project called for the project funds to flow
   through two segregated designated accounts - the first for the Da Afghanistan Bank (which had financial
   management responsibility for the deposit insurance, central bank capacity building, and central bank IT
   infrastructure components) and the second for the Ministry of Finance (which had financial management
   responsibility for the credit guarantee and matching grants components) - to be set up in Da Afghanistan
   Bank. Both agencies would request an initial advance (to be deposited in the designated accounts) that
   would be replenished on a quarterly basis for which the project would submit withdrawal applications after
   the review of the statement of expenditures by the Bank's Third-Party Monitoring Agent. During
   implementation: (a) the designated accounts were opened as planned; (b) the Da Afghanistan Bank and
   the Ministry of Finance received the initial advances; and (c) except for advances made to the ACGF,
   which were documented and audited (by the internal audit departments of the two agencies), no other
   expenditures were documented as of August 15, 2021. Financial management was rated satisfactory in
   the ISR of August 8, 2021.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were no unintended impacts.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 Applying reverse split
                                                                                 evaluation, efficacy is rated as
                               Moderately
Outcome                                              Unsatisfactory              Modest before restructuring and
                               Unsatisfactory
                                                                                 Negligible after suspension of
                                                                                 the project
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Three lessons are drawn from the ICR, with some adaptation.


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SAFI (P171886)



Improving access to finance for MSMEs involves not just increased financial support to
MSMEs but also technical assistance to MSME lenders. In this project, the extension of credit
guarantees effectively increased the volume of MSME lending at a time when macroeconomic
shocks led financial institutions to take less risk. However, financial support was not sufficient on its
own, as many financial institutions in Afghanistan lacked the knowledge and the experience of
lending to MSMEs – they did not have specialized departments or staff dedicated to MSME lending,
loan processes to assess credit applications from MSMEs, or technologies suitable for MSME
lending operations. The types of technical assistance to lenders can include advisory services for
the design of new financial products, expert services for the development of better underwriting
processes, and the creation of lending windows dedicated to women MSME borrowers.

Credit guarantees and matching grants are specialized operations that are best managed by
high-capacity private institutions or independent public agencies, where possible. In this
project, the Afghan Credit Guarantee Foundation, a non-profit foundation registered under German
law (created in 2014 to take over the operations of the Credit Guarantee Facility for Afghanistan)
was selected for its technical expertise and experience with MSME lending and guarantees. Entities
like the Afghan Credit Guarantee Foundation, with the required technical knowhow and the strong
record of accomplishment in supporting MSMEs, are able to administer credit guarantee operations
efficiently.

Close supervision by the Bank and significant capacity building of implementing agencies is
ever more necessary in fragility, conflict, and violence (FCV) settings. In this project, the
presence of key project members in the field and their close supervision of the project operation was
necessary to resolve project implementation issues promptly and effectively. In addition, providing
capacity building for staff in implementing agencies and “hand-holding” at the initial stages of the
project implementation was essential to enable the implementing agencies to improve their
understanding of Bank processes and to adjust their internal practices accordingly.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was candid about the institutional problems that hindered the execution of this project during its short
implementation period and the political problems that caused the abrupt suspension of the project.

The ICR was also candid about the efficiency of the project, the economic efficiency could not be estimated due
to premature suspension of the project and thus to lack of achievement of results.

The discussion of the risks to the sustainability of the project outcome was informative, in the context of the
liquidity and banking crisis that hurt the financial system following international sanctions.




                                                                                                      Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SAFI (P171886)



The lessons drawn by the ICR would be helpful to Bank operations in countries where politics is unsettled, and
institutions are weak.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 17 of 17
