     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Affordable Housing Program (P154948)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023735

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P154948                                    National Affordable Housing Program

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Indonesia                                  Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-87170                                 31-Mar-2021                                        400,644,790.33

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 17-Mar-2017                                28-Feb-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          450,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           400,644,790.33                                               0.00

 Actual                                       400,644,790.33                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Nina Rinnerberger          Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was “to improve access to affordable housing for lower
   income households”. (As stated in the Loan Agreement of November 30, 2017 (p. 6). The PDO formulation
   in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page viii) was identical.




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Affordable Housing Program (P154948)



   For the assessment in this ICRR and based on the PAD, which identified the provision of improved homes as
   a key objective of the project, the 'access to affordable housing' will be interpreted to include quality aspects
   related to adequate and safe housing for lower income households.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Mortgage-Linked Down Payment Assistance (Bantuan Pembiayaan Perumahan
   Berbasis Tabungan/BP2BT).

   World Bank at appraisal: US$215 million; World Bank at closing: US$83 million (39% of appraisal
   amount). Borrower at appraisal: US$50 million. Borrower at closing: US$0 million (0% of appraisal amount).

   This component (BP2BT or home acquisition program) provided mortgage-linked down payment assistance
   through financial intermediaries (participating lending institutions) to lower income first time homeowners for
   the purchase or construction of a residential property. Specifically, the mortgage-linked down payment
   assistance scheme (Bantuan Pembiayaan Perumahan Berbasis Tabungan – BP2BT) targeted aspiring
   lower income first time homeowners by providing down payment assistance support to match beneficiary
   savings and a market rate mortgage from a participating lending institution. It supported down payment
   assistance linked to a mortgage for the self-construction or reconstruction of a home by eligible lower
   income households and expanded eligibility for government mortgage-linked housing assistance to non-
   salaried households for the first time. As a new scheme, BP2BT was expected to be more efficient
   compared to the existing interest subsidy program (Fasilitas Likuiditas Pembiayaan Perumahan, FLPP).
   The component also provided technical assistance for mortgage-linked down payment assistance including
   support for strengthening BP2BT management (e.g. administration and information technology systems)
   and operations (e.g. monitoring and evaluation), as well as developing a public information campaign,
   and consumer financial literacy.

   Component 2: Home Improvement Assistance (Bantuan Stimulan Perumahan Swadaya/BSPS).

   World Bank at appraisal: US$215 million; World Bank at closing: US$312.8 million (145% of appraisal
   amount). Borrower at appraisal: US$460 million. Borrower at closing: US$889.98 million (193% of appraisal
   amount).

   This component (BPSP or home improvement program) supported the scaling up and improvement of the
   national Home Improvement Assistance Program (Bantuan Stimulan Perumahan Swadaya – BSPS) with
   the aim to support poor and lower income Indonesian households to attain safe and affordable housing
   through an incremental home improvement process. It financed the provision of home improvement or
   reconstruction assistance to lower income households based on the BSPS beneficiary eligibility criteria,

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    National Affordable Housing Program (P154948)



  assistance levels and eligible expenditure under the assistance and implementation model. It also provided
  support for BSPS management and operations at the national and provincial level as well as BSPS program
  development

  Component 3: Technical Assistance for Housing Policy Reform.

  World Bank at appraisal: US$20 million; World Bank at closing: US$4.2 million (21% of appraisal amount).

  This component financed a broad technical assistance to support policy reform, improved governance and
  enhanced capacity in the housing sector, related to (i) expanding access to housing finance through
  technical assistance to support policy and regulatory reform and improve governance to strengthen the
  primary and secondary mortgage markets and the enabling environment for housing finance and housing
  information system and (ii) addressing low income and public housing provision through technical
  assistance to support policy reform, improve governance and enhance capacity of stakeholders in
  addressing constraints to the provision of affordable housing.

  Revised Components:

  During implementation, the Government redirected the targeting for the two main components, based on
  termination of its Interest Rate Subsidy program and the increased fiscal budget for the FLLP in 2021, to (i)
  focus the home acquisition program on loans to non-salaried beneficiaries and (ii) reduce the income ceiling
  for the home improvement program from the 4th to the 2nd income decile. Additionally, the
  Government cancelled its US$50 million contribution to the home acquisition program, while increasing its
  contribution to the home improvement program due to the success of the subsidy scheme. In response to
  the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and as part of project restructuring in 2021, component 1 was
  renamed to “Credit-linked Housing Finance Assistance” to accommodate a new Housing Microfinance pilot.
  Additionally, component 2 introduced the use of wire-mesh technology to strengthen the structural integrity
  of upgraded or re-constructed homes. The costs of the three components were adjusted as follows: for
  Component 1 from US$215 million to US$125 million; for Component 2 from US$215 million to US$315
  million; and for Component 3 from US$20 million to US$15 million



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost

  The total project cost estimated at appraisal was US$960 million, of which US$450 million were IBRD and
  US$510 million were Borrower contribution (PAD, Data Sheet). The actual disbursement at the end of the
  project was US$400.64 million IBRD. The Borrower contribution reached US$889.98 million (ICR, page 2).

  Financing

  The source of financing was as follows (ICR, p.2):

  IBRD: US$450million at appraisal. The actual amount disbursed at project closing was US$400.64 million,
  due to under-utilization of around $49.34 million within the available implementation timeframe.

  Borrower Contribution


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Affordable Housing Program (P154948)



   US$510 million at appraisal. The revised amount was US$460 million. The actual amount disbursed was
   US$889.98 million.

   Dates

   The project was approved by the Board of Directors on March 17, 2017 and the Loan Agreements was
   signed on November 30, 2017. The project became effective on January 24, 2018 and underwent a mid-
   term review on August 5, 2019.

   The project went through two Level 2 restructurings, which included extensions of the closing dates. The
   original closing date was moved from March 31, 2021 to February 28, 2023. The project objective remained
   unchanged.

   Restructuring 1 (June 2020): The first restructuring included: extension of the loan closing date from
   March 31, 2021 to February 28, 2022; adjustment to the Results Framework and scope of activities within
   some components; changes to the institutional arrangements; changes to disbursement estimates and
   implementation schedule; changes to the project’s risk rating; and amendments to the Loan Agreement to
   reflect the above changes. In regard to the Results Framework, the following changes were made:

         5 new intermediate-level indicators were added to include, amongst others, monitoring of quality
          aspects related to both housing programs as well as a public private partnership for affordable
          housing development.
         The wording was improved for both outcome-level indicators and 12 intermediate-level indicators,
          though substantively they remained the same, and the end targets were reduced for one outcome-
          level indicator and 3 intermediate-level indicators.

   Restructuring 2 (June 2021): The second restructuring included: changes to the results framework
   (specifically the addition of intermediate results indicators and adjustment of targets to reflect changes to
   the components and the extension of target dates by 12 months); changes in components and costs;
   extension of closing date from February 28, 2022 to February 28, 2023; changes to reallocation between
   disbursement categories; changes to disbursement estimates and implementation schedule; and
   amendments to the Loan Agreement to reflect the above changes. In regard to the Results Framework, the
   following changes were made:

         2 new intermediate-level indicators were added to include piloting a new microfinance scheme and
          monitor improved resilience of upgraded and/or reconstructed housing units under the home
          improvement program.
         The end target was reduced for one outcome-level indicator and 2 intermediate-level indicators.

   Split Rating: This review will undertake a split rating, based on the reduction of some results framework
   indicator targets. Given that there was no disbursement between the first and second project restructuring
   (the amount disbursed remained US$217.34 million), the split evaluation will be based on the second
   restructuring.




3. Relevance of Objectives


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Affordable Housing Program (P154948)




Rationale
Country Context: According to the PAD (p 1-2), Indonesia was undergoing a major and rapid structural
transformation into an urban manufacturing and service-based economy at the time of appraisal. The urban
population was over 52 percent of the total population. There was a large infrastructure deficit and a severe
shortage of affordable housing, stifling growth and poverty reduction. The dearth of affordable housing
options for lower-income households had led to overcrowding and the growth of slums, characterized by
poor quality, substandard housing. Approximately 22 percent of Indonesia’s urban population (equaling to
around 29 million people) were estimated to live in slums. About 20 percent of housing units were estimated
to be in poor condition. Informal, self-built housing continued to produce the majority (around 71 percent) of
housing in Indonesia, which brought with it severe limitations in relation to the systematic provision of
services and infrastructure in a rapidly urbanizing context. Affordability remained a key constraint to
significantly improving housing outcomes for most Indonesians. Indonesia’s financial sector was in its early
phase of development, with banking dominating the growing sector. Only a small part of Indonesia’s total
population had access to banking services. Increasing the availability of affordable mortgage lending to
leverage the private lending sector was essential for providing formal housing at scale in an urbanizing
context. Government housing programs included several primary initiatives, such as the Home
Improvement Assistance (Bantuan Stimulan Perumahan Swadaya, BSPS – an up-front assistance for
incremental home improvement or new construction of self-built housing) and the Fasilitas Likuiditas
Pembiayaan Perumahan, FLPP – to enhance mortgage affordability for middle-income households by
subsidizing interest rates for fixed-rate mortgages). FLPP had several shortcomings, such as participation
of only one bank, an almost exclusive focus on salaried borrowers earning up to three times the national
median income, exclusive financing of new developer-built units, and exclusion of home improvement
financing to enhance the quality of existing housing stock and address overcrowding.

The project responded to the need to increase the supply of adequate and safe housing by helping the
Government of Indonesia (GoI) with its efforts to enhance access to affordable housing through support for
scaling up of one of the existing programs, specifically the BSPS. Additionally, given the limitations of the
FLPP product, the project supported the Government’s proposed transition to a more equitable and efficient
housing finance subsidy system by supporting a new mortgage-linked down payment assistance for
affordable housing finance. The project recognized that the scale and pace of this transition will be
determined by the success of the new mortgage-linked down payment assistance program.

Relevant Previous Bank Experience: The WBG had a history of providing advisory support to the GoI on
housing policy (spanning policy development for enabling the housing market to function, expanding access
and efficiency improvement in the housing sector and addressing the growth in slums). Additionally, the WB
programmatic ASA on land, housing and urban settlements delivered a roadmap for housing policy reform,
which served as a key input to the GoI’s Medium Term Development Plan (2015-2019) and strongly
influenced the design and content of this National Affordable Housing Program project.

Alignment with World Bank Strategy and Country Priorities: At appraisal, the project was aligned with
the WBG Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Indonesia 2016-2020, which included affordable
housing as a specific priority sector under the CPF’s engagement area 1 on Infrastructure Platforms at the
National Level (PAD, p. 11). At completion, the project remained highly relevant to the CPF for FY21-FY25
Engagement Area II Improve Infrastructure, Objective 2.1. Improve Infrastructure provision and quality of
service (CPF, p. 27-28). Strengthening infrastructure to support economic development and basic services
remains a priority in the GoI’s Medium-term national Development Plan (2020) (CPF, p. 17).


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      National Affordable Housing Program (P154948)



               Appropriateness of the PDO: While there is a clear alignment between the project's development
               objectives and the country- and WB strategies, the PDO formulation ("To increase access to affordable
               housing") does not capture key interventions supported under component 2 that focused on improving
               access to quality housing, which was identified as a key development problem for Indonesia, alongside the
               severe shortage of affordable housing. Specifically, the project aimed to address substandard housing in
               Indonesia and was, in part, specifically designed to provide support for improving housing conditions. Given
               that the quality dimension was a clear objective of the project, this review will accept the respective
               interventions as contributing to the stated PDO.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve access to affordable housing for lower income households.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change

                             The project included activities such as provision of a newly launched mortgage-linked down payment
                             assistance (BP2BT, or home acquisition program) to lower income first time homeowners through financial
                             intermediaries (i.e., financing of credit-linked subsidies to low-income beneficiaries) as well as technical
                             assistance for developing and strengthening BP2BT management, administrative and information technology
                             systems and capacities, development of a rigorous BP2BT monitoring and evaluation methodology and
                             system, including a baseline study, development of consumer financial literacy and a public information
                             campaign around BP2BT. It also included expansion of the national Home Improvement Assistance Program
                             (BSPS, or home improvement program), provision of financing and in-kind subsidies for home improvement
                             or reconstruction solutions, support to BSPS management and operations, and technical assistance for BSPS
                             program development, including establishment of a monitoring system to verify standard housing
                             requirements, and training for beneficiaries. Additionally, component 3 activities included technical assistance
                             for housing policy reform.

                             Together, these activities were expected to result in outputs such as access to affordable housing for lower
                             income households (with gross income in the bottom 60 percent of the national income distribution),
                             increased satisfaction of BP2BT beneficiaries with the home acquisition program, BP2BT IT system
                             developed and operationalized, increased integration of lenders into the housing market; as well as access to
                             affordable and improved housing for beneficiaries in the bottom 40 percent of households, upgraded housing
                             units that fulfill standard housing requirements, increased BSPS uptake in urban areas, complaints recorded
                             and processed within service standard, increased satisfaction of BSPS beneficiaries with the home
                             improvement program, BSPS Management Information System developed, strengthened lending capacity of

                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Affordable Housing Program (P154948)



participating lending institutions to non-fixed income customers; and also a Housing and Real Estate
Information System developed and under implementation, a mortgage guarantee mechanism developed, a
public housing policy roadmap developed, a business plan for the National Housing Corporation developed,
and Local Government Affordable Housing Plans developed.

As outcomes, the acquisition of new, existing, or self-constructed homes (through the mobilization of down
payment assistance linked to mortgage finance for targeted households) and the transformation of
substandard homes into habitable housing units (through the mobilization of home improvement subsidies)
were expected to lead to increased access to affordable housing for the target groups, enhanced capacity of
the BSPS to support quality housing, and improved governance and enhanced capacity in the housing sector
to address affordability, fiscal resilience, and livability. In the long term, this was to contribute to enabling the
growth of the urban economy through closing the qualitative and quantitative housing gap in Indonesia.

While the causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were mostly logical and convincing,
the PDO was not an adequate reflection of the activities being financed and supported under the project.
Support for BP2BT (component 1) contributed directly to improving access to affordable housing through the
provision of down payment assistance to targeted beneficiaries and extension of said assistance to
households working in non-salaried sectors. Support for BSPS (component 2), however, focused largely on
the provision of targeted home improvement assistance for low-income urban households with the aim to
reduce substandard housing and enhance access to affordable housing for lower income households through
expansion of the existing Government program. However, together, these interventions addressed key
development problems facing Indonesia in regard to both access to affordable and quality housing. The
critical assumptions were: (i) the GoI remains committed to maintain subsidy targeting and prioritization
toward segments with acute housing needs (low income and non-salaried) and (ii) systems and capacity
building (building climate- and disaster-resilient system, housing information system, and others) are
sustained.

Outputs

      2 participating lenders had >5% of the program-financed BP2BT annual volume; against the original
         target of 4 (original target not achieved).
        An IT system was developed and operationalized for the home acquisition program (original target
         met).
        0% of reconstructed and/or improved housing units verified appropriately in fulfilling standard house
         requirements; against the original target of 80% (original target not achieved).
        4.8% of BSPS implementation reached urban areas; against the original target of 35% (original
         target not achieved).
        100% of complaints were recorded and processed within the service standard applied (disaggregated
         by gender); against original target of 80% (original target exceeded).
        A Swadaya Management Information System was developed and operationalized (original target
         met).
        A Housing and Real Estate Information System was created and implemented to support evidence-
         based policy making and program development with housing data, a dashboard and indicators
         (original target met).
        No mortgage guarantee mechanism was developed (original target not achieved).
        A 2020-2045 Housing Policy Grand Design roadmap was developed and submitted to key
         stakeholders for long-term housing planning and development (original target met).

                                                                                                       Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Affordable Housing Program (P154948)




      Institutional arrangements were developed through knowledge exchange and capacity building for the
       housing sector and presented to key stakeholders (original target met).
      No local government affordable housing plans were developed; against the original target of 15
       (original target not achieved).

Outcomes

The main outcomes realized were:

      30,422 targeted households were assisted by the project for affordable house ownership (under
         BP2BT); against the original target of 126,000 (original target not achieved).
        92.56% of beneficiaries of the home acquisition program (BP2BT) were in the bottom 60 percent of
         the income distribution; against the original target of 80% (original target exceeded).
        59.55% of beneficiaries of the home acquisition program were from non-salaried sectors; against the
         original target of 20% (original target exceeded).
        BP2BT assistance-linked mortgage finance leveraged reached US$224,197,903; against original
         target of US$665,000,000 (original target not achieved).
        82.87% of beneficiaries reported being satisfied or highly satisfied with the home acquisition program;
         against the original target of 80% (original target exceeded).
        983,606 targeted households received house improvement/ reconstruction stimulant through an
         advance system of Home Improvement Assistance; against the original target of 450,000 (original
         target exceeded).
        98% of reconstructed and/or improved housing units under the BSPS were verified as accurate in
         beneficiary targeting; against the original target of 85% (original target exceeded).
        93.8% of beneficiaries reported being satisfied or highly satisfied with the home improvement program
         (disaggregated by gender); against the original target of 80% (original target exceeded).

Overall, the project significantly under-performed against its original targets under the home acquisition
program (BP2BT), while it substantially exceeded its original targets under the home improvement program. A
key achievement of the home acquisition program was the development of a market-friendly product that
included the private sector in Indonesia’s housing market. The product succeeded in reaching beneficiaries
who were in the bottom 60% of the income distribution by honing eligibility criteria to reduce mis-targeting and
prioritizing funding for the low-income segment with acute housing needs. Eligibility criteria were used as a
benchmark and replicated by the Government for other housing programs (see lessons learned). Additionally,
the home acquisition program supported 18,115 non-salaried workers (59.55 percent of beneficiaries),
essentially expanding the program's reach to those who were previously underserved and considered 'un-
bankable', i.e., unable to access affordable house ownership. While the level of assistance-linked mortgage
finance leveraged was four times the government fiscal budget (ICR, p. 13), it did not reach the original
target. Based on results from the beneficiary satisfaction survey, conducted each year during 2019 to 2021,
82.87% of beneficiaries reported being satisfied or highly satisfied with the home acquisition program (related
to the speed and timeliness of the approval process for mortgage-linked subsidies and quality of the house).
Finally, the World Bank team, during an interview with IEG for this review (on Jan 9, 2024), highlighted that
component 1 was a finalist for the Habitat for Humanity Award in recognition of innovation for public sector
housing solutions, for which the Director of Housing Finance Implementation (Directorate General of
Infrastructure Finance - Ministry of Public Works and Housing) received an award in South Korea in October
2023.


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Affordable Housing Program (P154948)



The home improvement program used a community-based approach focused on the transformation of
substandard homes into habitable housing units through the mobilization of home improvement subsidies.
Under this component, the project provided close to a million households at the bottom of the income
pyramid (bottom 40 percentile of the income segment) with access to funding to improve their housing
conditions as part of the project’s support to scaling up the Government's existing BSPS program. BSPS
implementation in urban areas was lower than expected, mostly due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic
that prompted the Government to refocus the home improvement program on extreme poverty alleviation
where beneficiaries were located mostly in rural areas. The ICR notes that prior to this Government policy
shift, BSPS implementation in urban areas had reached a high of 65 percent. One of the key associated
outcome indicators ('households targeted to receive house improvement stimulant') speaks to house
improvement/reconstruction, which was understood as enabling beneficiaries to access affordable assistance
(for the purchase of construction material and the hiring of specialized labor) that they would have otherwise
not been able to afford. Based on the results from the beneficiary satisfaction survey, conducted each year
during 2019 to 2021, 93.8% of beneficiaries reported being satisfied or highly satisfied with the home
improvement program (particularly in regard to the process of socialization (e.g., aspects related to group
gathering, construction planning and implementation stage, community engagement).

Based on the modest achievement of the home acquisition program and the high achievement of the home
improvement program, the rating is Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The objective was not revised. However, some of the project results framework indicator wording was
immaterially changed, some indicator end targets were reduced, and some new indicators were added during
the first and/or second restructuring, respectively. As noted, above, the split rating will be based on the
second restructuring.

Revised Rationale
The Theory of Change (ToC) outlined under the original objective remained relevant and valid after
restructuring and the changes did not affect the logic of the ToC.

The intermediate indicator on ‘reconstructed and/or improved housing units verified appropriately in fulfilling
standard house requirements’ (target 80%) was dropped during the first restructuring and replaced with the
indicator on ‘BSPS upgraded and/or re-constructed housing units verified as fulfilling construction quality-
structural integrity standards’ (target 50%). The indicator on ‘mortgage guarantee mechanism developed
(yes/no) was dropped during the first restructuring

Outputs Revision 1

      2 participating lenders had >5% of the program-financed BP2BT annual volume; against the revised
       target of 3 (revised target not achieved).


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Affordable Housing Program (P154948)




      100% of complaints were recorded and processed within the service standard applied (disaggregated
         by gender); against revised target of 75% (revised target exceeded).
        41% of BP2BT housing units fulfilled the minimum construction standard requirements; against the
         revised target of 55% (revised target not achieved).
        2.91% of BSPS upgraded and/or reconstructed housing units applied wire-mesh technology to
         improve resilience; against revised target of 3 (revised target met).
        A recommendation on a sustainable housing subsidy model was developed (revised target met).
        A Housing Microfinance scheme was developed and piloted for low-income households (revised
         target met).
        A system that tracks and enforces BSPS housing construction compliance towards the structural
         integrity and health standards was developed (revised target met).
        The pre-feasibility of two public private partnerships for affordable housing projects was supported to
         highlight alternative housing provisioning solutions (revised target met).

Outcomes Revision 1

      30,422 targeted households were assisted by the project for affordable house ownership; against the
         revised target of 32,000 (revised target not achieved).
      59.55% of beneficiaries of the home acquisition program (BP2BT) were from non-salaried sectors;
         against the revised target of 10% (revised target exceeded).
        BP2BT assistance-linked mortgage finance leveraged reached US$224,197,903; against revised
         target of US$200,000,000 (revised target exceeded).
        983,606 targeted households received house improvement/ reconstruction stimulant through an
         advance system of Home Improvement Assistance; against the revised target of 823,000 (revised
         target exceeded).
        98% of reconstructed and/or improved housing units under the BSPS were verified as accurate in
         beneficiary targeting; against the revised target of 90% (revised target exceeded).
        75.28% of BSPS housing units upgraded and/or reconstructed under the home improvement program
         were verified as fulfilling construction quality (structural integrity standards); against revised target of
         55% (revised target exceeded).

As part of restructuring efforts, the project adjusted the ambition of the home acquisition program and
ultimately almost achieved the revised target to support 32,000 households through mortgage-linked down
payment assistance. It substantially exceeded in targeting beneficiaries from the non-salaried sectors and
leveraged over $224 million through private sector funding. A Housing Microfinance scheme for low income
households was developed to address the acute needs for housing upgrades with private-sector funding and
engagement. Significantly increased targets for the home improvement program were exceeded, and
beneficiary targeting continued to be successful. The project added key indicators related to quality
assurance and construction compliance, which speak to the achievement of improved access of beneficiaries
to afford home upgrades. Over 75% of BSPS housing units that were upgraded and/or reconstructed under
the home improvement program were verified as fulfilling structural integrity standards. As such, there is
evidence that the project helped address the development problem of substandard housing and lack of
access to home improvement financing in Indonesia. As noted under the section on 'Relevance of the PDO',
the PDO lacked a focus on improved quality of housing and could have benefited from a revision of its



                                                                                                      Page 10 of 20
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 National Affordable Housing Program (P154948)



                              wording to include access to affordable and improved housing explicitly. Overall, the revised rating is
                              Substantial.



                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Based on the discussion of the objective against the original targets, the efficacy for the original project is
                            rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings. Even though the project substantially over-achieved the
                            objective to provide access to improved housing, it fell short on reaching the envisioned targets under the
                            affordable home acquisition program.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Based on the discussion of the objective against the revised targets, the efficacy for the revised project is
                            rated Substantial. After the project restructurings, the project almost achieved the revised, but significantly
                            lower targets under the affordable home ownership program and continued to exceed targets under the home
                            improvement program.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic and financial analysis: At appraisal, a cost-benefit analysis was carried out for both component 1
   and component 2, showing that the project was considered economically feasible. Specifically, the results
   indicated: (i) a net present value of $338 million and an economic internal rate of return of 13 percent (above the
   discount rate of 10 percent with a time span of 15 years) for component 1 - BP2BT and (ii) a net present value of
   $178 million and an economic internal rate of return of 42 percent (above the discount rate of 10 percent with a
   time span of 20 years) for component 2 – BSPS. The sensitivity analysis of project net benefits was analyzed
   with respect to two key variables (average percentage of maintenance cost and number of units of houses) and

                                                                                                                                Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      National Affordable Housing Program (P154948)



net present value was found to be relatively insensitive to changes in either variable. The PAD had presented a
cost-benefit analysis from the perspective of beneficiaries and did not include the government subsidy as part of
the investment costs. For the ICR analysis, the subsidies were included as part of investment costs, and several
assumptions were modified to reflect current market conditions, including those for home prices, leverage, and
mortgage interest rates. At completion, the ICR showed positive results for the cost-benefit analysis of the home
acquisition program (BP2BT) based on adjusted assumptions that included the government subsidy as part of
investment costs and reflected current market conditions (e.g., for home prices, leverage, and mortgage interest
rates). The ICR also conducted a comparative analysis of the costs and benefits for the BP2BT and FLPP
subsidy alternatives, showing that under identical conditions, BP2BT yields significant cost savings from the
beneficiary, government, and social perspective. The BSPS home improvement program remained economically
viable at completion based on a more conservative approach (that did not consider property capital gains) in the
cost-benefit analysis. The full results are shown in Table 1.

Table 1: Results of Economic and Financial Analysis at Appraisal and Closing

                                             Results at Appraisal Results at Completion
                                                    (PAD)                 (ICR)
BP2BT – Home Acquisition Program
Discount rate (%)                                      10                        8
NPV (US$ million)                                     338                       23
IRR (%)                                                13                       9.1
BSPS – Home Improvement Program
Discount rate (%)                                      10                       8
NPV (US$ million)                                     178                      479
IRR (%)                                                42                      24.7

Administrative Efficiency

The project faced some implementation delays and administrative challenges. The original implementation
timeline was overly optimistic, with only four years from approval to the original closing date, given that it took
time to produce the relevant housing regulations and for the Government to implement the new subsidy
instrument (BP2BT), which included gaining buy-in from financial intermediaries and developers. The impacts of
the COVID-19 pandemic contributed to implementation delays and prompted the second restructuring and
reallocation of funds among components in line with Government priorities. While some of the components were
scaled down, nearly all of the project’s activities (aside from developing a mortgage guarantee mechanism and
local government affordable housing plans, as noted above) were completed when the project concluded.
Overall, the project utilized 89 percent of the loan (US$400.6 million at closing against US$450 million at
appraisal).


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      National Affordable Housing Program (P154948)




                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

On account of substantial Relevance, substantial Efficacy with moderate shortcomings against the original
objectives, and substantial Efficacy after restructuring, as well as substantial Efficiency, the overall project
outcome is rated as Moderately Satisfactory. The calculation of the split ratings for the project is shown in
Table 2.

Table 2: Split Ratings Calculation

                                                                     Original             Objectives after
 Rating Dimension
                                                                    objectives               restructuring
 Relevance of Objective                                                          Substantial
 Overall Efficacy
                                                            Substantial with
                                                                                        Substantial
  Objective: To improve access to affordable housing for moderate shortcomings
  lower income households.
  Efficiency                                                               Substantial
  Outcome Rating                                         Moderately Satisfactory        Satisfactory
  Outcome Rating Value                                              4                          5
  Amount Disbursed (US$ million)                                 217.3                      183.3
  Disbursement (%)                                              54.25%                     45.75%
  Weight Value                                                    2.17                       2.29
  Total weights                                                         4.46 (rounded to 4)
  Overall Outcome Rating                                              Moderately Satisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
    Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

According to the ICR, the following posed risks to development outcomes:

Financial risk: The existing FLPP liquidity facility continues to be a preferred subsidy instrument despite its
inefficiency (due to not being accounted for fully in present value terms), while BP2BT, the home acquisition
program is being used for specific needs. There is a risk that the liquidity facility will limit the reach of the


                                                                                                      Page 13 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      National Affordable Housing Program (P154948)



Government to address the considerable housing needs for affordable, adequate, and resilient homes in
Indonesia, and that the home acquisition program is relegated to a niche product.

Environmental risk: The project’s quality assurance and quality control system, developed to enforce
construction quality housing delivery and implement a bottom-up construction quality monitoring system, is
not yet fully operational nationally. The quality of developer-built housing continues to be sub-optimal. There
is a risk that failure to sustain and extend the quality of housing delivery leads to setbacks in ensuring
resilient housing and climate and disaster risk mitigation for beneficiaries.

Further, this ICR review identifies additional risks to development outcomes, including:

Political risk: The project put strong measures in place to optimize targeting under both housing programs
to support low-income beneficiaries and increase the urban focus for the home improvement program. In
response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government redirected beneficiary targeting of both programs (see
section 2.d. of this ICRR), which impacted the eligibility review process, disbursement of subsidies, and
lenders. If targeting regimes change, there is a risk that intended program objectives may not be achieved,
and that some benefits may leak to non-eligible beneficiaries. Consistency issues in classifying eligibility
criteria may heighten the risk of targeting efficiency, as was the case with the home acquisition program.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design was informed by previous World Bank operations and analytical work (PAD, p.20-22)
  and reflected a number of lessons, inter alia: the importance of requisite regulations and financial
  infrastructure for a healthy housing finance system; the critical need for broader lender participation and
  competition in the housing sector; the advantages of a market-oriented subsidy product design; the need
  to move gradually down market with housing finance lending in order to avoid subprime risks; the
  importance of proper targeting and data for the success of public housing programs; and the importance
  of community empowerment and ownership for upgrading and home improvement operations.
  Stakeholder consultations and focus group discussions further informed the design (ICR, p. 20).

  At appraisal, the Bank thoroughly considered key risks to achieving the PDO (the overall risk rating of the
  project was Substantial) and put in place mitigation measures (PAD, Annex 6, p.99-101). However, the
  Bank underestimated the risks related to sector strategies and policies (specifically the finalization of
  required subsidy regulations for the home acquisition program, BP2BT) and the time it took for lending
  institutions to build their own systems and operating standards to work with the home acquisition
  program. While a substantial targeting risk had been identified at appraisal, the mitigation measures
  proved insufficient and scale up in urban areas remained a persistent issue. Additionally, limited technical
  capacity of the implementing agency and low interest of state-owned insurance companies resulted in
  dropping the project’s element for the mortgage guarantee mechanism.

  Lastly, the PDO would have benefited from explicitly including a focus on improving the quality of housing
  given that key interventions supported by the project (i.e., component 2 on home improvement



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Affordable Housing Program (P154948)



  assistance) supported access to reconstructed and/or improved housing. The quality at entry is rated as
  Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank proactively supervised the project by carrying out 14 implementation support missions
 during the five-year project implementation period, including a Mid-Term-Review in August 2019. The ICR
 notes that continuity of task team leadership was maintained throughout the project and the core
 supervision team included fiduciary management and environmental and social safeguards specialists
 (ICR, p. 26-27). In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, implementation support was maintained through
 videoconferencing and included virtual supervision of the quality assurance and quality control initiative
 introduced by the project. The Implementation Status & Results Reports (ISRs) adequately documented
 project status and issues. Some of the project’s challenges included slow disbursement and the need for
 significant additional technical support, which the World Bank team addressed. As part of the restructuring,
 the project further emphasized mainstreaming of quality control aspects into the Government's existing
 housing program and included key associated indicators in the Results Framework. It also reallocated
 greater funding towards the home improvement component. However, the PDO was not revised to reflect
 the increased focus on improved quality aspects. Inclusion of both dimensions of affordable and quality
 housing would have been appropriate to fully reflect the results achieved by the project.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s PDO did not fully reflect half of the project interventions, which were focused on support to
 beneficiaries in improving substandard housing quality. Similarly, the two key outcome indicators focused
 on the number of households supported, which is at the lower level of the results chain. Overall, the
 Results Framework's (RF) intermediate results indicators and PDO indicators were specific enough to
 measure progress towards both the access and the quality dimension of housing support. While the RF
 may have benefitted from fewer intermediate indicators to facilitate more streamlined monitoring and
 reporting, the project's indicators adequately captured key aspects of the project (including beneficiary
 targeting, beneficiary satisfaction, compliance with construction quality, etc.).



                                                                                                   Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Affordable Housing Program (P154948)



 During the project’s appraisal, a results-based monitoring and evaluation (M&E) approach was designed
 and the M&E team in each Project Implementing Unit (PIU) (under the home acquisition and home
 improvement programs) were to be responsible for regular monitoring of activities. A Management
 Information System (MIS) was to be available to track and monitor key data and information during project
 implementation (PAD, p. 24). The principal data sources of the M&E system were to include field and
 beneficiary surveys to measure progress towards the outcome indicators on the number of targeted
 households that the received mortgage-linked down payment or house improvement assistance by the
 project, as well as IT system monitoring (for BP2BT), output verification and the MIS.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR notes that reports on the home acquisition program (BP2BT) and the home improvement
  program (BSPS) were available during the project and for the self-evaluation, though at different levels of
  disaggregation and completeness (p. 23). The project faced consistency challenges related to the
  classification of certain variables (occupation and employment type) that affected the efficiency of
  targeting under the home acquisition program. Some incomplete reporting and data gaps in the BP2BT
  lending data by lenders were noted. Reports under the home improvement program were not always
  delivered to the World Bank in a consistent, timely, and complete manner. The project achieved the
  development and implementation of the Housing and Real Estate Information System strengthens the
  Government’s capability to monitor and track a broad range of land and housing market information.



c. M&E Utilization
  Progress was tracked based on the RF and all indicators were routinely updated and reported in the
  ISRs to the extent possible. According to the ICR, the data reports on both housing programs were used
  by the PIU and the World Bank team to assess project outputs and the achievement of the PDO and
  adjust implementation during the MTR and the two restructurings. Any errors in reporting for the home
  improvement program, due to limited technical abilities of the field facilitators or lack of error checking,
  were corrected during the preparation of the ICR (ICR, p. 24).

  Overall, M&E quality is rated Substantial given that there is sufficient data from the M&E system to
  demonstrate the project's achievements, despite some shortcomings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project triggered Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10); and
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) and was assessed as Category B (partial assessment). The project
   prepared and applied an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), including an
   Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF), to guide the identification and mitigation of potential E&S

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    National Affordable Housing Program (P154948)



  impacts. The Indonesian language version of the combined ESMF and the IPPF was disclosed on October
  4, 2016, and the English version was disclosed on the World Bank website on November 18, 2016. The
  project maintained a Safeguard Unit responsible for conducting Environmental & Social (E&S) screening
  that formed the basis to propose appropriate mitigations for incorporation in the relevant documents under
  Components 1 and 2. The E&S performance was rated either Satisfactory or Moderately Satisfactory during
  implementation and all applicable policies were complied with. The project did not experience any land
  ownership conflicts and there were no disputes over land ownership.

  According to the ICR, a two-tiered Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was established with local and
  central levels of management and a total of 178 complaints were registered and appropriately handled until
  project closure. However, there were indications that the system did not capture all complaints, was slow to
  respond to complaints, and female-headed households were underrepresented in GRM implementation
  (ICR, p. 25).

  The ICR notes the occurrence of a fatal accident of a construction worker due to exposure to an electric
  current, recorded during construction of a house under the home acquisition program (BP2BT). The
  accident occurred in June 2022 but was reported to the World Bank only during a field visit in October 2022.
  While the work instruction for BP2BT house construction included occupational health and safety
  requirements, they were not disseminated well to construction workers, and did not include an emergency
  response procedure in case of a work accident. The ICR notes that the contractor provided compensation to
  the victim's family and corrective actions were prescribed and fully implemented as part of the project to
  prevent similar incidents.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement

  The ICR states that procurement activities were carried out in accordance with the World Bank's
  Procurement and Consultant Guidelines and the provision in the Loan Agreement. Procurement capacity
  of the project implementing unit was limited at the outset of the project, a risk that was identified during
  project preparation (PAD, p. 27-28). Extensive training was provided to relevant project implementing
  agencies on procurement and Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP). The
  procurement was rated as Moderately Satisfactory at the time of the last ISR (December 2, 2022). At
  project closing, there were no pending procurement activities

  Financial Management

  The ICR states that financial management capacity varied between the implementing agencies but
  that with support from the project management consultant, financial management capacity improved
  gradually during project implementation. Toward the end of the project, Interim Financial Report
  submissions improved and most audit findings from FY2018 to FY2021 were fully addressed. The project
  received an unqualified opinion from the auditor on all financial statements from FY2018 to FY2021. The
  FY2022 audit report has been submitted to the State Audit Institution. IEG was informed by the World Bank
  team (as part of e-mail correspondence on January 10, 2024) that the financial statements for FY2023



                                                                                                   Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Affordable Housing Program (P154948)



   (Jan and Feb) have also been submitted and verified by the GoI Inspector General. The financial
   management was rated as Satisfactory at project closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR notes (p. 20) that the home acquisition program’s eligibility criteria (based on gross household
   income, in line with lender underwriting practices) stimulated targeting reform for all other Government
   housing finance subsidy programs. Effective targeting is key to ensure that the limited government
   subsidies are extended to the needed beneficiaries to enable shared prosperity. In March 2021, the
   Government changed targeting for all its housing programs to a maximum household income of IDR 8
   million (US$525) (Government decree No. 242/KPTS/M/2020).



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                               There is sufficient data from the
                                                                               M&E system to demonstrate the
Quality of M&E                  Modest               Substantial
                                                                               project's achievements, despite
                                                                               some minor shortcomings.
Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons in the ICR are mostly focused around the quality aspects of the housing support provided
by the project (pages 28-29) and synthesized as follows:

If the interests of different stakeholders are not fully considered, there is a risk that complex
housing subsidy reform goals are not achieved. The housing subsidy program piloted under the
project pursued multiple goals including improved economic efficiency and optimized targeting of
housing subsidy instruments. While the project demonstrated that there is a role for diversified
housing subsidy instruments in Indonesia, uptake of the new program was limited given the value of
the existing subsidy program to different Indonesian stakeholders. For transformative housing reform
goals to be achieved, a phased approach that considers the political economy may be more
suitable.


                                                                                                  Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       National Affordable Housing Program (P154948)



If a construction quality system is in place, home improvement is an effective and low-cost
measure to improve housing conditions for the poor. Even though support by the World Bank
focused on a large existing home-improvement program (BSPS), the project’s push for a quality
assurance and quality control system during implementation was adopted as technical guidelines for
the entire BSPS program, which changed the program’s trajectory toward better efficiency and
sustainability.

If housing-quality standards and associated monitoring systems are in place, this may
increase the potential for climate resilient and energy-efficient housing delivery outcomes.
The project aimed to build climate and disaster resilience at appraisal but lacked the monitoring
system to enforce and measure progress. As part of the restructuring, the project included a focus
on construction quality and structural integrity standards, as well as improved resilience of upgraded
and/or reconstructed housing units. This allowed for monitoring of progress towards housing quality-
related goals.

In addition, IEG draws the following lesson:

If effective targeting is in place, this may increase the potential that limited government
subsidies are extended to the needed beneficiaries to enable shared prosperity. The project's
eligibility criteria under the home acquisition program (BP2BT) stimulated targeting reform for all
other Government housing finance subsidy programs, which effectively extended the reach of the
program to those in most need. Specifically, it allows beneficiaries up to the 95th income percentile
and the working member with the lowest income of the household to apply for government subsidies
and benefit from the housing finance programs.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR presents a candid, well-rounded, and thorough assessment of the project experience, using a
complete and robust evidence base to support the achievements. The high quality of analysis is underpinned
by triangulation of evidence and responds to the theory of change. The ratings were well justified and in line
with the evidence. However, the shortcomings of the PDO and the theory of change could have been
discussed. The key lessons presented are illustrative of the operational realities encountered and include
recommendations for future housing projects with a focus on improving housing quality aspects. The ICR is
internally consistent and succinctly presents the results story in a logical manner.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 20
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
National Affordable Housing Program (P154948)




                                                                             Page 20 of 20
