     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Myanmar NCCDP (P132500)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023824

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Project Name
 P132500                                 Myanmar NCCDP

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 Myanmar                                 Social Sustainability and Inclusion


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-56870,IDA-H8140,TF-A7173            31-Jan-2019                                        417,552,667.56

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 01-Nov-2012                             31-Dec-2022

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           80,000,000.00                                  3,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                        482,998,479.04                                     2,998,479.04

 Actual                                    417,552,667.56                                     2,998,479.04




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ebru Karamete             Christopher David           Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
                           Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project development objective stated in the Grant Agreement was: “To enable poor rural communities
   to benefit from improved access to and use of basic infrastructure and services through a people-
   centered approach and to enhance the Recipient’s capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an
   eligible crisis or emergency” (Grant Agreement, page 4). The Project Appraisal Document (PAD) statement
   was slightly different, using the word ‘Government’ instead of ‘Recipient” (PAD, page 8).



                                                                                               Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Myanmar NCCDP (P132500)



   The PDO remained substantively unchanged throughout the project lifespan.

   For the ICRR, the PDO is parsed as follows:

   Objective 1: To enable poor rural communities to benefit from improved access to and use of basic
   infrastructure and services through a people-centered approach.

   Objective 2: To enhance the Recipient’s capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible crisis or
   emergency.

   A military takeover took place on February 1, 2021, and the World Bank paused all project disbursements in
   accordance with OP/BP 7.30. Accordingly, the information presented by the Implementation Completion and
   Results Report (ICR) was up until the military takeover and was prepared based on a desk review of
   supervision reports and interviews with World Bank.

   A third objective was added by the ICR as per the OPCS Guideline (December 9, 2021, Annex L: Preparation
   of ICR in FCV Setting for IPF Operations, page 46-53).

   Objective 3. Improved institutional capacity in FCV context.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  09-Jun-2015

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had five components:

   1. Community Block Grants (Appraisal Estimate: US$52.2 million, Additional Financing Estimate:
   US$ 365.6 million, Actual Amount: US$231.86 million)

   This component aimed to finance priority community level infrastructure including small feeder roads,
   footpaths and bridges, small dikes, drinking water systems, rehabilitation of classrooms and health centers,
   and small-scale rural electrification. Block grants were to be allocated through a participatory planning
   process covering all villages within a village tract. All village tracts in selected townships would be covered
   for equity purposes. Planning and prioritization of sub-projects would be undertaken by villagers and
   representative village tract forums.



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Myanmar NCCDP (P132500)



  2. Facilitation and Capacity Development Appraisal Estimate: US$14.2 million, Additional Financing
  Estimate: US$100.0 million, Actual Amount:US$81.2 million).

  This component aimed to finance technical assistance and institutional support at the union and township
  levels on capacity development in areas such as participatory processes, project management, gender
  equality and inclusion, environmental management, and social accountability for local committee members
  as well as government staff at the township, region/state and union levels.

  3. Knowledge and Learning Appraisal Estimate: US$1.8 million, Additional Financing Estimate:
  US$6.0 million, Actual Amount: US$3.7 million).

  This component aimed to support government staff and community and civil society representatives through
  learning from community-based approaches implemented within Myanmar. Other activities would include
  south-south learning exchanges, annual multi-stakeholder reviews to share experiences, an annual
  “development marketplace” to highlight the most promising innovations in people-centered development in
  Myanmar with a view to initiating these in the project areas, and establishment of a CDD gender network to
  improve gender equality and women’s empowerment.

  4. Implementation Support Appraisal Estimate: US$11.8 million, Additional Financing Estimate: US$
  54.0 million, Actual Amount: US$28.9 million)

  This component aimed to support project management at the union and township levels, including
  monitoring and evaluation, reporting and communications, administration and logistical support for project
  implementation, and third-party financial and technical audits.

  5. Emergency Contingency Response Appraisal Estimate:US$0 million, Additional Financing
  Estimate: US$18.95 million, Actual Amount: US$62.3 million).

  The component was designed to allow for the rapid reallocation of grant proceeds from other components in
  order to provide preparedness and rapid response support to disaster, emergency and/or catastrophic
  events, as needed.

  Revisions: The 2015 and 2018 AFs scaled-up the geographical coverage of the original component
  activities by an additional 48 townships for a total of 63 townships under the project and changed various
  component costs. Under component 1, there was an increase in the value of the village track block grants
  from the equivalent of US$27,000 per village tract to the equivalent of US$33,000 and the number of grant
  cycles available to beneficiary communities increased from three to four. Also, as part of the June 2015 AF,
  M&E activities were shifted from Component 4 (Implementation Support) to Component 3 (Knowledge and
  Learning) and the financing of rehabilitation and/or construction of office space for the Department of Rural
  Development (DRD) was added to Component 4




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates



                                                                                                  Page 3 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Myanmar NCCDP (P132500)



Cost: The project costs at appraisal were US$ US$86.3 million, which increased to US$ 535.5 million and
at project closing this amount was US$459.2 million.

Financing: The project was financed through an Emergency IDA Grant (IDA-H8140) of SDR 52.6 million
(US$80 million equivalent), which disbursed US$73.98 million at closing. Two additional financings were
added in 2015 and 2018; i.e. IDA Credit (IDA-56870) was added in the amount of SDR 284.5 million
(US$400 million equivalent) and a US$3 million grant was added through the Myanmar Multi Donor Trust
Fund (TF-A7173). The disbursements on these additional financings were US$ 340.6 million and US$2.99
million respectively. In 2015, the Government of Italy agreed to provide parallel financing of the project
through a concessional loan to the Government of Myanmar for EUR 20 million (US$22.5 million
equivalent), which disbursed US$ 20.8 million at closing.

Borrower Contribution: The government planned to contribute US$ 6.3 million at appraisal, which
increased to US$30.0 million via additional financings and at project closing total borrower contribution
amount was US$20.8 million.

Dates: The project was approved on November 1, 2012, and became effective on January 11, 2013. Mid
Term review was 5 years later, on May 25, 2018. The original closing date was January 31, 2019, but was
extended for about 4 years to December 31, 2022, to accommodate additional financings but also to
complete the remaining sub-projects.

Restructurings: The project included two additional financings and four restructurings:

Restructuring 1: On June 9, 2015, additional financing P153113 (US$400 million) was included to enable
the scale-up of the project to expand its geographical reach, to increase the number of grant cycles
available to beneficiary communities, and to increase per capita investment amounts. (i) The PDO
statement financing agreement was harmonized by replacing the word ‘government’s’ by ‘recipient’s’ to
ensure consistency between project paper and the financing agreement. (ii) There were revisions to the
results framework: A target was added to ‘direct beneficiaries’ indicator and sub-indicators on ‘female
beneficiaries’ and ‘number of persons having access to and use of project-built infrastructure and services’
were added. In addition, end targets of all other indicators were increased to reflect the additional financing.
(iii) Safeguard Policies OP4.04 (Natural Habitats) and OP7.50 (International Waterways) were triggered in
view of the presence of project villages in national forest areas, and the financing of sub-projects on
tributaries to the Ayeyarwady river. (iv) the ESSAF was converted to an ESMF in keeping with the
requirements of OP 10.00. Draft ESMF was disclosed in February 2015; (v) AF and IDA grant closing date
extended from January 31, 2019, to November 30, 2021, concurrently, to align with the closing date of the
IDA AF. (vi) Government of Italy co-financing was obtained through a concessional loan that allowed the
expansion of the project to approximately four new project townships between 2015 and 2019.

Restructuring 2. On November 16, 2015, a second level restructuring was done to change institutional
arrangements.

On June 14, 2016, the 1st Emergency Activation Response reallocated an estimated US$18.9 million (SDR
13.5 million) from the IDA AF credit to an Immediate Response Mechanism in response to national flooding
in 2015.

Restructuring 3. On April 12, 2018, a second level restructuring was done to: (i) reallocate resources
between disbursement categories to reflect CERC reallocation (ii) adjust the component costs in alignment
with the reallocations; (iii) Revised ESMF was presented at public discussion as a result of the triggered

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Myanmar NCCDP (P132500)



   Safeguard Policy OP4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources, given that the project is operating in some areas
   of cultural significance.

   Restructuring 4. On 27 June 2018. Additional financing of US$3 million (P166734) from DFID was
   provided as RETF to Government from the Myanmar Partnership Multi Donor Trust Fund (TF0A7173).

   Restructuring 5. On April 1, 2020, Level 2 restructuring extended the timeline of the submission of the
   audit reports to nine months, in full alignment with country systems.

   On July 10, 2020, 2nd CERC Activation allocated US$110 million of project funds to CERC to support
   COVID-19 emergency response.

   Restructuring 6. On November 30, 2021, level 2 restructuring was made for extension of closing date for
   both the IDA Grant and IDA Credit from November 30, 2021, to December 30, 2022. To allow for the
   remaining sub-projects to be completed to enable the target communities to access the much-needed basic
   services, provided by the sub-projects. Risk rating upgraded from Moderate to Substantial following the
   military takeover. Implementation Schedule changed to reflect the extension of closing date.

   A split evaluation is not necessary as the PDO and/or the PDO indicators did not change.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context: During the time of project appraisal in 2012, Myanmar was one of the poorest countries
in the East Asia and Pacific region, due to decades of civil conflict, social and economic isolation, and
limited investments in economic and social development. In 2010, the poverty rate was estimated between
25.6 and 37.5 percent, and the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) was US$500-800 per capita. Approximately
70 percent of poverty was concentrated in rural areas and social indicators pointed to limited benefits
available to citizens (ICR, para. 3). The government’s underinvestment in public institutions and the civil
service meant there was limited legitimacy and few public services being delivered in rural areas,
particularly in health, education, and agricultural extension services. In addition, Myanmar suffered from a
longstanding armed conflict and ethnic and religious tensions, and there was a long history of state neglect
of citizen needs. The voices of ordinary citizens, especially marginalized and ethnic minority people, were
largely excluded from development planning and implementation processes. Top-down decision-making
was the norm, and participatory approaches and bottom-up planning were non-existent.

Government strategies. Following the country’s first elections in twenty years, in 2011, the newly elected
administration accelerated reforms in what became known as the “triple transition”: from an authoritarian
military system to democratic governance, from a centrally directed economy to a market-oriented one; and
from 60 years of conflict to peace in border areas with multiple Ethnic Armed Organizations (EAOs). The
transition also included a shift from a top-down structure of governance to a more inclusive, people-
centered, bottom-up approach, with a greater focus on development in rural areas, and increased
investments in education and health. The Framework for Economic and Social Reforms (2012-2015), which
guided the reform efforts, outlined the need for more systematic inputs from townships, districts, regions,
and states to planning and budgeting. Some civil and political freedoms were updated, including changes in

                                                                                                  Page 5 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Myanmar NCCDP (P132500)



               the national legal framework that allowed for trade, the formation of unions and public gatherings for the first
               time in twenty years, and a new media law that reduced media and internet censorship, which led to new
               opportunities for public discussions of previously banned topics. The government also introduced a Ward
               and Village Track Administration Law in 2012, which introduced new local level accountability entry points
               and processes.

               World Bank strategies: In 2012, the World Bank reengaged with the Government of Myanmar for the first
               time in over 25 years. The World Bank’s reengagement strategy outlined in the Interim Strategy Note (ISN)
               for the Republic of the Union of Myanmar for the Period FY13-14 (Report No. 72458-MM) was launched on
               the same day as the National Community Driven Development Project (NCDDP) was approved. The ISN
               comprised two pillars: Pillar 1 (Transforming Institutions), which aimed to support the government’s efforts
               to transform institutions to allow them to deliver services for citizens, and Pillar 2 (Building Confidence),
               which supported the delivery of tangible results by the government to build confidence in the ability of the
               ongoing reform process to deliver benefits for the population. The NCDDP supported both pillars by helping
               to operationalize a people-centered approach to development as a way to help build the capacity of, and
               confidence in the government’s reforms. Consistent with the government’s reforms and the ISN, the project
               specifically focused on community engagement and participation, strengthening local administrative
               structures, and delivering basic services to poor rural communities. This approach relied on lessons learned
               and experience of the World Bank from operations in similar fragile and conflict affected contexts and the
               World Development Report of 2014, which noted that institutional legitimacy was key to stability and that
               transformation in the context of fragility often took a long time to achieve. The project objectives were
               closely aligned with the World Bank Group (WBG) Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Myanmar for
               the Period FY20-23 (Report Number 147607-MM). The CPF specifically notes the importance of the
               NCDDP in increasing access to essential services for rural populations in a bottom-up manner as part of
               the WBG’s engagement in Myanmar to reduce extreme poverty and boost shared prosperity. The PDO
               responded to all three CPF Focus Areas, as well as the cross-cutting theme of promoting social inclusion,
               including in conflict-affected areas.

               The PDO was pitched at the right level, given the government priorities and capacities, and the FCV context
               in the country at the time.

               Based on the above the relevance of the PDO is High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To enable poor communities to benefit from improved access to and use of basic infrastructure and services
                             through a people centric approach.

                                                                                                                           Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Myanmar NCCDP (P132500)




Rationale
As noted, the project’s efficacy is assessed as of February 2021, the military takeover and based on World
Bank reports, borrower progress reports, the project’s management information system, and the findings of a
Social Inclusion Evaluation (SIE) carried out by the World Bank in 2020.

The ICR constructed a retrospective theory of change (TOC) that reflected the broad intentions of the project.
The first objective was delivered using a CDD approach that was aligned with the government’s people-
centered development approach that was specifically included in the PDO statement. Community
infrastructure and sub-projects on basic services that was supported by the project, as well as capacity
building for local communities and government officials to identify, plan and implement priorities was to
enable poor rural communities to benefit from improved access to and use of infrastructure and basic
services. The project's outcomes were intended to be institutions that were transformed in delivering services
and benefits for the citizens and increased participation and empowerment of communities in rural
development. While this illustrated the core thrust of the project, the enabling aspect that sought to ensure
'benefits' for these communities has a livelihood dimension that is not well covered in the ICR, nor in the
results framework. Including basic details on the contribution to improved livelihoods and reduced poverty
levels would be useful in illustrating what difference these investments make to the communities. Without this
information, it is difficult to validate the degree of 'benefit' coming from the very successful community
engagement process.

The outcome indicators were output oriented as follows:

      Number of persons having access to and use of project- built infrastructure and services;
      Percent of households participating in planning and decision making and implementation of sub-
       projects
      Members of the community satisfied by the project.

Outputs:

      The project supported the rehabilitation and construction of 35,724 infrastructure and services sub-
       projects, slightly below the 40,000 subprojects target. The ICR, reported that although the total
       number of sub-projects were slightly below the target of 40,000, it is estimated that the target would
       have likely been exceeded had disbursements not been paused after the military takeover (ICR,
       paragraph 37). The ICR noted that the 2018 technical audit of the sub-projects found that 87 percent
       of them met the project’s combined technical and safeguards specifications (above the 85 percent
       target) (ICR, paragraph 38). The supported sub-projects included:
            o 19,655 transport facilities (12,824 km of roads and footpaths, bridges, and jetties),
            o 4,125 water and sanitation facilities,
            o 5,078 educational facilities,
            o 3,015 electrification facilities,
            o 3,814 community facilities and
            o 37 health posts.

Outcomes:

The ICR noted that over 8.5 million people in more than 12,000 villages in 63 townships benefited from this
project. The project substantially exceeded the target of 4 million direct beneficiaries and with 51.3 % female

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Myanmar NCCDP (P132500)



beneficiaries, met the target of 50 % female beneficiaries. In addition, the project investments resulted in
almost 7.6 million people from poor rural communities had access to related services that were previously
unavailable or of poor quality (exceeding the target of 4 million people) (ICR, paragraph 36).

To measure the ‘people centric approach’ the ICR assessed participation and satisfaction rate by the
beneficiary households. The project’s M&E system showed that, the overall rate of household participation in
the identification, planning and implementation of sub-projects reached 61.7 percent (as compared to a target
of 50 percent), and the rate of satisfaction with the project was 92.4 percent (as compared to a target of 80
percent). The 2020 SIE confirmed these results, finding that 85 percent of households interviewed indicated
that they had participated in sub-project planning, decision-making and implementation and 95 percent of
respondents felt satisfied with these processes. Satisfaction rates were high in all townships measured,
across gender and ethnic minority subgroups, and among the relatively poor and other marginalized groups
(ICR, para. 39). This evidence is emblematic of community-based interventions where the process is of
significance to the intended impact.

The project’s attention to and inclusion of 24 conflict affected townships (about one third of total townships
supported) helped these townships benefit from project support. The ICR reported that these areas are
predominantly formed of minority groups and mostly excluded from development support and services. The
ICR also noted that participation and beneficiary satisfaction rates in these townships were about the same as
the other townships supported by the project (ICR, para. 46).

While the reach of the CDD approach was impressive, no data was provided on the poverty and livelihoods
impacts of the project in the participating townships given the lack of assessments after the military takeover.
The project could have also included qualitative evidence to better understand the project's community
benefits related to poverty and livelihoods improvements.

Based on the above, the achievement of the objective is rated substantial with moderate shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To enhance the government's capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible crisis or emergency.

Rationale
The second objective was linked to institutional capacity building activities on disaster response as well as the
interventions under the Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC), which would be activated in
response to eligible crises or natural disasters.

The CERC was activated twice: in June 2016 following the landslides and floods of 2015 and in July 2020 to
support the Covid-19 crisis response:

      The CERC was activated on June 14, 2016, after the government asked for support following the
       2015 floods and landslides that affected six disaster-affected states and regions. The equivalent of

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Myanmar NCCDP (P132500)



       US$18.96 million was transferred to an Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM) for the government’s
       emergency support, of which US$15.6 million was ultimately used. These funds were used to
       purchase critical machinery and equipment, production inputs, and other required goods to support
       recovery in priority disaster-affected areas and to improve preparedness within respective sectors.
      The CERC was activated a second time on July 10, 2020, approximately two months after the
       government’s request for support in response to the COVID-19 crisis. The equivalent of US$110
       million was allocated to finance two emergency initiatives under the government’s COVID-19
       Emergency Response Plan: a Cash-for-Work (CfW) program and an Emergency Village Revolving
       Fund (EVRF) program. Support also included rapid needs assessments by NCDDP field staff, inputs,
       and related training of government and community officials. Based on DRD’s MIS data through
       October 2020, the CfW had reached 2,505 villages in 259 townships, benefiting 400,781 households
       with about MMK17 billion (approximately US$13 million equivalent) paid in wages across 4,402 sub-
       projects. DRD had planned to continue these efforts in 2021 but delays in the approval of the
       government’s annual budget and the military takeover impeded further implementation. At the time of
       the military takeover approximately US$42.9 million worth of activities had been implemented under
       the second CERC. Following the takeover, the balance of unused CERC financing remained
       undisbursed by the World Bank. The Bank did not carry out any further assessment of results of the
       second CERC due to the takeover.
      In 2018, the project provided additional funding (of approximately US$285,000) to respond to flooding
       caused by a breached dam to repair 206 damaged public structures. Funds were released to
       communities within two to three weeks of the flooding to facilitate this response. The project also
       subsequently financed reconstruction of infrastructure previously supported by the project when
       damaged because of natural disasters.

      The skills developed both in communities and within the government implementing agency (DRD)
       proved critical to helping the government respond to the COVID-19 pandemic through the two
       emergency initiatives supported under the project’s second CERC.

       Based on the above, achievement of the second objective is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improved institutional capacity in a FCV context

Rationale
This objective was added as per the OPCS Guideline (December 2021, Annex L: Preparation of ICR in FCV
Setting for IPF Operations, page 46-53). The project improved the institutional capacity of the government to
deliver basic infrastructure and services at the local (township) and community level through the following:

      A total of 2,029 government officials were trained in new skills for planning, project management
       (procurement, financial management, monitoring and evaluation) and engineering, well in excess of

                                                                                                 Page 9 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Myanmar NCCDP (P132500)



                                     the 500-person target. This training was enhanced through cross-township learning exchanges (16
                                     exchanges carried out compared to a target of 20).
                                    Six national multi-stakeholder reviews (MSR) (below the target of eight) were conducted. Specifically,
                                     hundreds of MSRs were conducted at the village tract, township, and state/region levels annually,
                                     which were compiled at the national level to review the overall process of sub-project planning and
                                     implementation to identify changes and enhancements to the sub-project cycle, which would be
                                     applied to the following year’s cycle. The MSRs served both as an accountability and learning
                                     mechanism and improved the quality of project implementation-- for example by increasing the size of
                                     sub-project grants to reflect inflation, customizing village tract grant allocations to take population
                                     sizes into account more thoroughly, and simplifying reporting requirements between villages, village
                                     tracts and townships-- thus enhancing government capacity to deliver basic infrastructure and
                                     services.
                                    DRD’s capacity was enhanced at the national, state/region and township levels through project-
                                     financed training and learning programs. Two results measures were used to assess overall project
                                     management: grievances addressed, and annual financial audit findings addressed. Over 96.5
                                     percent of registered grievances related to the delivery of project benefits were addressed by January
                                     2021 (the last World Bank implementation support mission), compared to an 85 percent target, and
                                     100 percent of significant annual financial audit findings were addressed, above the 95 percent target.
                                    The project also strengthened the capacity of participating community members to lead their own
                                     development in approximately 12,000 communities across 63 townships. The ICR reported that
                                     627,738 community members developed and applied new skills in the planning, financial
                                     management, and procurement of the sub-projects, which exceeded an end target of 300,000.
                                    The ICR reported that an independent evaluation found that project villages were more apt to follow
                                     government COVID-19 precautions and regulations. DRD continued to apply the capacities and
                                     systems developed under the NCDDP post-military takeover using its own resources (ICR, paragraph
                                     34).

                            Based on the above, the achievement of this additional objective is rated substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project’s overall efficacy is rated Substantial. The achievement of the first PDO is rated substantial with
                            moderate shortcomings, since all related indicator targets were exceeded, but with lack of evidence on
                            poverty and livelihood impacts. The achievement of the second PDO is also rated substantial based on the
                            project successfully tackling the two activations of the CERC. The achievement of the third PDO that was
                            added at closing as per OPCS guidelines on FCS, is also rated successful based on the project’s contribution
                            on the improved institutional capacity of government to delivery services and infrastructure at quality in an
                            FCV context, with some minor underachievement of intermediate result targets.


                                                                                                                              Page 10 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Myanmar NCCDP (P132500)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA): No ex-ante EFA was carried out on project investments given the
emergency nature of the project, the demand-driven nature of investments, and the lack of reliable cost and
benefit data on small-scale infrastructure in Myanmar. Therefore, the project relied on EFAs for World Bank-
financed regional and global CDD projects, including some in FCV contexts, such as Afghanistan. Various
studies showed economic internal rates of return (EIRRs) on average between 18 and 53 percent, and that CDD
projects were in general cost-effective compared to comparable government and NGO delivery mechanisms
(ICR, para. 48).

The World Bank was also unable to do an ex-post EFA of project investments as a result of the military
takeover. However, an Economic and Financial Analysis was conducted on a sample of project-supported sub-
project investments as part of the 2018 Technical Audit of the project. The 2018 economic analysis focused on
four sub-project types (water supply systems, school buildings, roads, and electrification) and showed theses to
be economically viable. The benefits from farm-to-market roads and bridges investments included savings in
transporting agricultural goods, lower travel costs for households, and reduction in post-harvest losses, higher
cropping intensity, increased property values, increased area of land cultivated or increase in number of farmers
engaging in agricultural production, changes in the product mix toward higher-value crops, reduction in
maintenance cost, time savings of other users, better access to health stations, lower number of accidents,
increase in number of children attending school, and increased traffic volume. Benefits from water supply
projects included additional water consumption, time saved from fetching water and reduction in waterborne
diseases due to clean water. Benefits from electrification included time saved from fetching firewood, additional
time to study at night for school children, and productivity gains for rural enterprises that use electricity. Benefits
from a new school building included additional years of schooling (and hence higher wages in the labor market).
The benefits described above are what would be valued in an ideal situation. The actual estimation of benefits
for this current study was limited to those that could be quantified based on the available field survey data. As
such, benefits of farm-to-market roads did not include estimates related to intra-village transport. Therefore, the
estimates presented in this analysis were considered conservative. The economic costs and benefits were
compared over the lifespan of the given sub-project type (which ranged from to 10 to 15 years depending on the
type of sub-project) and their NPV and EIRR were calculated based on the official discount rate of 10 percent.

The EIRR for the different types of sub-projects ranged from 12.3 percent for non-remote farm to market roads
to 132 percent for remote farm to market roads. Overall, the findings suggested that most of the NCDDP sub-
projects (water supply, school building, electrification, and farm-to-market roads) were economically viable. The
one caveat to this observation relates to farm-to-market roads in accessible villages, where the economic
viability of the sub-project is sensitive to a reduction in the estimated life of the sub-project, a reduction to
estimated benefits, or an increase in costs, which would put the EIRR at or below the discount rate. On the other
hand, farm-to-market roads in remote villages registered the highest EIRR mainly due to significant savings in
transport of produce and farm inputs (ICR, Annex4).




                                                                                                         Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Myanmar NCCDP (P132500)



Cost Effectiveness Analysis: The technical audits also showed that the unit costs for NCDDP infrastructure
were lower than comparable infrastructure projects constructed by other government programs. In particular,
community buildings, bridges, tube-well water supply systems, earth and concrete roads, and electrification sub-
projects were found to be cost-effective. The costs savings ranged from 4 percent (for earth roads) to 42 percent
(for electric grid extension) compared to other agency projects (ICR para.50). Furthermore, the ratio of sub-
project grant investments to total project cost, with 74 percent as of September 2020, was comparable to other
countries. For example an analysis of several national level programs carried out as part of an assessment of
the Afghanistan National Solidarity Program found this measure range from 53 to 89 percent.

Implementation Efficiency: The percentage of project management costs as compared to the overall cost of
the project was estimated at 14.75 percent at appraisal. However, by project close the rate of project
management costs stood at 7.1 percent (including CERC expenditures). Even with CERC expenditures
excluded from the total value of the project (as these were not pure CDD efforts) the project management rate
stood at 8.4 percent, significantly below global comparators. Using an analysis carried out as part of the
Afghanistan study referenced above, globally, the average project management rate for national-level CDD
programs is 10.2 percent. The ICR also noted that until the military takeover, the project followed original and
revised disbursement projections in spite of the effects of Covid-19 and the initial delays in procurement and
setting up new systems (ICR, para. 52).

Based on the positive results on economic efficiency, cost effectiveness and implementation efficiency, the
overall efficiency of the project is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     55.00
 ICR Estimate                                              12.30
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The overall outcome of the project is rated Satisfactory. The relevance of objectives is rated high due to strong
alignment to the government and World Bank strategies, given the FCV context in the country at the time. The
achievement of the first PDO, “to enable poor communities to benefit from improved access to and use of basic
infrastructure and services through a people centric approach” is rated substantial with moderate shortcomings,
since all related indicator targets exceeded, but with lack of evidence on poverty and livelihood impacts. The
achievement of the second PDO, “to enhance the government's capacity to respond promptly and effectively to

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Myanmar NCCDP (P132500)



an eligible crisis or emergency” is also rated substantial based on the project successfully addressing the two
activations of the CERC. The achievement of the third PDO that was added at closing as per OPCS guidelines
on FCS, “to improve institutional capacity in FCV context” is also rated successful based on the project’s
contribution on the improved institutional capacity of government to delivery services and infrastructure including
emergency and crisis response. The project’s efficiency is rated substantial based on technical audit results that
showed substantial EIRR rates for various sub-projects, as well as substantial cost effectiveness and
implementation for the project until the military take over.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

As reported by the ICR, there is a high risk that the development outcomes of the project will not be
sustained because of the military takeover in February 2021 and the subsequent reduction of all national and
international support for community development and poverty reduction efforts. According to an update by
the World Bank and UNHCR in 2022, indications are that poverty has dramatically increased since the
military takeover and more than a million additional people have been displaced within the country because
of the on-going internal conflict between the military and various armed resistance movements. On the other
hand, the small and widely dispersed nature of the investments supported under the project makes them less
vulnerable to destruction and more likely to be maintained by local communities’ operation and maintenance
committees. The 2018 technical audit found that 75 percent of these committees had established user-fee
collection systems and O&M activities were fully supported by villagers in most villages without inputs from
government or line ministries. Furthermore, the enhanced village-level capacities for collective decision
making, sub-project planning, etc., are likely to aid community resilience in responding to adversity and
overcoming development challenges. The value of these soft skills was noted in a 2021 independent
evaluation of the project, which found that supported villages were better able to address the difficulties of
the COVID-19 pandemic than non-supported villages. Lastly, the ICR noted that based on the project’s
publicly available online MIS, the DRD has continued to support the project activities post-military takeover
(ICR, para. 94).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was the first World Bank engagement with Myanmar after more than 25 years. Being an
  emergency project, it was prepared within four months. The ICR noted that this was possible in part due
  to mobilization of a group of multi-disciplinary experts, several of whom had previous experience in
  Myanmar, to ensure a suitable design and effective dialogue with government counterparts. The team
  drew heavily on World Bank specialists with extensive experience in FCV contexts (both as team
  members and informal advisors to the preparation) and engaged widely with a host of UN and other
  partners with much greater experience and knowledge of the country context at the time. The project was
  designed as a six-year operation-- longer than typical emergency operations—to allow for flexibility and

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Myanmar NCCDP (P132500)



  adaptation, given the ‘newness’ of the World Banks’ reengagement with Myanmar and lack of good data
  on conditions in the field and institutional capacities. There were no conditions of effectiveness and the
  preparation and adoption of the Project Operations Manual (POM) was the only condition of
  disbursement, allowing government to access funding retroactively immediately after the project signing
  to start-up activities and engage technical consultants (ICR, para. 90).

  The key risks identified at appraisal included engaging with a new government in a transitional phase
  following a long history of military-dominated central control structures; fragility of reform processes;
  continued conflict in some areas and a resumption of conflict in ceasefire areas; the uncertain operating
  environment in rural areas; high community expectations leading to possible frustration and
  disillusionment; and low government institutional and technical capacity. Mitigation measures to address
  them were extensive institutional support to DRD through technical assistance with particular attention to
  governance, safeguards, and fiduciary issues; emphasizing community participation to help address
  expectations and capacity constraints; and reinforcing feedback loops through simple M&E
  arrangements, social audits, a grievance mechanism and the multi-stakeholder review to learn lessons
  and adapt.

  Based on the above, quality at entry rating is satisfactory.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Based on the ICR, the World Bank conducted regular supervision missions to ensure close coordination
 and guidance (i.e.18 in-person and 4 virtual implementation support missions from 2013-2020, almost
 three per year on average). The ICR also noted that the aide memoires had sufficient details and provided
 clear directions on next steps. The Bank worked closely with the implementing agency and reviewed and
 provided adequate implementation guidance and captured key issues in Implementation Status and
 Results Reports (ISRs). Key World Bank staff such as the project’s Task Team Leader (TTL) or co-TTL as
 well as key implementation and support staff including specialists in safeguards, procurement, M&E and
 conflict resolution were based in the country during implementation, which allowed for continued close
 support to DRD and sustained engagement with UN and civil society partners. Furthermore, the World
 Bank was timely in conducting two mid-term reviews that informed the restructuring of the project to
 address changes in project implementation and to mobilize significant additional funding to scale up its
 development impact. The World Bank also mobilized additional resources (State and Peacebuilding Fund,
 Korean Trust Fund for Economic and Peace-building Transitions, Bank Executed Myanmar Partnership
 MDTF) to support analytical and advisory work and south-south knowledge exchanges aimed to enhance
 the performance of the NCDDP and DRD staff. Additional efforts to build up team leadership skills among
 the national task team members have helped to enhance implementation especially given the downsizing
 of the World Bank office in Myanmar post COVID and the military-takeover. In retrospect, considering the
 military takeover, the World Bank could have done more to support the further development of task



                                                                                                   Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Myanmar NCCDP (P132500)



 management skills among the national team to help transition over the responsibility of task management
 post-takeover (ICR, para. 91-92.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design mostly focused on outputs and processes rather than outcomes. The PDO level Indicators
 and Intermediate Result Indicators were simple yet relevant and aligned with the PDOs. An MIS was
 designed to quickly capture information to be able to identify and adapt to emerging trends. In addition,
 social audits and annual process reviews (multi-stakeholder reviews) were included in the design to collect
 additional qualitative or process data that could quickly be applied to adjusting project implementation
 arrangements. Periodic progress reports (quarterly, mid-term and completion) were to be prepared by DRD
 with information gathered from the township offices and the MIS system. With the scaling up of the project,
 a specific assessment was carried out to determine the feasibility of a robust impact evaluation and advised
 against such an approach due to the following: i) selecting a representative control group of non-project
 townships was problematic given the lack of accurate pre-project township data; ii) there was no prior
 household survey instrument available from 2013-2015; and iii) the sample size required to generate
 sufficient power to identify project impacts was prohibitively large and therefore expensive. Given the
 unique nature of CDD operations, this decision was well conceived.

 However, it would be important for such a large-scale project to monitor the project’s contributions to
 livelihood improvements and reduction in poverty levels for the supported households. Furthermore, the
 ICR noted that although there was an emphasis on ensuring women’s participation in all sub-project
 activities, the results framework included only one output level gender disaggregated measure. Additional,
 higher level gender results measures could have further highlighted important project outcomes (ICR, para.
 78).

 There were only minor adjustments (through project restructurings) to the results framework that included
 increases in certain targets to reflect the project expansion under the AF. There was also the addition of a
 PDO-level indicator, to distinguish total project beneficiaries from those beneficiaries who had direct access
 to the infrastructure and services provided through the sub-projects.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR reported that despite the initial challenges in staffing and setting up the MIS platform, thus
  delays in data collection and progress reporting, by 2018 the MIS was providing real-time access to
  implementation progress information that was made publicly available with GIS-tagged sub-project data.

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Myanmar NCCDP (P132500)



  Annual social audits were conducted by community facilitators in each participating village, informing the
  annual township, region/state, and Union MSRs. Nonetheless, according to the January 2021 World
  Bank aide memoire, challenges persisted in relation to the timely submission of M&E reports, data
  consistency and overall quality of reports partly due to increased workload from the CERC activities and
  DRD staffing shortfalls. Nevertheless, the 2020 SIE provided robust outcome evidence that
  complemented the more output-oriented results framework, including participation rates in the planning
  process, access, and utilization of NCDDP sub-projects, and levels of social cohesion. The World Bank
  also conducted three studies that augmented MIS data and helped the government take action on
  specific project implementation areas (technical audit of sub-projects (2016), technical and financial audit
  of sub-projects (2018), and (iii) review of project in conflict-affected contexts (2020)) (ICR, para. 79-80).



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data were utilized to inform progress reports and decisions on various issues, including
  improvements to project processes. M&E information was used in results monitoring meetings at the
  local, community and national level, annual multi-stakeholder meetings and social audits, technical
  audits, financial audits, and thematic studies on local governance and conflict reviews. All contributed to
  regular and constant assessment of project performance and allowed for the timely identification of
  problems as well as the identification of good practices and early achievements of the project. The MIS
  was available online for anyone to access, with continuous improvements to the system, to ensure that
  better information was readily available (GIS information and location of project activities). The
  information also informed restructurings, mission planning and overall project implementation.

  Overall M&E is rated Substantial on balance, the M&E design was agile and relevant, the M&E
  implementation arrangements were in general well executed, and the data collected were utilized to
  inform timely management decision-making throughout project implementation. Also, the World Bank
  support—undertook several critical studies to augment the MIS data. However, it would have been
  useful to collect data on project contributions on livelihoods and poverty as well as gender aspects.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category B (Partial Assessment) on safeguards given the small-scale and
   dispersed nature of the project’s civil works, with anticipated local and temporary adverse environmental
   and social impacts that could be easily avoided or mitigated. Three safeguard policies were triggered:
   Environmental Assessment (EA) (OP/BP 4.01); Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10); and Involuntary
   Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) (because of the possibility that minor land acquisition would be required for
   some sub-projects). The government developed an Environmental and Social Screening Assessment
   Framework (ESSAF), allowed for Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies (OP 8.00), as the principal
   safeguards instrument, which was disclosed on October 15, 2012, both in-country and by the World Bank
   Infoshop. Two Environmental Codes of Practice (ECoP) were prepared and disclosed; one at the

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Myanmar NCCDP (P132500)



  community level the other at the sub-project level and when the environmental screening determined that
  the ECoPs were insufficient to mitigate environmental risks, an Environment Management Plan was
  prepared and disclosed. Additional safeguard policies were subsequently included through 2015 AF, which
  are Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) and International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) (as some sub-projects
  included activities on tributaries to the Ayeyarwady River); and the ESSAF was converted into an
  Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), serving as the primary safeguards document
  for all activities financed subsequently. The ESMF was publicly disclosed in-country and by the InfoShop in
  English and Myanmar on April 6, 2015. The 2018 restructuring triggered Physical and Cultural Resources
  (OP/BP 4.11) because the project was operating in areas with some cultural significance, and the ESMF
  was updated to include these safeguards (ICR para.83-84).

  According to the ICR, the project was compliant with all relevant requirements of the triggered safeguards
  policies (ICR, para.85). ISR’s safeguard ratings were satisfactory the last two years before military
  takeover. In addition, DRD successfully developed and operationalized a Grievance Handling Mechanism
  (GHM). The GHM was a new form of accountability and transparency that had not been utilized to this scale
  and size before in the country. As of June 2020, cumulatively, the project had received almost 29,300
  entries through the GHM, and the response time ranged from four to 14 days. Approximately 3 percent of
  the grievances received were core grievances (on violation of project policy or procedure, violation of
  contract, misuse of funds, etc.) and 97 percent of the grievances were non-core (of which 51 percent were
  notes of appreciation). DRD integrated the GHM into its organizational structure at all levels and used it for
  its other programs such as water and sanitation (ICR, para. 86).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management. The ICR reported that the project was compliant with the World Bank FM policies
  and procedures and all financial reporting and audit requirements of the Financing Agreement. FM reports
  submitted to the World Bank were acceptable; however, their timeliness was inconsistent, sometimes due
  to external factors. As of September 2020, there were no overdue financial reports or audits, and all audits
  were unqualified (ICR, para. 87). The FM rating was Moderately Satisfactory at project closing.

  Procurement. According to the ICR, the project was compliant with the World Bank procurement policies
  and procedures. By the time of the AF in 2015, the government had become familiar with the World Bank’s
  procurement requirements, a procurement plan was updated annually or as required to reflect project
  needs. However, due to the evolving nature of the national procurement laws and relatively limited
  experience on international tenders within Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Finance, some of the more
  complex international procurements were delayed. Annual procurement review exercises addressed any
  emergent procurement issues, all of which were addressed adequately (ICR, para. 88). The procurement
  rating was Satisfactory at project closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  There were no unintended impacts.



                                                                                                  Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Myanmar NCCDP (P132500)




d. Other
   Gender: The ICR noted that although there was an emphasis on ensuring women’s participation in all sub-
   project activities, the results framework included only one output level gender disaggregated measure.
   Additional, higher level gender results measures could have further highlighted important project outcomes
   (ICR, para. 78).



11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR formulated several useful lessons. The most relevant ones, with IEG’s modification, are as
follows:

Sound donor coordination under one program through a common platform can be an
effective way to achieve positive results on community driven development projects,
particularly in FCV environments. The project established a common platform for CDD that other
development partners could buy into. The NCDDP was able to bring together the UK, Italy and
Japan in an on-budget government program by providing quality assurances and building effective
implementation systems that made the project the largest donor-supported government program in
the country. Given the highly fragmented donor landscape and low government capacity in Myanmar
at the time of project preparation, this was a notable accomplishment.

CDD projects designed in FCV contexts may benefit from working with independent
facilitating partners (FPs) to support project implementation, where they serve a dual
purpose of augmenting government capacity and providing a more neutral or trusted
interlocutor for community engagement. In the case of Myanmar, where there was little
government experience and visibility with communities and local development and limited capacity
outside of the implementing department’s national office, working with FPs proved invaluable in
getting the project up and running at scale relatively quickly. The NCDDP also provides helpful
lessons on output-based contracting of such FPs (to help reassure governments that they are
getting value for money for these larger service contracts) and partnership arrangements between
government and FPs that helped to enhance project implementation processes further. A corollary to
this lesson is the importance of investing in government capacity to both oversee the delivery of
services by such key FPs and to take on key functions over time as appropriate.


                                                                                                Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Myanmar NCCDP (P132500)



Specific conflict mitigation mechanisms and approaches are necessary for working in
conflict contexts, particularly in those areas where control is contested between the state
and non-state actors. The NCDDP used a range of approaches that proved successful, these
included: i) conducting a conflict assessment prior to the final selection of participating townships; ii)
early up-front and ongoing engagements with non-state political actors in these areas where work is
planned; iii) recruitment of local staff for community facilitator roles to ensure local knowledge
(including language and culture) and networks are integrated in project implementation; iv) conflict
sensitivity training for local government and community-based project staff; and v) allowing time and
opportunities to build trust between the government and the EAOs, which in the NCDDP happened
by allowing certain areas of the township (villages or village tracts) to opt out of participation for a
number of years until EAOs gained confidence in the value of the project. These approaches
enabled project access to areas restricted to other government programs. When security challenges
emerged, the project responded flexibly by suspending and, where possible, resuming actions to
ensure the safety of project stakeholders.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is candid and provides a detailed overview of the project. Given the weaknesses in the project’s
results framework, the ICR provides substantiated additional evidence to the extent possible and includes the
details of the social inclusion evaluation details as part of the report’s annex. The report is internally consistent
with logical linking and integration of various sections of the report. While the theory of change informs the
reader as to how the ratings have been reached, Including basic details on the contribution to improved
livelihoods and reduced poverty levels would be useful in illustrating what difference these investments make to
the communities. The entries in the “Lessons and Recommendations” are based on specific experiences of the
project; however, they are mostly in the form of findings rather than lessons. Overall, the quality of the ICR is
rated substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                       Page 19 of 20
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Myanmar NCCDP (P132500)




                                                                  Page 20 of 20
