     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023586

1. Program Information



 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 Senegal                                   Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                         Approved Operations
 0                                          0

 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P159023                                    Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series




 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-60970                                 15-Dec-2018                                          64,683,180.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Jun-2017                               15-Dec-2018
                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                            60,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                             60,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                         64,683,180.00                                             0.00




P164525_TBL
 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 Senegal                                   Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P164525                                   Second Multisectoral Structural Reform ( P164525 )




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 32
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-60970,IDA-63570                       31-Dec-2019                                          180063320.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 14-Dec-2018                               31-Dec-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                          180,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           180,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                       180,063,320.00                                              0.00



 P170366_TBL
 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 Senegal                                   Energy & Extractives

 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P170366                                   Third MultiSectoral Struct Reform DPF ( P170366 )


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-63570,IDA-65280,IDA-66810,IDA-        31-Dec-2020                                          282379822.31
 D6510

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Dec-2019                               17-Jun-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                          280,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           279,824,645.17                                              0.00

 Actual                                       282,379,822.31                                              0.00



 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Antonio M. Ollero          Jeffrey Allen Chelsky        Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas

                                                                                                 Page 2 of 32
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)



EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

According to the Program Document (page vii) of the first of the three-operation Republic of Senegal Multi-
Sectoral Structural Reforms Development Policy Financing, the program development objective of the
programmatic series was "to support [the] Government’s efforts in: (i) strengthening the governance and
management of the energy sector to reduce costs, improve reliability, and facilitate equitable access; and
(ii) enhancing the legal and regulatory framework of the Information and Communication Technology (ICT) sector
to promote competition, investment, and equitable access." The Program Document (page 4) of the second
operation added "... and (iii) reinforcing policy, institutional, and financial foundations of the emerging digital
economy."

This ICR Review assesses the program development objective (PDOs) as:

      PDO1: To strengthen the governance and management of the energy sector to reduce costs, improve
       reliability, and facilitate equitable access.
      PDO2: To enhance the legal and regulatory framework of the information and communications
       technology sector to promote competition, investment, and equitable access.
      PDO3: To reinforce the policy, institutional, and financial foundations of the emerging digital economy.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The program had three policy pillars.

Strengthening the Governance and Management of the Energy Sector supported reforms to: (a) improve the
corporate governance of the national electric utility, Société Nationale d'Electricité du Sénégal (SENELEC); (b)
improve the financial performance of SENELEC, focused on cross-debt and arrears clearance between
SENELEC and the Government and on tariff adjustments authorized the industry regulator Commission de
Régulation du Secteur de d’Electricité (CRSE); (c) remove barriers to private investment and industry
competition; and (d) facilitate equitable access aimed at rural areas.

Enhancing the Legal and Regulatory Framework for the Information and Communications Technology
(ICT) Sector supported reforms to: (a) improve the legal and regulatory framework for the ICT sector;
(b) remove barriers to competition and investment in the Internet broadband market, and (c) facilitate equitable
access to ICT services.

Reinforcing the Policy, Institutional, and Financial Foundations of the Emerging Digital Economy
supported reforms to: (a) enhance the legal, regulatory, and institutional framework for the digital economy;
(b) strengthen the roll out of e-Government solutions to accelerate the adoption and use of online and mobile tax
filing and tax payment methods; and (c) improve the ecosystem for start-ups by addressing key policy gaps and
regulatory constraints.




c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 32
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)




Program Cost and Financing. The total program cost was estimated at US$520 million, was financed by
credits and grants from the International Development Association (IDA) to the Republic of Senegal of Euro
(EUR) 405.7 million and Special Drawing Rights (SDR) 36.6 million, for which the final disbursed amount was
US$527.1 million.

      The first operation was estimated to cost US$60 million, was financed by an IDA credit of EUR 54.9
         million, for which the final disbursed amount was US$64.7 million.
      The second operation was estimated to cost US$180 million, was financed by an IDA credit of EUR
         158.8 million, for which the final disbursed amount was US$180.1 million.
      The third operation was originally estimated to cost US$180 million and was financed by an IDA credit of
         EUR146 million. A supplemental financing for the third operation of US$100 million was extended to
         help the Government cover an unanticipated financing gap due to the socioeconomic fallout of the
         COVID-19 pandemic and was financed by an IDA credit of EUR 46 million and an IDA grant of
         SDR 36.6 million. The final disbursed amount for the third operation, including the supplemental
         financing, was US$282.4 million.

Dates.

      The first operation was approved on June 30, 2017, became effective on September 15, 2017, and
       closed as scheduled on December 15, 2018.
      The second operation was approved on December 14, 2018, became effective on February 14, 2019,
       and closed as scheduled on December 15, 2019.
      The third operation was approved on December 18, 2019, became effective on December 19, 2019, and
       closed on June 17, 2021, half a year after the original closing date of December 31, 2020.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Binding Constraints to Development. The project development objectives were relevant to addressing the
 binding constraints to development faced by Senegal. The Systematic Country Diagnostic of Senegal (SCD)
 identified four main constraints to achieving inclusive growth and equity: the lack of level playing field in
 the private sector, limited accessibility and affordability of land and energy, inequality and inefficiency of
 social public policies and expenditures, and rigidity and high cost in the labor market. The binding constraints
 were manifest across a broad range of sectors:

       Energy and Electricity. Energy supply was unreliable and electricity was costly: (a) the Government
          lacked a credible and consistent strategy to expand generation capacity in line with demand; (b)
          despite recent improvements, SENELEC's finances remained burdened by high production costs,
          large technical and commercial losses, and a buildup of cross-debt and arrears with the Government;
          (c) although the electricity regulator, CRSE, performed its core functions relatively well,
          it lacked sufficient capacity and autonomy to address a range of sector regulatory challenges; and
          (d) the goal in rural electrification to achieve universal access by 2025 was hampered by a lack
          of clarity on financing mechanisms, uncertainty about the institutional set-up of the private concession


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)



       model, and weaknesses in the operational effectiveness of the Agence Sénégalaise d'Electrification
       Rurale (ASER).
      ICT and the Digital Economy, The development of the telecommunications and broadband industries
       was held back by a lack of market competition and by restrictive regulations: (a) the dominant position
       of the incumbent telecommunications operator skewed market competition; (b) telecommunications
       regulations were "relative restrictive" compared those in to peer countries (using the metrics of
       the OECD - Regulation in Network and Service Sectors); (c) the implementation of new Digital
       Strategy aimed at addressing policy and institutional shortcomings was slow and uneven, dragged
       down by policy inconsistency among public agencies; and (d) vested interests continued to derail the
       reforms, with the main agencies more keen on maximizing revenue rather than expanding access to
       services.

Country Priorities. The DPF series was consistent with the country's development priorities.

      The Plan Sénégal Emergent 2014-2035 (PSE), the country's framework plan for structural
       transformation (to an "emerging economy" status) over the medium- to long-term, advanced three
       strategic pillars: "Growth and the structural transformation of the economy," "Promotion of human
       capital, social protection, and social development," and "Good governance, institutions, peace and
       security." On energy and electricity, the PSE supported a shift toward lower-cost sources of energy
       and efficiency reforms at SENELEC in response to high production costs across the economy using
       oil-based fuels, continued compensation from the government to maintain user tariffs, and
       large explicit and implicit subsidies amid the inability of SENELEC to pay taxes on imported inputs
       and to repay the government-guaranteed commercial debt incurred to finance negative cash-flow at
       the utility. On ICT, the PSE contended that development of the telecommunications and information
       technology infrastructure would allow Senegal to become a regional leader in the sector and promote
       value-added growth from cross-sectoral impacts. However, poor access to telecommunications
       services, the high cost of Internet services, and the persistent digital divide between urban and rural
       areas limited the development of digital public and private applications deemed critical drivers of
       future growth.
      The Sénégal Numérique 2025 (SN2025), the country's vision document for the digital economy and
       developed as part of the implementation of the PSE with support from this operation, proposed
       modernizing the digital economy based on open and affordable access to digital services, the
       promotion of digital industry innovation and value-creation, and the diffusion of digital
       technologies across priority economic sectors. The SN2025 supported raising the contribution of
       digital technologies to GDP by 10 per cent and creating 35,000 direct jobs by 2025.

Bank Group Strategy. The project development objective was aligned with the Bank Group strategy
in Senegal at appraisal and at closing.

      The Country Partnership Strategy (2013-2017) for the Republic of Senegal (CPS) committed Bank
       Group support for the country’s development priorities focused on two pillars: “Accelerating inclusive
       growth and creating jobs” and “Improving service delivery”. The project objectives were aligned
       with CPS pillars.
      The Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Senegal for the Period FY20-FY24
       (CPF) committed Bank Group support for the country’s development priorities organized around
       three focus areas: “Build human capital to enhance productivity and ignite the demographic
       dividend”, “Boost competitiveness and job creation through private sector-led growth”, and “Increase


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 32
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)



        resilience and sustainability in the context of growing risks.” The project objectives were aligned with
        the second and third CPF focus areas.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Table 1: Prior Actions (PAs) of the Senegal Structural Reform Development Policy Operation

 DPF1                                DPF2                               DPF3
 Objective 1 - To strengthen the governance and management of the energy sector to reduce
 costs, improve reliability, and facilitate equitable access
 Governance:
                                                                        PA4: To enhance transparency in
                                                                        the electricity sector, the
 PA1: In order to improve the                                           Recipient’s Ministry of Petroleum
                                     PA3: To further strengthen
 management of SENELEC, the                                             and Energy has
                                     SENELEC’s governance,
 Government has entered with                                            instructed SENELEC to
                                     the Recipient has established,
 SENELEC into a                                                         reorganize,
                                     for SENELEC’s independent
 focused Performance Contract,                                          through the creation of: (i) the
                                     Board members, their profiles,
 which includes a monitoring                                            SENELEC holding company; (ii)
                                     reflecting competences in private
 and corrective mechanism, and                                          separate subsidiaries for the
                                     sector management and auditing,
 incorporates a                                                         generation, transmission, and
                                     as well as the procedures for
 functional performance incentive                                       distribution of electricity; and (iii) a
                                     their selection and appointment.
 system.                                                                subsidiary associated with
                                                                        the natural gas segment to carry
                                                                        out a gas aggregator role.
 PA2: In order to enable
 the board of directors of SENELEC
 to better perform its corporate
 governance role, (i) SENELEC’s
 General Assembly has adopted the
 modifications to SENELEC’s
 statutes to ensure compliance with
 Article 416 of the OHADA Revised
 Uniform Act of 2014, allowing
 the appointment of directors to
 its board of directors that are not
 shareholders, and (ii) SENELEC's
 Board of Directors has established
 technical and financial committees.
 Finance:
 PA5: In order to sustainably        PA6: To further strengthen the     PA7: Under a detailed financial
 resolve the sector issues on cross financial viability of SENELEC, the plan for the electricity sector that
 debt and financial arrears (i) the  Recipient: (i) through its         includes payment of public sector
 Government has entered with         MEFP, has agreed to settle         arrears and coverage of funds

                                                                                                        Page 6 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)



SENELEC into a cross-debt and         its arrears to SENELEC in terms needed by SENELEC for tariff
arrears clearance agreement           of tariff compensation and          compensation, (i) the Recipient’s
covering the period August 2012 - electricity bills for fiscal years 2017 Ministry of Petroleum and Energy
February 2016, (ii) the Government and 2018 through                       has requested the CRSE and the
has agreed to pay SENELEC’s           additional funding for tariffs      CRSE has agreed to modify the
2017 VAT credits within               compensation in its 2018 budget, maximum allowed
the statutory three months while and the issuance of a promissory revenue tariff formula to
SENELEC has agreed to honor           note to SENELEC for the             include an ex-post adjustment of
100 percent of its tax commitments remaining amount of arrears which actual investment achievements;
by 2019; and (iii) the Minister of    first repayment instalment has      (ii) the Recipient has modified the
Finance has issued a circular         been included in the 2019 Draft     decree (décret sur le fonds de
instructing all central government Budget Law submitted                   préférence pour la compensation
autonomous institutions and           to Parliament; (ii) has made        tarifaire des concessionnaires de
entities to include in their yearly   the payment of EPAFs'               l’électrification rurale) to apply a
budgets separate allocations for      electricity expenditures to the     "passthrough"
covering electricity and water bills. service providers mandatory, and element corresponding to the
                                      (iii) has streamlined the           shortfall for rural concessionaires
                                      processing of SENELEC’s VAT         as a result of tariff harmonization;
                                      refund applications.                and (iii) the CRSE has increased
                                                                          the level of tariffs.
Competition and Investment:
PA8: In order to diversify the                                            PA10: To enable development of
                                      PA9: To accelerate the
country energy mix towards less                                           the gas-to-power strategy,
                                      diversification of the
expensive sources including                                               the Recipient’s Council of
                                      Recipient’s energy mix towards
renewables, the Council                                                   Ministers has adopted and
                                      less expensive and cleaner
of Ministers has approved                                                 submitted to
                                      technologies, the Recipient’s
a strategic master plan                                                   the National Assembly the draft
                                      Council of Ministers, has approved
for electricity generation setting                                        gas law, which provides for
                                      and published a national strategy
forth the Government’s priorities in                                      planning, regulation
                                      describing the key features of its
energy diversification and private                                        and institutional arrangements
                                      institutional and legal framework
sector participation in power                                             for the gas subsectors in
                                      for midstream and downstream
generation, including related                                             their midstream and
                                      gas subsectors.
project development modalities.                                           downstream segments.
                                                                          PA11: To enable development of
                                                                          the gas-to-power Strategy: (i)
                                                                          PETROSEN has formed a
                                                                          company (special purpose
                                                                          vehicle) that will build and operate
                                                                          the gas transportation system; (ii)
                                                                          the Council of Ministers has
                                                                          discussed the gas-to-power
                                                                          implementation plan and the
                                                                          Recipient’s Ministry of Petroleum
                                                                          and Energy has published on its
                                                                          website the main points of
                                                                          implementation, notably the
                                                                          percentage of
                                                                          private/public ownership of the

                                                                                                      Page 7 of 32
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)



                                                              company, identified PETROSEN
                                                              as the principal public institution
                                                              that will hold the public sector’s
                                                              participation in the company;
                                                              and the decision on the source of
                                                              gas; and (iii) the Recipient’s
                                                              Ministry of Petroleum and Energy
                                                              has approved an updated
                                                              electricity masterplan to fully
                                                              integrate
                                                              planned use of gas generation
                                                              and
                                                              including renewables forming
                                                              at least 29 percent of the energy
                                                              mix in 2025.
Access:
PA12: In order to improve
access to affordable electricity
services in rural areas, the Minister
of Energy has instructed the
electricity national regulator to
lower rural concessions’ electricity
user tariffs to SENELEC’s
national tariffs.
Objective 2 - To enhance the legal and regulatory framework of the information and
communications technology sector to promote competition, investment, and equitable access
Governance:
                                       PA14: To strengthen the ICT’s
PA13: The Council of Ministers has
                                       overall legal and institutional
adopted the National Strategy for
                                       framework, the Recipient: (i) has
the digital economy Sénégal
                                       submitted to the National
Numérique 2025 providing policy
                                       Assembly the Draft Electronic
basis for increased open market
                                       Communications Act in line
access to new service providers in
                                       with the Sénégal Numérique
the telecommunications sector in
                                       2025 Strategy; and (ii) has
line with international
                                       established the Conseil National
best practices.
                                       du Numérique.
Competition and Investment:
PA15: In order to facilitate the entry PA18: To strengthen competition
of a wider range of internet service in the ICT market, the ARTP has
providers (ISP) into the retail        adopted: (i) a decision listing the
internet broadband segment,            relevant markets for market
the Government has: (i) enacted        dominance in the ICT sector; and
the                                    (ii) a decision listing the dominant
amendments to Articles 29 to 32 of operators and
the Telecom Law No 2011-01 of          their respective obligations in
February 24, 2011, providing that the relevant markets.

                                                                                         Page 8 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)



ISPs are subject to the lighter and
less
expensive general “authorization”
regime instead of the
“licensing” regime, and are allowed
to deploy and operate their own
infrastructure; (ii) issued an
implementation decree of the
amended Articles 29 to 32 of the
Telecom Law No 2011-01 of
February 24, 2011, which includes
a provision
converting already attributed ISP
licenses into authorizations.
                                      PA19: To strengthen
                                      the competition in the broadband
                                      market, the ARTP has published
PA16: In order to increase            on its website, the standard
competition in the wholesale          model and guidelines to be used
internet broadband segment, the for: (i) granting of internet
Government has adopted and            service providers authorizations
implemented a decree specifying which contain only limited
the rules for granting authorizations and reasonable restrictions to
to wholesale                          internet service provision and
telecommunications infrastructure. geographic coverage; and (ii)
                                      granting of authorizations to
                                      wholesale telecom infrastructure
                                      operators.
PA17: With a view to reduce
infrastructure roll-out costs for
                                      PA20: To strengthen the
telecom operators, the Government
                                      competition in the 4G market, the
has adopted and implemented a
                                      Recipient, through its MPTEN, has
decree clarifying the technical and
                                      established a committee
financial rules for infrastructure
                                      to engage in negotiations
sharing among telecommunication
                                      with interested mobile operators
operators in accordance with
                                      for the provisions of 4G
Articles 10 and 25 of the Telecom
                                      telecom services.
law no 2011-01 of February 24,
2011.
Access:
                                                                          PA21: To activate the Universal
                                                                          Service Fund pursuant to the
                                                                          Universal Service Decree,
                                                                          the Recipient has: (i) established
                                                                          the new governance bodies
                                                                          namely a strategic committee and
                                                                          a fund coordinator; (ii) adopted


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)



                                                                       the Universal Service strategy’s
                                                                       action plan with a focus on closing
                                                                       the digital divide and gender gap
                                                                       in women’s access to Internet;
                                                                       and (iii) had its first consultation
                                                                       with private operators to cover
                                                                       rural areas.
                                                                       PA22: To promote open access to
                                                                       ADIE’s fiber optic network, the
                                                                       Recipient has published a
                                                                       competitive tender process (avis
                                                                       d’appel à préqualification) to
                                                                       select a private concessionaire to
                                                                       operate and expand said network
                                                                       in the Recipient’s territory.
Objective 3 - To reinforce the policy, institutional, and financial foundations of the
emerging digital economy
e-Government Solutions:
                                                                       PA25: To enhance efficiency
                                                                       and transparency of e-government
                                   PA23: To generalize online tax      services, reduce compliance costs
                                   and customs mandatory               for taxpayers and
                                   threshold for the use of electronic strengthen domestic resource
                                   filing from FCFA 500 million        mobilization, the Recipient’s MoF
                                   to FCFA 100 million of              has: (i) operationalized digital
                                   annual turnover to ensure           consultation of taxes (through the
                                   coverage of all medium-sized        MoF’s personalized taxpayer
                                   companies in the e-tax platform in webpage, "my personal
                                   2019; and (ii) established the      space"), which covers at least 10
                                   threshold of FCFA 50 million for percent of eligible taxpayers; and
                                   the mandatory online payment of (ii) operationalized a risk-based
                                   customs duties and fees.            audit selection system,
                                                                       which encompasses at least 50
                                                                       percent of relevant verifications.
                                   PA24: To harmonize and
                                   expand the use of digital payment
                                   options, the MFB has: (i) updated
                                   and consolidated the
                                   rules governing digital
                                   payments received by the
                                   Recipient’s Treasury, Customs
                                   and Tax
                                   administrations; (ii) expanded the
                                   range of payment options
                                   to include mobile money,
                                   payment by cards, as well as
                                   payment service aggregators,


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)



                                    among others; and (iii) established
                                    an
                                    open selection process
                                    for providers of digital
                                    payment services and defined
                                    the modalities for
                                    interoperability, data security, and
                                    protection of personal data
                                    applying to such services.
Startup Ecosystem:
                                                                           DPF3-PA10: To create a business
                                                                           environment conducive to
                                                                           entrepreneurship and innovation,
                                                                           the Recipient’s Council
                                                                           of Ministers has adopted
                                                                           and submitted to the
                                                                           National Assembly: (i) a draft law
                                                                           on the creation and promotion
                                                                           of startups in Senegal; and
                                                                           (ii) amendments to the General
                                                                           Tax Code to streamline MSME
                                                                           taxation through the draft finance
                                                                           law 2020.

Objective 1 - To strengthen the governance and management of the energy sector to reduce costs,
improve reliability, and facilitate equitable access.

Although Senegal had better access to electricity than other states in the Sub Saharan Africa region (57
percent of households nationally in 2016, compared to 26 percent in Guinea and in Malawi), electricity
remained problematic as demand increased by 40 percent in 2010-2016 while installed capacity rose only 30
percent: (a) dependent on imported heavy fuel oil and diesel, electricity was expensive – the average cost to
the consumer was US$0.19 per kilowatt-hour (KWh) in 2016, compared to US$0.09 per KWh in Nigeria
(natural gas), US$0.11 per KWh in Ghana (mix of natural gas and hydropower), US$0.13 per KWh in Côte
d’Ivoire (mix of natural gas and hydropower), and US$0.10 per KWh globally; (b) supply was unreliable –
 outages averaged six a month at 1.8 hours, while overall losses and unserved energy (a proxy for blackouts
and brownouts) averaged 19 percent or 30.2 GWh in 2016, compared to the utility’s and the government’s
target of 17 percent or 10 GWh; and (c) access remained limited in rural areas – rural access was low at 29
percent, hindered by inadequate infrastructure and high tariffs. This programmatic series supported reforms
in four areas to reduce costs, improve reliability, and facilitate equitable access – corporate governance,
financial arrangements, industry competition and investment, and rural access.

Governance. Owning half of the country’s total generation capacity, the state-owned SENELEC monopolized
generation, transmission, and distribution (four independent power producers owning the other half
sold generation exclusively to SENELEC). Meanwhile, sector policy was overseen by the Ministry of Energy
and Development of Renewable Energies while regulation was exercised by the independent Commission de
Régulation du Secteur de d’Electricité (CRSE), responsible for determining the tariff structure, approving the
sector revenue plans, and monitoring the performance of concession contracts. Weaknesses in corporate
governance at SENELEC and gaps in the regulatory capacity of CSRE were long-standing problems: (a) the

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)



SENELEC Board struggled to assert a substantive strategic and oversight role in the firm; (b) decision
making at the firm was fragmented, slow, and opaque; (c) company operations were hampered by
administrative dictates from the Ministry of Energy and the Ministry of Finance; and (d) the Ministry of
Energy and the CRSE lacked resources and tools to address sector challenges. These deficiencies with
corporate governance at SENELEC and with industrial regulation by the CRSE degraded the operational
efficiency and financial viability of energy production resulting in unreliable energy supply and higher energy
prices, according to the Program Documents.

      PA1: The new performance contract between the Government and SENELEC for 2017-2019
       corrected for the deficiencies of the old contract for 2013-2016, which lacked sanctions in the event of
       failure and relied on a multiplicity of indicators to measure performance. The new contract was more
       focused, offered incentives for good performance, exacted penalties for failure, and required the
       publication of an independent audit of contract implementation. Contract provisions were informed by
       studies produced by the Electricity Sector Support Project (2013-2022), including Institutional and
       Regulatory Sector Study, Organizational and Managerial Audit of SENELEC, Financial Diagnostic of
       SENELEC, and Institutional Audit of the CRSE, as well as various SENELEC Accounting Reports
       and Reports from the Independent Auditor on the Performance Contract. The new performance
       contract, if judiciously implemented, would improve the reliability of energy supply, a result which
       would be evidenced by a reduction in gigawatt hours that were lost by the generating system. The
       relevance of PA1 is rated Satisfactory.
      PA2: Two measures would help the board of directors at SENELEC to better perform their
       duties. First, the utility’s statutes were modified to comply with the Revised Uniform Act on
       Commercial Companies and Economic Interest Groups of 2014 of the Organisation pour
       l’Harmonisation en Afrique du Droit des Affaire (OHADA), which harmonized business law among 16
       treaty states in Africa (using principles inspired by French law). The amendments opened the
       SENELEC Board to independent (non-shareholder) directors and created technical and finance
       committees at the Board. Although aligning the SENELEC Board composition with OHADA norms
       would eventually strengthen the governance of the utility, the immediate impact of this measure on
       system reliability, energy costs, and consumer access would be indirect and difficult to quantify. The
       relevance of PA2 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.
      PA3: Second, following the amendments to the statutes, SENELEC appointed independent directors
       from private industry and consumer associations, using criteria defined for their appointment
       (focused on track records in managing large industrial companies, experience in the capital markets,
       and expertise with financial controls and auditing). As with PA2, the immediate impact of PA3 (which
       implemented PA2) on system reliability, energy costs, and consumer access would be indirect and
       difficult to quantify. The relevance of PA3 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.
      PA4: This prior action restructured SENELEC: (a) it created a holding company;
       (b) organized separate subsidiaries for electricity generation, transmission, and distribution; and (c)
       established a subsidiary for natural gas to function as gas aggregator midstream and
       downstream. These measures represented a substantive corporate restructuring: (a) the separation
       of generation, transmission, and distribution was necessary to better operate and manage the grid; (b)
       the unbundling of transmission would enable wheeling tariffs, reduce costs, and facilitate third-party
       access; (c) third-party access would facilitate regional trade (and enable Senegal to become a
       power export hub for the West African Power Pool); (d) the natural gas subsidiary, focused on gas
       aggregation (purchase/sale), separate from gas transportation, would be important to maintaining an
       unbundled value chain, with opportunities for competition in prices. The reforms were informed by
       Rethinking Power Sector Reforms (World Bank, 2019). According to the U.S. Oak Ridge National
       Laboratory (Kirby. Hirst, and Vancoevering, 1995, “Identification and Definition of Unbundled Electric

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)



       Generation and Distribution Services”), quoting economic analysis done for the Edison Electric
       Institute (Baumol, Joskow, and Kahn, 1994, “The Challenge for Federal and State Regulators:
       Transition from Regulation to Efficient Competition in Electric Power”), unbundling is linked
       competition, but in a conditional sense: “If we can successfully unbundle the transmission functions,
       identifying all the monopoly grid services now being provided, assigning clear property rights to the
       facilities that supply them, measuring what is supplied by who and to whom and properly pricing each,
       we can permit more thorough competition in generation without concern about its causing
       inefficiencies. If we are unable to do so, it is entirely possible that the efficiency benefits flowing from
       competitive generation could be entirely dissipated or indeed more than entirely offset by the
       deteriorated coordination between that sector and transmission.” The relevance of PA4 is rated
       Satisfactory.

Finance. SENELEC had made some headway addressing high production costs, large technical and
commercial losses, and cross-debt and arrears buildup with the Government but problems remained: (a)
transmission and distribution losses were trimmed from 21 percent of total dispatch in 2012 to 19 percent in
2015, but were still above the international benchmark of 10 percent; (b) substantial cross-debt and arrears,
amounting to around Central African CFA franc (FCFA) 160 billion (US$275 million equivalent), or 50
percent of 2015 revenue, were due among the central government, municipalities, other public entities, and
SENELEC – cross debt included unpaid local and central administration electricity bills, arrears on value
added tax (VAT) reimbursement to SENELEC, and unpaid taxes from SENELEC. The reform measures
supported by this operation focused on cross-debt and arrears clearance and on tariff adjustments in three
packages. Solutions to the cross-debt and arrears problem and the tariff adjustment problem would improve
SENELEC’s finances, allowing the utility to reduce the costs of energy supply.

      PA5: The first package involved: (a) cross-debt clearance for the period August 2012 – February 2016
       (in the amount of FCFA 90 million, with a remaining credit in favor of the Government of FCFA 70
       million); (b) payment by the Government of VAT credits to SENELEC for 2017, coupled by a
       commitment by SENELEC to honor tax commitments by 2019; and (c) an instruction from the
       Ministry of Finance to central government autonomous institutions (universities and hospitals) to
       include separate allocations for electricity and water bills in in their annual budgets (the defined
       budget allocations would prevent the reallocation these funds for other purposes). The relevance
       of PA5 is rated Satisfactory.
      PA6: The second package consisted of: (a) the settlement by the Government of arrears to
       SENELEC (tariff compensation and electricity bills) in the amount of FCFA 153 billion for 2017 and
       2018 through additional funding for tariff compensation in the amount of FCFA 28 billion in the 2018
       Budget and the issuance of a promissory note for the remaining amount of FCFA 125 billion; (b) the
       mandatory payment by public entities with financial autonomy of electricity expenditures to the
       service providers; and (c) the streamlining the processing of SENELEC’s VAT
       refund applications. The relevance of PA6 is rated Satisfactory.
      PA7: The third package involved: (a) a modification of the maximum allowed revenue tariff formula to
       include an ex-post adjustment for the difference between forecast and actual capital investments; (b)
       a modification of the decree governing the creation and organization of a preferential fund for energy
       to apply a “passthrough” element corresponding to the shortfall for rural concessionaires as a result
       of tariff harmonization; and (c) an increase in the level of tariffs Like the resolution of the cross-debt
       and arrears problem, a breakthrough with tariff adjustments would improve the financial position of
       SENELEC, allowing the utility to reduce the costs of energy supply. With tariff adjustments being
       politically difficult, the relevance of PA7 is rated Highly Satisfactory.


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)



Competition and Investment. To shift the energy mix from a heavy reliance on heavy fuel oil toward a mix of
low-carbon technologies (the “least cost power generation plan”) and thereby reduce the cost of power
generation – a reduction in dependency on heavy fuel oil from 90 percent in 2016 to 60 percent by 2021 and
1 percent by 2025 was envisioned to cut average electricity cost from US$0.19 per kilowatt hour (KWh) in
2016 to US$0.12 per KWh in 2025 – it was necessary to remove barriers to competition and investment in the
industry. New investment was needed to significantly reduce the cost of generation, which new investment
could only be generated if prospective investors were guaranteed a level playing field to enter the business.

      PA8: The strategic master plan for the electricity generation set the priorities for energy
       diversification, private sector participation, and project development modalities. The master plan
       would guide supply-side planning for the next 15 years, aiming to diversify power generation toward
       less costly sources (coal and natural gas) and renewable energies (hydropower, solar, and
       wind). Strategies and plans, however, are not ideal prior actions as they do not require
       implementation. The relevance of PA8 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.
      PA9: A gas-to-power strategy focused on the gas industry would guide the transition from heavy fuel
       oil to natural gas – a Bank study concluded that substituting imported heavy fuel oil with gas from
       indigenous sources would cut power costs by 30 percent. The strategy would clarify the legal,
       regulatory, and institutional framework for midstream and downstream gas management, provide a
       clear timeline for transition implementation, and lay out a conversion plan for existing heavy fuel oil
       plants. The national strategy would also define the key principles to govern the separation of gas
       commodity ownership from gas pipeline ownership, third party access to gas pipelines, competition in
       gas aggregation and supply, and competition in gas pipelines. Strategies and plans, however, are not
       ideal prior actions as they do not require implementation. The relevance of PA9 is rated Moderately
       Satisfactory.
      PA10: The draft Gas Law adopted by the Council of Ministers and submitted to Parliament defined
       the planning, regulation, and institutional arrangements for the gas industry in the midstream and
       downstream segments. By supplying the legal and regulatory framework to advance the gas-to-
       power program, the Gas Law was expected to encourage the private sector to undertake the needed
       investments for the shift toward lower cost and cleaner technologies, allow third-party access to the
       gas network, foster competition to supply gas in the downstream market, and enable the creation of a
       special purpose vehicle for gas pipeline activity. As the prior action did not require the enactment of
       the law, the relevance of PA10 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.
      PA11: To advance the implementation of the gas-to-power strategy, the state-owned petroleum
       company Societe Des Petroles Du Senegal (PETROSEN) formed a special purpose vehicle to
       build and operate the gas transportation system. With PETROSEN holding the public
       sector’s participation in the company, the special purpose vehicle would be pivotal to achieving the
       target for gas and renewables to form at least 29 percent of the energy mix by 2025. The rebalanced
       energy mix would lead to greater supply reliability and help reduce costs. The relevance of PA11 is
       rated Satisfactory.

Access. Senegal introduced a rural concession model in 2008 to attract private investors in areas not
covered by SENELEC. The results have not been encouraging, however. According to a consultant report
(Castalia Limited, 2015, “Evaluation of Rural Electrification Concessions in Sub-Saharan Africa: Detailed
Case Study – Senegal”) and additional analyses by the Bank, the concessions failed to achieve the
Government’s goals. At the end of 2015: (a) only six concession areas were tendered, out of a planned 10:
(b) only four started serving customers, with three operators enjoying monopolies in transmission and
distribution within their concession areas; (c) only 3,726 rural household subscribers were connected to a
service, versus a target of 106,600 households; (d) user tariffs and connection fees differed in contiguous

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)



areas (depending on whether the service was provided by SENELEC or a private concessionaire); (e) tariffs
charged by the private rural concessionaires were twice that by SENELEC; and (f) affordability hampered
achieving the objective of providing access to electricity in rural areas.

      PA12: To address the inability of the rural concessions to expand consumer access to electricity
       services, the national electricity regulator would lower electricity user tariffs in rural concessions to the
       level of national tariffs charged by SENELEC. A significant policy shift, tariff harmonization would
       address affordability and equity issues in rural areas, aiming to supply more affordable electricity
       services to consumers in these areas. The relevance of PA12 is rated Satisfactory.

Objective 2 – To enhance the legal and regulatory framework of the information and communications
technology sector to promote competition, investment, and equitable access.

Availability broadband services remained limited and access unequal despite the relatively well-developed
fiber infrastructure: (a) Senegal has a bandwidth of 23 gigabytes per second (Gb/s) through three submarine
cables and numerous satellite connections; (b) however, the mobile broadband penetration rate (in percent of
the population) was only 26 percent in 2017 – versus 76 percent in South Africa, 71 percent in Ghana, 68
percent in Cape Verde, 54 percent in Nigeria, and 43 percent in Côte d’Ivoire, according to the International
Telecommunications Union; (c) the country faced a persistent digital divide between urban and rural
areas, between main and secondary cities, and within cities; and (d) the gender digital gap was also wide,
with only 29 percent of women reporting using the Internet in 2017, compared to 43 percent of men.

Governance. The governance system and the regulatory environment were outdated, marred by
coordination failures and inconsistency in policy implementation: (a) Senegal had previously adopted the
legal norms of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and West African Economic and
Monetary Union (WAEMU) when it enacted the Telecommunications Code in 2011 (Law No. 2011-01 of
February 2011); (b) it amended the national law belatedly in 2017 (Law No. 2017-13 of January 2017)); (c)
however, until 2018, the Government had not developed the implementation decrees for the
Telecommunications Code of 2011, leaving the sector to operate under an incomplete legal framework for
almost a decade. The problem was exacerbated by a multiplicity of decision centers, rendering the
application of the law and the oversight of the industry largely erratic. The problem was compounded by
a difficult political economy and vested interests. Altogether, deficiencies with the governance and regulatory
capacity diminished competition, investment, and access to ICT services, according to the Program
Documents.

      PA13: The national strategy for the digital economy, Sénégal Numérique 2025, provided the policy
       basis for increased open market access to new service providers in the telecommunications sector,
       in line with international best practices. The relevance of PA13 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.
      PA14: The draft Electronic Communications Act, submitted to Parliament, aimed to strengthen the
       legal and institutional framework for the ICR sector, consistent with Sénégal Numérique 2025.
       The Conseil National du Numérique (CNN) was created to serve as the high-level
       umbrella national consultative council for the ICR sector. As the prior action did not require the
       enactment of the law, the relevance of PA14 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

Competition and Investment. Limited competition in the broadband market hurt the accessibility, affordability,
and quality of Internet services: (a) there were three main telecommunications operators; (b) one
operator had the dominant position – it cornered 58 percent of the mobile telephone market and 65 percent of
the mobile Internet market (by value), owned the largest fiber optic network, and served as the only provider

                                                                                                      Page 15 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)



of fixed Internet and fourth-generation wireless (4G) services; (c) the entry in 2017 of three new Internet
service providers (ISPs) added some competition, but restrictions on the provision of high-demand services –
Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) and Internet Protocol TV (IPTV) – and poor regulation by the Autorité de
Régulation des Télécommunications et des Postes (ARTP) nullified any gains; (d) 4G license allocation was
marred by uncompetitive practices and non-transparent regulation – the ARTP allocated 4G frequencies only
to the dominant operator in 2017, before finally allocating frequencies to the second largest mobile network
operator in 2018; and (e) mobile broadband services remained relatively expensive and of low quality,
according to data from the International Telecommunications Union.

      PA15: Amendments to Articles 29-32 of the Telecommunication Code of 2011 (Law No. 2011-01 of
         February 2011) would subject ISPs to the lighter and less expensive general “authorization”
         regime instead of the “licensing” regime and allowed them to deploy and operate their
         own infrastructure. A decree implementing the amendments converted already attributed ISP
         licenses into authorizations. The legal measures would facilitate the entry of more ISPs into the retail
         broadband Internet market. The relevance of PA15 is rated Satisfactory.
        PA16: A decree defined the rules for granting authorizations to wholesale
         telecommunications infrastructure operators. The rules would be consistent with the
         Telecommunications Code of 2011 (Law No 2011-01 of February 2011) as amended and aim to
         increase competition in the wholesale broadband Internet market. The relevance of PA16 is rated
         Satisfactory.
        PA17: A decree clarified the technical and financial rules for infrastructure sharing
         among telecommunication operators (i.e., between dominant and non-dominant players),
         following Articles 10 and 25 of the Telecommunications Code of 2011 (Law No 2011-01 of February
         2011). The decree would complement measures aimed at removing restrictions to market entry and
         focus on infrastructure sharing and a workable interconnection system. The rules would aim to
         ensure fairness, protect operators’' incentives to invest in costly equipment, and reduce infrastructure
         roll-out costs for the telecommunications operators. The relevance of PA17 is rated Satisfactory.
        PA18: With the rules for infrastructure sharing among telecommunications operations having been
         issued (PA17), the implementation of the decree required the issuance by the regulator of three
         regulation decisions imposing specific obligations on dominant players to provide to non-dominant
         players open and nondiscriminatory access to their essential infrastructure. The first decision issued
         and published by the ARTP in October 2018 listed the relevant markets for market dominance in the
         ICT sector. The second decision also issued and published in October 2018 listed the dominant
         operators and their obligations in the relevant markets. The regulatory decisions opening the access
         by existing and new non-dominant operators to dominant players’ essential infrastructure would
         promote competition and decrease the non-dominant operators’ costs, due to efficiency gains in
         infrastructure usage. The relevance of PA18 is rated Satisfactory.
        PA19: With the rules for granting authorizations to wholesale telecommunications infrastructure
         operators having been issued (PA16), the implementation of the decree required the publication by
         the ARTP of the standard model and guidelines to process the granting of this authorizations. The
         standard model did not impose any unjustified restriction on wholesale service provision and
         geographic coverage. By ensuring a level playing field among actors and by lending transparency to
         the authorization process, it was expected that the ARTP model and guidelines would attract new
         private players into the broadband market, boost competition, and reduce the costs of Internet
         services. The relevance of PA19 is rated Satisfactory.
        PA20: A joint commission created by the ARTP and composed of the Ministry of Finance and
         Ministry of Telecommunications would negotiate the technical and financial conditions for allocating


                                                                                                    Page 16 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)



       additional 4G frequencies with interested licensed operators. The mandate to the commission was to
       strengthen competition in the 4G market and end the current monopoly in 4G services. The relevance
       of PA20 is rated Satisfactory.

Access. The ability of the Fonds de Développement des Services Universels de Télécommunications
(FDUST), the funding mechanism created to make telecommunications services accessible to the largest
number at affordable prices (the universal service policy) was constrained by limited financial
resources, insufficient technical capacity, and weak governance structures. The FDUST had yet to finance
any significant digital project (the mandate was to finance digital infrastructure and services in underserved
areas that were unprofitable for the private sector). Moreover, the large public fiber optic network – 4,000
kilometers of optical fiber deployed in urban and rural areas across the country owned and operated by the
Agence de l’Informatique de l’État (ADIE) – was largely underused, dragged down by ADIE's lack of financial
resources and technical capacity to commercialize the network effectively.

      PA21: The prior action to "adopt the universal service strategy," "activate the FDUST," "establish new
       governance bodies," and "consult with private operators to cover rural areas" is entirely lacking in
       detail, given the known lack of financial resources and technical capacity at the FDUST. The
       relevance of PA21 is rated Unsatisfactory.
      PA22: A competitive tender process (avis d’appel à préqualification) would select a
       private concessionaire to operate and expand the ADIE's fiber optic network. The use of a
       concession model for the management of excess capacity at the network was formalized by a joint
       order of the Ministry of Communication, Telecommunications, Posts and Digital Economy and the
       Ministry of the Economy, Finance and Planning in July 2018. The completion of this process would
       open access to the network and improve the management of the public telecommunications
       infrastructure. However, this prior action starts and ends with “publishing a competitive tender
       process.” The relevance of PA22 is rated Unsatisfactory.

Objective 3 – To reinforce the policy, institutional, and financial foundations of the emerging digital
economy.

The adoption by the Government of the Sénégal Numérique 2025 and the enactment of the Electrical
Communications Code helped resolve key policy and regulatory uncertainties that had long impeded the
development of the digital economy in Senegal, according to a Bank study supported by the Digital
Development Partnership (of seven state and two private donors). The Digital Economy for Africa – Country
Diagnostic of Senegal (World Bank, 2019) recommended policy actions in five “foundational elements of the
digital economy ecosystem” – digital infrastructure, digital government platforms, digital financial services,
digital skills and capacities development, and digital entrepreneurship, two of which were prioritized for
support by this programmatic series – digital government platforms, and digital entrepreneurship.

e-Government Solutions. Government digital platforms – the software-based online infrastructure that
facilitate interactions and transactions between public agencies and private citizens – are vital to a digital
economy, serving as digital marketplaces, collaboration tools, and data aggregators. –In one application of
government digital platforms, Senegal launched the online tax filing and tax payment modules in 2013 to
improve the efficiency of revenue administration. The e-Tax system, however, remained limited to major
enterprises. Senegal rolled out the National Biometric Identification Card (ENBIC) in 2016, pioneering
(together with Ghana) the biometric digital identification system in the 15-nation Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS). The e-ID system was made mandatory for all citizens and used for
identification to access several services, albeit some 25 percent of the population had yet to register for the

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 32
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)



ENBIC card at appraisal. To advance the digital government platforms, this series would focus on expanding
the e-Tax system.

      PA23 – A reduction the mandatory threshold for electronic filing by firms from FCFA 500 million
       (US$0.82 million) to FCFA 100 million (US$0.16 million) of annual turnover would enable the
       participation of all medium-sized firms in the e-Tax platform by 2019. Moreover, the establishment of
       a threshold of FCFA 50 million (US$0.08 million) for the mandatory online payment of customs
       duties and fees would include customs payments in the online system for the first time. Considering
       that the e-Tax system had so far served only large enterprises, the sizable reduction in the payment
       thresholds would expand the use of the e-Tax system to include medium enterprises. The relevance
       of PA23 is rated Satisfactory.
      PA24 – An update to the rules governing digital payments to the Treasury, Customs, and
       Tax administrations, the expansion of allowable payment options to include mobile money,
       payment by cards, and use of payment service aggregators; and the adoption of an open selection
       process for providers of digital payment services;, and the definition of the modalities for system
       interoperability, data security, and protection of personal data related to these services would, in
       combination, broaden the options for digital payments to the Government. The relevance of PA24 is
       rated Satisfactory.
      PA25 – To enhance the efficiency and transparency of e-government services, reduce compliance
       costs for taxpayers, and strengthen domestic resource mobilization, the Ministry of Finance enabled
       online consultations about taxes through personalized taxpayer webpages at the Ministry of Finance,
       "my personal space," covering at least 10 percent of eligible taxpayers, and authorized a risk-based
       audit selection system, covering at least 50 percent of relevant verifications. These measures were
       informed by Policy Note for the Government in Senegal - Fiscal Reform in Senegal (Loeprick and
       Bachas, 2019) and Audit Selection Algorithm in Senegal (Bachas, Brockmeyer, and Sarr, 2019). The
       relevance of PA25 is rated Satisfactory.

Startup Ecosystem. Digital entrepreneurship is enabled by an ecosystem that allows firms to leverage new
technologies, adopt new business models, and launch new products and services. Senegal had one of the
most dynamic digital entrepreneurship ecosystems in francophone West Africa, according to several
assessments: (a) the country's use of technologies was widespread – the smartphone adoption rate was 35.6
percent, compared to an average 28 percent in the region (Jumia Senegal, 2018, Mobile Report 2018:
Trends of the Mobile Market and Their Impact on the Senegalese Economy); (b) the entrepreneurial activity
rate was high – the index score on early-stage entrepreneurial activity was 38.9 in 2017-18 (i.e., 39 percent of
the population aged 18 to 64 had established or headed a new company), compared to 10.9 in South Africa
or 9.3 in India (World Bank, 2018, Global Entrepreneurship Monitor - Youth Business International); and (c)
innovation ecosystem development had been rapid – there were 63 start-ups per million inhabitants in
2015 (13th of 107 countries globally) and some 15 incubators, accelerators, and co-working spaces served
over 2,500 start-ups and entrepreneurs. Despite these advances, the legal and regulatory framework for
digital entrepreneurship was lacking in Senegal, as it was in practically all of Sub-Saharan Africa (World
Bank, 2019, Analysis of Regulatory Reforms Focused on Start-ups in Africa and MENA).

      PA26 – Although the prior action required only the submission by the Council of Ministers of the draft
       laws to the National Assembly, the legislature subsequently enacted the Senegal Startup Act (Law No
       2020-01) in December 2019 (soon after the approval of the third operation in the same month)
       and the Senegal Finance Law for 2020 also in December 2019. The Senegal Startup Act created a
       governance framework for startups, a legal regime for their identification and registration, a resource
       center dedicated to their development, and a package of incentive measures. With the legislation,

                                                                                                  Page 18 of 32
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)



         Senegal became the second African nation (after Tunisia in 2018) to pass a startup law to promote
         innovation. Developed beginning in 2018 by 60 players in the local innovation ecosystem, the new
         law was informed, according to the ICR, by several analytic work including: Closing the Gap -
         Assessment of the Entrepreneurial Ecosystem in Senegal (Wellen and van Melle, Dutch Good
         Growth Fund, 2017); Strategic Audit Report - Developing the Legal Framework for the Promotion of
         Innovative Companies with High Growth Potential in Senegal (Carapaces, 2019); and Analysis of
         Regulatory Reforms Focused on Start-ups in Africa and MENA (World Bank, 2019). Separately, the
         Senegal Finance Law for 2020 amended the tax code to support start-ups in the digital sector
         through tax incentives related to the flat minimum tax, the payroll tax, the tax compliance levy on
         imports; and the methods for calculating the unique global contribution. The tax measures were
         informed by Options for the Simplification for the MSME Tax Regime in Senegal (World Bank,
         2019). It was expected that the new legal and regulatory framework, the incentive measures, and the
         tax reforms would encourage the formation and development of startups. The relevance of PA26 is
         rated Satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Table 2: Results Indicators (RIs)

                                                                             Actual
                                                                             Change
                                                                             in Results
                                                                             Indicator
Results         Associated Relevance                                         Relative Achievement
                                             Baseline Target    Actual Value
Indicator       Prior Action Rating                                          to         Rating
                                                                             Targeted
                                                                             Change,
                                                                             in
                                                                             Percent
PDO 1 - To strengthen the governance and management of the energy sector to reduce costs,
improve reliability, and facilitate equitable access
RI1 - Unserved
energy (total) PA1
per year (GWh) PA2                           34.1
                              Satisfactory            13 (2021) 13.62 (2021) 97         Substantial
as proxy of     PA3                          (2015)
blackouts       PA4
and brownouts
RI2 - Overall   PA1
                              Satisfactory 21 (2015) 15 (2021) 18.9 (2021) 35           Modest
electricity     PA2


                                                                                                Page 19 of 32
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)



losses as        PA3
percentage of PA4
electricity
produced
RI3 - SENELEC
debt coverage PA5
                                        0.54 (201
ratio (EBIDTA PA6         Satisfactory            1.0 (2021) 0.9 (2021)    78     Substantial
                                        8)
adjusted/debt PA7
service)
RI4 -
                 PA8
Percentage of
                 PA9      Moderately    17 (2018)
generation                                        45 (2021) 36 (2021)      68     Substantial
                 PA10     Satisfactory
capacity that is
                 PA11
not HFO- based
RI5 - Installed PA8
capacity of      PA9      Moderately              30 (2021)
                                        11 (2018)             28 (2021)    89     Substantial
renewable        PA10     Satisfactory
energies         PA11
RI6 - Share of
rural population
with access to
                 PA12     Satisfactory 29 (2015) 60 (2021) 58.2 (2021) 94         Substantial
electricity,
percentage of
total population
PDO 2 - To enhance the legal and regulatory framework of the information and communications
technology sector to promote competition, investment, and equitable access
RI7 - Ranking of
Senegal with
respect to the
A.1.02 sub-      PA13                   81st
                          Satisfactory            65th (2021) 50th (2021) 258     High
index of the     PA14                   (2015)
Network
Readiness
Index
                 PA15
                 PA16
RI8 - Internet
                 PA17                                         92.3 (2021)
penetration rate          Satisfactory 60 (2016) 75 (2021)                 215    High
                 PA18                                         95.3 (2022)
(Source: ARTP)
                 PA19
                 PA20
                 PA15
RI9 - Number of PA16
facility-based PA17                                           7 (2021)
                          Satisfactory 1 (2015) 6 (2021)                   120    High
Internet         PA18                                         8 (2022)
providers        PA19
                 PA20


                                                                                          Page 20 of 32
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)



RI10A –
 Percentage of
rural
households                                                        No data
                  PA21
reporting                   Satisfactory 17 (2015) 13 (2021) (Survey            0       Negligible
                  PA22
access to the                                                     discontinued)
Internet
(Source: Gallup
Survey)
RI10B -
 Percentage of
females
reporting
access to the
                                                                  No data
Internet (rural) PA21                      12.1
                            Satisfactory               20 (2021) (Survey        0       Negligible
(Source: Gallup PA22                       (2017)
                                                                  discontinued)
Survey or the
Enquête
Démographique
et de Santé
Continue)
PDO 3 - To reinforce the policy, institutional, and financial foundations of the emerging digital
economy
RI11 - Number
of MSME                                                           72, 015
                  PA23
taxpayers                                  65,534      72,088     (2021)
                  PA24      Satisfactory                                        99      High
registered with                            (2019)      (2021)     84,362
                  PA25
the DSF/DGID                                                      (2022)
(Source: DGID)
RI12 - Number
of tax payments
(Source: World PA23
                            Moderately     58
Bank Doing        PA24                                 40 (2021) 29 (2021)      139     [High]
                            Unsatisfactory (DB2019)
Business          PA25
“Paying Taxes”
indicator)
RI13 - Number
of firms
registered as
‘startups’ by a
                                                                                        Negligible
licensed
                  PA26      Satisfactory 0 (2019) 150 (2021) No data            0
private or public
support
structure (as
defined in the
startup law)



                                                                                              Page 21 of 32
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)




Objective 1 - To strengthen the governance and management of the energy sector to reduce costs,
improve reliability, and facilitate equitable access.

Governance

     RI1 - would signify an improvement in the reliability of energy supply to meet demand. Measured in
      gigawatt hours (GWh) on an annual basis, unserved energy would serve as a proxy for blackouts
      (the complete interruption of power in a given service area) and brownouts (the partial or temporary
      reduction in system voltage or system capacity), which are the commonplace metrics of power supply
      reliability. Greater supply reliability, as measured by lower unserved energy, was the expected result
      of measures to improve the governance of SENELEC, including by the Government concluding a
      performance contract with the utility. The relevance of RI1 is rated Satisfactory.
     RI2 - Like the reduction in total unserved energy, a reduction in overall electricity losses – the sum of
      technical losses (energy dissipated in the conductors, transmission lines, transformers, sub-transmission
      lines, distribution lines, and magnetic losses in transformers) and commercial losses (electricity
      generated that is not correctly metered, billed, and revenue collected) – would signify an improvement in
      the reliability of energy supply to meet demand. Greater supply reliability, as measured by lower
      electricity losses, expressed as a percentage of electricity output, was the expected result of measures to
      improve the governance of SENELEC, including by the Government concluding a performance contract
      with the utility. The relevance of RI2 is rated Satisfactory.

Finance

     RI3 - SENELEC's debt coverage ratio – which compares the firm's operating income with its upcoming
      debt obligations (i.e., the ratio of earnings before interest, dividends, taxes, and amortization (EBIDTA) to
      debt service) – would reflect an improvement in SINELEC's financial sustainability, which would in turn
      enable it to reduce energy supply costs. A ratio of at least 1 would signify an ability to pay current debt
      obligations (otherwise a firm with less than a unitary ratio would have to draw on external sources to
      cover debt, including by borrowing even more). A settlement by the Government agencies of their
      accumulated arrears with SENELEC, the payment of VAT credits due to SENELEC, the provision of
      adequate budgetary resources to agencies for electricity and water bills and increases in tariff levels
      would boost SINELEC's operating income, enabling it to improve its debt coverage ratio. The relevance
      of RI3 is rated Satisfactory.

Competition and Investment

     RI4 - should measure the degree of success of measures to diversify the country's energy mix, and
      thereby ensure energy supply reliability and reduce energy supply costs. However, the underlying prior
      actions supported by this series consisted principally of the approval of strategic master plans,
      submission to the legislative body of draft laws, and creation of a special purpose vehicle for investment
      in gas for power generation. While master plans and draft laws are important to the
      energy diversification drive, their direct impact on the actual energy mix would be difficult to
      quantify. The relevance of RI4 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.
     RI5 - Like RI4, the percentage of installed capacity that used renewable energy should measure the
      degree of success of measures to diversify the country's energy mix, and thereby ensure energy supply
      reliability and reduce energy supply costs. However, the underlying prior actions supported by this series
      consisted principally of the approval of strategic master plans, submission to the legislative body of draft

                                                                                                    Page 22 of 32
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)



         laws, and creation of a special purpose vehicle for investment in gas for power generation. While master
         plans and draft laws are important to the energy diversification drive, their direct impact on the actual
         energy mix would be difficult to quantify. The relevance of RI5 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

Access

     RI6 - would measure the impact of lowering the electricity user tariffs changed by rural concessions
         relative to the national tariffs charged by SENELAC, the prior action which aimed to make electricity more
         affordable in rural areas. The indicator would be especially relevant to measuring progress toward the
         objective to improve consumer access in rural areas, where the access problem was most
         pronounced. The relevance of RI6 is rated Satisfactory.

Objective 2 - To enhance the legal and regulatory framework of the information and communications
technology sector to promote competition, investment, an equitable access.

Governance

     RI7 - which assesses the extent to which the national legal framework facilitates ICT penetration and a
      safe development of business activities, would measure the impact of improving governance in the ICT
      sector (PA13 and PA14). Conceived by economists at Harvard University (Kirkman, Sachs, and
      Osorio, The Networked Readiness Index: Measuring the Preparedness of Nations for the Networked
      World) and first reported for 75 countries in 2002 (World Economic Forum and the Institut Européen
      d'Administration des Affaires, The Global Information Technology Report 2001-2002: Readiness for the
      Networked World), the Network Readiness Index was redesigned in 2019 to measure performance
      across four dimensions of digital readiness - technology, people, governance, and impact - using 58
      different indicators (Portulans Institute, The Network Readiness Index 2019: Towards a Future Ready
      Society). For RI7, the 2021 result (50th rank for Senegal out of 130 countries in the indicator 3.2.2 on
      “ICT regulatory environment” under pillar C on Governance, sub-pillar 2 on Regulation) was compared to
      the 2015 baseline (81st rank for Senegal out of 143 countries in the A.1.02. sub-index that assesses
      “ICT-specific legal framework”). An improved reading on the index would reflect a greater ability by the
      economy to attract investment in ICT. The relevance of RI7 is rated Satisfactory.
     RI8 - would measure the impact of legal and regulatory reforms to facilitate entry and strengthen
      competition in the wholesale and retail internet broadband markets (PA15, PA16, PA 17, PA18, PA19),
      including in the 4G market – the market for fourth generation of broadband cellular network technology
      (PA20). The data would be sourced from the Senegal Regulatory Authority of Telecommunications and
      Posts (ARTP) – the international data is compiled by the International Telecommunication Union (World
      Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database) and is also reported (annually for most member countries)
      by the World Bank (World Development Indicators). The relevance of RI8 is rated Satisfactory.
     RI9 - As with an increase in the internet penetration rate, an increase in the number of facility-based
      internet providers would measure the impact of legal and regulatory reforms to facilitate entry and
      strengthen competition in the wholesale and retail internet broadband markets, including in the
      4G market – the market for fourth generation of broadband cellular network technology (PA20). The
      relevance of RI9 is rated Satisfactory.

Access

     RI10A - An increase in the percentage of rural households reporting access to the internet would signify
         greater access among the rural population to the internet, indicating progress toward the access

                                                                                                    Page 23 of 32
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)



       objective. The indicator is particularly relevant to measures to implement the Universal Access Decree,
       especially the focus on "covering rural areas" (PA22). The data would be obtained from the
       U.S. consulting firm Gallup Inc., which monitored and reported on internet access globally, including in
       Sub-Saharan Africa (Africa Online - a Gallup World Poll). The relevance of RI10A is rated Satisfactory.
      RI10B - The gender dimension of RI10A, an increase in the percentage of rural area females reporting
       access to the internet would similarly indicating progress toward the access objective. The indicator is
       particularly relevant to measures to implement the Universal Access Decree, especially the focus on
       "closing the digital divide and gender gap in women's access to the internet." Apart from the Gallup
       survey, a separate data source would be the Senegal Agence Nationale de la Statistique et de la
       Démographie's (ANSD's) Enquête Démographique et de Santé Continue (Continuous Demographic
       and Health Survey). The relevance of RI10B is rated Satisfactory.

Objective 3 - To reinforce the policy, institutional, and financial foundations of the emerging digital
economy.

e-Government Solutions

      RI11 - would indicate the extent of MSME participation in the digitalization of tax filing and tax payment
       services, the expansion of which was supported by this operation (PA23, PA24, and PA25). The
       indicator reflects the impact of the prior actions which lowered the thresholds for e-filing and e-payment,
       expanded the range of e-payment options, and introduced online consultations (with the Ministry of
       Finance) and risk-based audits. The data would be supplied by the DGID. The relevance of RI11 is
       rated Satisfactory.
      RI12 - the number of tax payments (drawn from the Bank's Doing Business “Paying Taxes” indicator) is a
       poor measure. It is a de jure measure -- every tax and fee paid by the business that is required by law
       and mandated by any level of government -- and would not reflect the impact of the digitalization of tax
       filing and tax payment, unless the implementation of PA23, PA24, and PA25 also involved the de jure
       reduction of the number of tax payments, which does not appear to be the case. The number of hours
       per year to prepare, file tax returns, and pay taxes (also drawn from the Bank's Doing Business “Paying
       Taxes” indicator) would have been the more appropriate indicator to measure the impact of facilitating
       tax filing and tax payments through the digitalization by the Government of tax services. The relevance
       of RI12 is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Start-up Ecosystem

      RI13 - was the expected result of the enactment of the Senegal Start Up Act and the Senegal Finance
       Law for 2020. It would reflect an improvement in the ecosystem supporting digital enterprises. The
       relevance of RI13 is rated Satisfactory.




Rating

Satisfactory

5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

                                                                                                    Page 24 of 32
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)



EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To strengthen the governance and management of the energy sector to reduce costs, improve reliability, and
               facilitate equitable access.

               Rationale
               Governance

                     RI1 - The total unserved energy per year, a proxy for blackouts and brownouts, was reduced from
                      34.1 gigawatt hours (GWh) in 2015 to 13.62 GWh in 2021, partially meeting the target reduction to 13
                      GWh. The degree of achievement is rated Substantial.
                     RI2 - Overall electricity losses were reduced from 21 percent of electricity produced in 2015 to 18.9
                      percent in 2021, partially meeting the target reduction (more than a fourth but less than two-thirds) to
                      15 percent. The degree of achievement is rated Modest.

               Finance

                     RI3 - SENELEC's debt cover ratio, defined as EBIDTA divided by debt service, declined from 0.54 in
                        2018 (baseline revised from 1.5 in 2015) to 0.9 in 2021, partially meeting (by at least two-thirds) the
                        target increase to 1.0. The degree of achievement is rated Substantial.

               Competition and Investment

                     RI4 - The percentage of generation capacity that was not HFO-based rose from 17 percent in 2018
                      (baseline revised from 10 percent in 2015) to 36 percent in 2021, partially meeting (by at least two-
                      thirds) the target increase to 45 percent. The degree of achievement is rated Substantial.
                     RI5 - The installed capacity of renewable energies rose from 11 percent of total capacity installed in
                      2018 (baseline revised from 0 percent in 2015) to 28 percent in 2021, partially meeting (by at least two
                      thirds) the target increase to 30 percent. The degree of achievement is rated Substantial.

               Access

                     RI6 - The share of rural population with access to electricity rose from 29 percent of the total
                        population in 2015 to 58.2 percent in 2021, partially meeting the target increase to 60 percent. The
                        degree of achievement is rated Substantial.



               Rating
               Satisfactory




                                                                                                                   Page 25 of 32
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To enhance the legal and regulatory framework of the information and communications technology sector to
promote competition, investment, and equitable access.

Rationale
Governance

      RI7 - The ranking of Senegal on the A.1.02 sub-index of the Network Readiness Index (which
         assesses the extent to which the national legal framework facilitates ICT penetration and a safe
         development of business activities) of the World Economic Forum improved from 81st (of 143
         countries) in 2015 to 50th in 2021, exceeding the target of 65th. The degree of achievement is rated
         High.

Competition and Investment

      RI8 - The internet penetration rate increased from 60 percent in 2016 to 92.3 percent in 2021, as
       reported by the Regulatory Authority of Telecommunications and Posts, exceeding the target of 75,
       percentage. The internet penetration rate increased further to 95 percent in 2022. The degree of
       achievement is rated High.
      RI9 - The number of facility-based internet providers increased from one in 2015 to seven in 2021,
       exceeding the target of five. The number of facility-based internet providers increased further to
       eight in 2022. The degree of achievement is rated High.

Access

      RI10A - There is no data to determine the percentage of rural households reporting access to the
       Internet. The Gallup Survey, which reported that 17 percent of rural households had access to the
       Internet in the baseline, was discontinued. The degree of achievement is rated Negligible.
      RI10B - There is no data to determine the percentage of females in rural areas reporting access to the
       Internet. The Gallup Survey and the Update of the 2017 Enquête Démographique et de Santé
       Continue, which reported that 12.1 percent of females in rural areas had access to the internet in
       2017, were discontinued. The degree of achievement is rated Negligible.



Rating
Moderately Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To reinforce the policy, institutional, and financial foundations of the emerging digital economy.


                                                                                                     Page 26 of 32
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)




                  Rationale
                  e-Government Solutions

                        RI11 - The number of MSME taxpayers registered with the Direction des Services Fiscaux at
                         the Directorate General of Taxes and Domains increased from 65,534 in 2019 to 72,105 in 2021,
                         meeting the target of 72,085. The number increased further to 84,362 in 2022. The degree of
                         achievement is rated High.
                        RI12 - The number of tax payments was reduced from 58 at the baseline in 2018 to 29 at closing in
                         2021, exceeding the target reduction to 40. Because of deficiencies with the indicator (see Section 4),
                         the degree of achievement is downgraded from high to Substantial.

                  Startup Ecosystem

                        RI13 - There was no data to measure the number of firms registered as "startups" by a
                         licensed private or public support structure (as defined in the startup law). The target was to have 150
                         firms registered as startups by closing. The degree of achievement is rated Negligible.



                  Rating
                  Moderately Satisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The achievement of the objective to strengthen the governance and management of the energy sector to reduce
costs, improve reliability, and facilitate equitable access is rated satisfactory, the objective to enhance the legal
and regulatory framework of the information and communications technology sector to promote competition,
investment, and equitable access, moderately satisfactory, and the objective to reinforce the policy, institutional,
and financial foundations of the emerging digital economy, moderately satisfactory. The overall achievement of
objectives is rated Moderately Satisfactory.




Overall Efficacy Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

6. Outcome

                                                                                                                  Page 27 of 32
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)




Rationale

With the relevance of the prior actions rated satisfactory, and the achievement of the program objectives rated
moderately satisfactory, the outcome of the program is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to the sustainability of the development outcomes achieved by the program are substantial, arising
from resistance to reforms by vested interests, political pressure to dilute reforms, or political accommodation
ahead of the national elections in 2024, according to the ICR. However, the Government and the Bank have
launched other reforms, several related to the prior actions advanced by this program and supported by the First
and Second Republic of Senegal Equitable and Resilient Recovery Development Policy Financing, which will
help mitigate these risks.

      Energy and Electricity. Senegal adopted the Gas Code (Law No. 2020-06) in January 2020 to ensure
       the development of a robust and efficient gas-value chain, mitigate carbon emission, limit climate
       change, and bring electricity tariffs down. To implement the Gas Code, the Government adopted
       decrees defining the legal and regulatory framework for investment in the midstream and downstream
       segments of the gas industry. The National Assembly enacted the country's first Electricity Code (Law
       No. 2021-31) in July 2021, providing a new regulatory framework for the power sector and
       integrating regulations related to independent power producers, renewables, energy savings, and rural
       electrification. The new law set up an integrated 10-year Plan Intégré à Moindre Coût (PIMC), on which
       five-year power generation, transmission, distribution, renewable development, and energy efficiency
       plans would be based, aiming to ensure universal access to electricity by 2025 and boost renewables
       to 32 percent of grid-connected power capacity by 2030. To implement the Electricity Code, the
       President signed a decree establishing the procedures for awarding agreements and licenses related to
       associated regulated activities.
      ICT and the Digital Economy, The National Assembly enacted Law 2021-39 in December 2021, creating
       the Senegal Numérique S.A. (SENUM SA) to replace the state informatics agency ADIE. SENUM SA
       would implement the national computerization policy, including those articulated by Sénégal Numérique
       2025, and manage the digital infrastructure of the state, including the assets of ADIE. To increase
       access to finance for startups, the Government adopted a regulatory framework for the promotion and
       financing of startups, with the guiding principle that public funds would be combined with, and leverage,
       private resources for the financing of startups.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

                                                                                                   Page 28 of 32
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)




Rationale

Analytical Underpinning. The prior actions were informed by substantive analytic work, including
work produced by related operations and by technical assistance supported by the Bank (see Section 3.A and
3.B).

Link to Other Bank Operations. The program objectives and prior actions supported by this operation were
aligned with the objectives and activities of other active Bank operations in Senegal.

Operational Risks and Mitigation Measures. The overall risk to the operation, which the Bank considered
substantial in the first operation, was raised to high in the second and third operations. Risks associated with
sector policies and strategies remained high throughout the series and would be addressed by continuous policy
dialogue with the Government; involvement by the International Monetary Fund, the International Finance
Corporation, and other development partners in sector reform planning; and close monitoring of the reform effort
by all stakeholders, including by the private sector. Institutional capacity risk for program implementation would
be mitigated by complementary Bank technical assistance operations and close supervision by the Bank field
staff.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Supervision. There was no data to measure the percentage of rural households with access to the Internet
(RI10A and RI10B) and the number of firms registered as startups under the Senegal Startup Act (RI13). While
the problem with RI10A and RI10B owed to the Gallup Poll discontinuing its survey, there was no explanation
offered for the lack of data for RI13. There is no evidence in the ICR that the Bank tried to obtain alternative
sources of data.

Adaptation. The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic at the onset of the third operation highlighted the need
by the Government of additional resources to fund the public health and economic support response to the
pandemic. The ongoing implementation of the third operation (approved in December 2019 and scheduled to
close in December 2020) offered the opportunity to obtain additional support for the operation while addressing
the financing gap faced by the Government in responding to the COVID-19 crisis. The supplemental financing
agreement for US$100 million (made without altering the program objectives and linked to the same prior
actions) was signed in June 2020.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

                                                                                                   Page 29 of 32
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)




c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

---

Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The ICR reported that:

       The expected negative welfare effects of the electricity user tariff increases were "negligible" in the short
        term, as only 2 percent of the "extreme poor" and 6 percent of the "moderate poor" belonged to
        consumption categories T1 and T2 for which tariffs were hiked. The conclusion was based on
        simulations, according to the ICR.
       The rural population benefitted from better living conditions and improved productivity following an
        increase in the share of the rural population with access to electricity rose from 29 percent in 2015 to 58
        percent in 2021 (RI6) (see Section 5 - Objective 1). The ICR did not provide any empirical analysis or
        data to support this assertion.
       A Bank study, Digital Senegal for Inclusive Growth: Technological Transformation for Better and
        More Jobs (Cruz, Dutz, and Rodrigues-Caserllan, 2022), assessed the effects of digital technology
        adoption on household welfare and enterprise productivity and concluded that the benefits were
        significant: (a) for households – mobile Internet coverage was associated with 14 percent higher total
        consumption, 26 percent higher non-food consumption, jobs with higher earnings, and 10 percent lower
        extreme poverty rate; (b) for firms – better technologies led to higher levels of productivity, generated
        more jobs, and increased the share of unskilled workers on the payroll (i.e., an increase in technological
        sophistication for business functions that an average firm used most intensively was associated with a 14
        percent increase in the number of workers); and (c) for informal micro firms – while using a smartphone
        did not generate more jobs, digital technologies for management functions, together with electricity and
        credit, mattered jointly for productivity, sales, and jobs. The study did not use data related this
        operation.



b. Environmental

The ICR did not present evidence to assess the ex-post environmental impact of this operation. The
report simply claimed that "no prior action from the operation has led to any noticeable impact on the
environment, forest, or natural resources."



                                                                                                      Page 30 of 32
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)



c. Gender

There was no data to determine the percentage of females in rural areas reporting access to the Internet
(RI10B) (see Section 5 - Objective 2).



d. Other

---
10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR is consistent with OPCS guidelines on ICRs for development financing operations and includes
sections on the relevance of prior actions and the relevance of results indicators. The account of the project’s
performance is well informed and concisely presented. The efficacy assessment is outcome-oriented and based
on the degree of achievement of the results targets. Explanations for the failure to achieve some results targets
are highly informative. The ICR presents ample evidence to support its assessment of the Bank’s performance
at design and during implementation. The enumeration of the analytic underpinnings of the operation, the
connection with other Bank operations in Senegal, and the coordination with other development partners are
fairly detailed. The ICR draws lessons that would be valuable to development policy operations focused on
reforms in energy and electricity and in ICT and the digital economy.


a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
 Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreement/Comments
                                Moderately
 Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
 Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
 Relevance of Results
                                ---                    Satisfactory
 Indicators
 Quality of ICR                 ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

Two lessons are drawn from the ICR, with some adaptation.



                                                                                                   Page 31 of 32
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Senegal Structural Reform DPO Series (P159023)



Understanding and accounting for the politics and the political economy of reforms is essential to
designing and implementing meaningful prior actions that advance the reform agenda. In this program,
the dominant telecommunications operator held a monopoly or near-monopoly position in many segments of the
telecommunications and broadband markets. In allocating frequencies for the next generation 4G services, the
industry regulator issues frequencies only to the dominant operator following less than transparent
negotiations. Given this political economy context, it was necessary for the Government to articulate a national
policy of infrastructure sharing between the dominant and non-dominant players and enshrine the policy in
legislation. It was also necessary for the Government to alter the governance framework for the industry
regulation and create a joint commission to negotiate the technical and financial terms of licenses granted to
new entrants. The reform measures aimed to break the monopoly power of the dominant operator and steer the
regulator toward greater market competition.

Structural reform programs take time and may require support from other operations beyond the scope
of a programmatic development policy financing series. In this program, prior actions over three operations
could only require the submission of draft laws to the National Assembly and not the enactment of the draft laws
by the legislature, much less the issuance of implementation decrees by the President or the promulgation of
regulatory decisions by the electricity regulator or the telecommunications regulator. It would take support from
a related programmatic development policy operation, the First and Second Senegal Equitable and Resilient
Recovery Development Policy Financing, to complete the legislative enactment and the executive-branch
implementation of the legal and regulatory reforms introduced by Senegal Multi-Sectoral Structural Reforms
Development Policy Financing. The multi-sector orientation of both Bank series allowed for the inclusion of
follow-up reform measures in the second series.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                   Page 32 of 32
