     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Regional Infrastructure Development Fund (P154947)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023727

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P154947                                     Regional Infrastructure Development Fund

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Indonesia                                   Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 COFN-C1480,IBRD-87140,TF-A3871              31-Dec-2020                                           46,064,096.12

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 10-Mar-2017                                 30-Nov-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           103,000,000.00                                       3,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              46,064,096.12                                      2,717,087.59

 Actual                                          46,064,096.12                                      2,717,087.59




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Burcin Pamuksuz             Ihsan Kaler Hurcan            Avjeet Singh                     IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) Loan Agreement (p.7) dated
   May 12, 2017 and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 6) the Project Development Objective (PDO) was
   “to increase access to infrastructure finance at the subnational level through a financially sustainable financial
   intermediary”.




                                                                                                      Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Regional Infrastructure Development Fund (P154947)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  30-Jun-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Regional Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) was to be implemented by PT Sarana Multi Infrastruktur
   (PT SMI), a state-owned enterprise wholly owned by the Ministry of Finance of Indonesia, with a mandate to
   catalyze infrastructure financing in the country. The project originally consisted of two components:

   1. Capital Support for RIDF (Estimated Cost at Appraisal: US$400 million; Revised Cost at the Second
   Restructuring: US$350 million; Revised Cost at the Fifth Restructuring: US$291.68 million; Actual Cost at
   Closing: US$ 86.38 million):

   The RIDF was a core element of the platform of the Government of Indonesia (GOI) on sustainable
   urbanization, which included a series of World Bank-supported vertical national sector investment programs
   and a technical assistance program. This component was to provide capital support to the RIDF and grant
   loans to participating subnational governments (SNGs) for selected economically viable infrastructure
   projects. The project was to provide funding to the fund manager PT SMI to capitalize RIDF through a mix
   of debt and equity. The debt component was to be a World Bank and Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank
   (AIIB) co-financing channeled to the Ministry of Finance (MoF) in foreign currency. The MoF was to lend the
   loan proceeds to PT SMI in Indonesian Rupiah. The MoF was to assume the exchange rate risk. The equity
   contributions from the GOI were to be funded from cash available on PT SMI’s balance sheet. The pricing
   principle for the funding was to be “cost plus”. It was targeted that the lending rate would be more attractive
   for SNGs compared to the funding available in the country. The subprojects financed by the RIDF were to
   be economically viable and have clear development and poverty reduction impacts. Eligible sectors
   included water supply, sanitation, sewerage, drainage, solid waste, urban transport including roads, low-
   income housing, slum upgrading, and primary healthcare and education facilities. The project included a
   security structure that fully guaranteed the RIDF lending by the MoF in the case of default by an SNG.

   2. RIDF Project Development Facility (Estimated Cost at Appraisal: US$6 million; Actual Cost at Closing:
   US$2.81 million):

   A project development facility (PDF) was to be established under this component. The PDF was to support
   the SNGs in subproject identification and preparation such as feasibility studies, detailed engineering
   designs, environmental and social safeguard assessments, advisory services on financial management and
   procurement, and training. The PDF was also to support the building up of the project pipeline and ensure
   the consistency of the subprojects with the technical, financial, economic, social and environmental
   appraisal standards of the RIDF.



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Regional Infrastructure Development Fund (P154947)



  Revised Components: At the second project restructuring in June 2020, a third component was added to
  the project scope:

  3. Early Response and Recovery Component – ERRC. This component was to enable the RIDF to
  rapidly respond to subnational borrowing needs arising from emergencies, including COVID-19. The ERRC
  was to serve as a product offering under the RIDF to immediately respond to national/subnational
  emergencies and recovery efforts in the medium term. The new component was to be financed by a
  reallocation of undisbursed IBRD-loan proceeds in the amount of US$25 million from the first component. A
  similar adjustment was made to the AIIB loan proceeds and accordingly the total allocation for the new
  component was estimated to be US$50 million. Following the reallocations at the second restructuring, total
  cost of the first component was reduced to US$350 million.

  In the fifth restructuring in June 2022, US$49.2 million of the unused loan proceeds were cancelled because
  of challenges in project implementation and procurement, strong competition from alternative sources of
  financing, and delays caused by the COVID-19 pandemic related measures. As a result, total estimated
  costs of the first and third components decreased to US$291.68 million and US$9.76 million, respectively.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project cost estimated at appraisal was US$406 million. The project cost was revised
  down to US$104.64 million at the fifth restructuring. The actual cost at project closing was US$89.19 million,
  lower than the estimate at appraisal because the project could not complete a significant portion of the
  project activities due to procurement and implementation problems, capacity issues, and external factors
  like COVID-19 and competing financing programs.

  Financing: The IBRD loan amount estimated at appraisal was US$100 million. By project closing, the
  project had disbursed US$43.34 million. Component 1 activities were to be co-financed by a US$100 million
  loan from the AIIB. A US$3 million grant from the Indonesia Sustainable Urbanization Fund (ISUF) was to
  finance the activities under Component 2. By project closing, the project had disbursed US$2.81 million of
  the ISUF grant and US$43.03 million of the AIIB loan.

  Borrower Contribution: At appraisal, US$203 million of borrower contribution was foreseen. By project
  closing, the PDF component enabled the successful preparation and loan application for 10 subprojects
  worth US$150 million that were financed by PT SMI equity. However, as these subprojects did not comply
  with the prescribed fiduciary and safeguard arrangements as stipulated in the RIDF Project Operations
  Manual, this amount was not included in the borrower’s contribution (ICR, p.19).

  Dates: The project was approved on March 10, 2017, and became effective on September 28, 2017. The
  IBRD Loan’s original closing date was December 31, 2020. However, the implementation period was
  extended for two years at the second restructuring, and the loan closed on November 30, 2022. The original
  closing of the ISUF grant was June 30, 2019 but three Level 2 restructurings extended the grant closing
  date first to December 31, 2020 (first restructuring), then to June 25, 2021 (third restructuring) and lastly to
  May 31, 2022 (fourth restructuring).

  Restructurings:




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Regional Infrastructure Development Fund (P154947)



The project had five Level 2 restructurings:

Restructuring No.1 (June 25, 2019): The restructuring extended the implementation period of the grant
component (TF-A3871) by 18 months from June 30, 2019 to December 31, 2020 to match the grant closing
date with the IBRD loan closing date. This extension was to allow the full implementation of activities under
the PDF that were delayed due to slow procurement activities and lengthy bureaucratic procedures.

Restructuring No.2 (June 30, 2020): The restructuring extended the loan closing date by 23 months from
December 31, 2020 to November 30, 2022, to allow the full implementation of planned activities under the
subproject loan portfolio and pipeline. The restructuring also introduced some flexibility for the MoF and the
PT SMI to respond to negative interest rate margin risk because of volatility in market yields and the
ministerial regulation issued on loan pricing. Lastly, a new component, the ERRC, was added to the project
scope to enable the GOI to rapidly response to emergencies, including COVID-19. In line with these
changes, the project’s results framework was revised: The PDO indicator of “number of subnational
governments receiving RIDF loans” was replaced by “number of sub-projects receiving RIDF loans” to
better assess the progress in achieving increased access outcome. The end target was set as 20 projects.
In addition, the end target for the PDO indicator “average tenor of loans approved by RIDF” was reduced
from 8 years to 6 years. A new PDO indicator was added to assess the effectiveness of the ERRC (number
of subnational governments receiving assistance through ERRC) and another one to measure capacities
and systems developed (number of subnational governments receiving capacity building training).
Regarding the intermediate results indicators, targets for three indicators were reduced and two new
indicators were added related to the ERRC (number of subnational governments applying to ERRC and
number of ERRC applications appraised).

Restructuring No.3 (December 18, 2020) and Restructuring No.4 (June 25, 2021): These restructurings
extended the closing date of the ISUF grant from December 31, 2020, to June 25, 2021 and May 31, 2022,
respectively. As the ISUF grant supported the PDF under Component 2, these project closing date
extensions aimed to enable uncommitted amounts to be fully utilized.

Restructuring No.5 (June 15, 2022): This restructuring cancelled an undisbursed amount of US$49.17
million from the IBRD loan because of underutilization. According to the restructuring paper, this was due to
a number of reasons including challenges related to procurement and implementation, strong competition
from alternative sources of financing for SNGs such as the National Economic Recovery Loan (PEN), and
delays related to the COVID-19 pandemic measures. The restructuring also revised the project’s results
framework to accommodate project’s achievements during the remaining implementation period. Targets for
three PDO indicators (number of sub-projects receiving RIDF loan, average tenor of loans approved by
RIDF, and number of SNGs receiving assistance through ERRC) and two intermediate results indicators
(amount capital raised and number of SNGs applying to ERRC) were reduced.

Reasons to undertake a split assessment for the project outcome: A split assessment for the project
outcome was undertaken because of the changes in the targets of the PDO indicators at the second project
restructuring. Although the revisions at the fifth restructuring would require a split assessment of the project
outcome, a split assessment for those revisions will not be undertaken because they did not have any
impact on project’s efficacy in achieving the project’s objective as the project did not disburse any funds
after this restructuring.




                                                                                                   Page 4 of 19
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Regional Infrastructure Development Fund (P154947)



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The World Bank Strategy: The project objective was highly aligned with the World Bank strategy defined
in the Country Partnership Framework FY21-25 and with the World Bank Group’s 2020 Systemic Country
Diagnostic Update for Indonesia. In line with the decentralization efforts that began in 2001, the SNGs in
Indonesia were required to implement infrastructure investments. However, the available financing
instruments could not meet the required urban and local level investments by nature and scale. In addition,
the SNGs have lacked the technical, institutional, or financial capacity to carry out strategic infrastructure
investments and keep pace with the rapidly expanding demand for local services (PAD, p.4). The Country
Diagnostic update mentioned that inadequate infrastructure was jeopardizing sustainable growth and
competitiveness in the country. In this context, the CPF (Engagement Area II. Improve Infrastructure,
Objective 2.1 Improve infrastructure provision and quality of service) supports the development of
infrastructure and service delivery through national platforms, institutional strengthening, and capacity
building on evidence-based planning. The project aimed to address the medium to long-term infrastructure
financing gap for SNGs. In alignment with the country’s development problem, the project offered both
financing and project development assistance to subnational governments to close the above-mentioned
gap.

Country Context: The GOI’s 2015–2019 National Medium-Term Development Plan (also the current plan
from 2020 to 2024) highlighted the massive need for infrastructure delivery through all modes, including
subnational spending. More specifically, the plan mentioned using mechanisms such as a municipal
development fund for urban infrastructure. In this context, the project’s objective targeting infrastructure
financing at the sub-national level was outcome-oriented. However, given the capacity constraints in the
country (PT SMI lacked familiarity with WB project requirements, assumed new responsibilities needed to
develop new capacities, SNGs lacked capacities, particularly for meeting requirements of safeguard
policies) to deal with complex infrastructure projects, and the underdeveloped enabling environment to
implement subnational financing, the PDO was over-ambitious.

Previous Sector Experience: When designing the project, a wide range of experiences was examined,
including those in Colombia, India, Morocco, the Philippines, South Africa, and Vietnam. The project
activities were consistent with good practice cases of similar facilities, typically revolving funds financed by
the respective governments and international agencies. They provide assistance in the areas of
undertaking pre-feasibility studies, environmental and social impact assessments, project documentation,
and preparation of detailed project reports. The World Bank has experience in local service delivery through
previous engagements in Indonesia, mainly through the Local Government Decentralization Project and the
Urban Sector Development Reform Project (USDRP). The USDRP recommended that a financial
intermediary solution would be more effective than direct on-lending to municipal governments and that
long-term operations and maintenance costs for urban infrastructure should be considered during the initial
planning stage (PAD 13). The Programmatic Advisory Services and Analytics also provided advisory on
sustainable urbanization in the country. Based on the Bank's previous experience in the sector and the
country, the objective was sufficiently challenging for this intervention.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating


                                                                                                          Page 5 of 19
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Regional Infrastructure Development Fund (P154947)



               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To increase access to infrastructure finance at the subnational level through a financially sustainable financial
                intermediary.

                Rationale
                Theory of Change:

                The project inputs were to be used to finance the project activities consisting of the following: (a) capital
                grants to RIDF to finance infrastructure subprojects to be developed by the SNGs; (b) provision of financial
                and technical support to SNGs for the preparation of feasibility studies, detailed engineering designs, and
                environmental and social safeguard assessments, and consultancy services on financial management and
                procurement through PDF; and (c) development of a security mechanism for subnational borrowings. These
                activities were expected to lead to the project outputs of subprojects identified that were eligible for RIDF
                funding, a security mechanism, capacity increase in the SNGs, and loans extended to eligible SNGs for the
                financing of economically viable subprojects in the eligible sectors. These outputs would have been expected
                to result in eligible SNGs’ increased access to infrastructure finance and the development of critical
                infrastructure. There were two critical assumptions: (a) the necessary enabling environment for the
                implementation of SNG financing was in place; and (b) the terms and conditions of the loans offered under
                the RIDF were attractive enough for the SNGs to borrow. Overall, the causal pathways from financing and
                services provided through PDF (inputs) to expected results (increased capacity in and loans to SNGs) were
                valid and direct. The results achieved could be attributable to the project’s intervention.

                The PDO level indicators for assessing increased access to infrastructure finance were relevant. However,
                the impact of the project’s support on the project development capacity of the SNGs could not be captured as
                the results framework did not include any indicator in this regard. The intermediate results indicators were
                mainly concentrated on inputs. The results framework could have benefitted from additional PDO level
                indicators, which could capture the impact of the project on the capacity improvement of the PT SMI gained
                through the implementation of the RIDF (ICR, p.29).

                Outputs:

                      Number of subproject loans appraised: The RIDF appraised loan proposals for 33 subprojects by
                       project closing, remaining below the original target of 40 and higher.
                      Number of subnational governments applying for RIDF Project Development Facility
                       services: 32 SNGs applied for PDF assistance, remaining below the original target of 40. The SNGs
                       mostly requested services for the preparation of feasibility studies, detailed engineering plans, and
                       environmental impact assessments. In addition, services for the development of relocation plans,
                       procurement, project monitoring, analyses of potential revenues, social and economic impacts, and
                       traffic impacts were also requested.

                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Regional Infrastructure Development Fund (P154947)




     Number of projects prepared with assistance from the RIDF Project Development Facility:
       Thirty subprojects were prepared with assistance from the PDF, slightly below the original target of 35
       projects. The ICR (p.19) reports that of the 42 subprojects that requested PDF assistance, 12
       subprojects withdrew their loan applications from the facility or cancelled them for reasons such as
       non-approval of the loan proposal by the local legislatures, the short loan tenor recommended by
       Ministry of Home Affairs (MoHA), or the application of additional and different procurement and
       safeguards policies with which the SNGs were not familiar. However, the ICR (p.19) states that PDF
       provided valuable support to SNGs in accelerating the preparation of subproject technical documents,
       which would otherwise have taken much longer to prepare.

Additional outputs reported in the ICR:

     Impact Evaluations: The project mobilized an Indonesia Infrastructure Support (INIS) Trust Fund (TF)
       grant to support PT SMI in establishing methodologies and pilot studies to capture the long-term social
       development and economic outcomes of its subnational infrastructure financing projects. By project
       closing, two impact evaluation studies were completed, assessing PT SMI’s pre-RIDF and RIDF
       subprojects. At the time of the ICR, an Impact Evaluation Manual was being developed. Through the
       support of the Indonesia Infrastructure Support Trust Fund mobilized by the project, PT SMI was
       supported in establishing methodologies and pilot studies to capture the long-term social development
       and economic outcomes of its subnational infrastructure financing projects. The trust fund also
       contributed to the development of a guidance book for designing and implementing impact evaluation,
       focusing on the public market, hospital, and road subprojects (ICR, p.22).

Outcomes:

Increased access to infrastructure finance by the SNGs

     Amount of capital raised: The final achievement was US$86.38 million against the target of US$400
       million.
     Number of SNGs receiving RIDF loans (this indicator was modified at the second restructuring): The
      project achieved 12 loans, falling short of the original target of 25.
     Average loan size approved by RIDF: By project closing, the RIDF loan portfolio reached an
      average loan size of IDR194.3 billion (approximately US$13.1 million), exceeding the target of IDR150
      billion (approximately US$10.1 million). The ICR (p.16) reports that the approved sub-loan packages
      ranged from IDR40.8 million to IDR388.8 million (approximately US$2.7 million–US$26.2 million) for
      three types of infrastructure: roads, public markets, and hospitals.
     Average tenor of loans approved by RIDF: The tenor of the loans approved by RIDF averaged 4.57
      years at project closing, remaining below the original target of 8 years. In Indonesia, tenors of loans to
      be borrowed by the SNGs under the RIDF were capped at five years by MoHA. Therefore, achieving
      the original target of 8 years was not possible (ICR, p.16).

Financial performance and sustainability of RIDF

     Return on RIDF assets: By project closing, the rate of return on RIDF assets was 2 percent above
       the target of 1 percent. The ratio was calculated from 2017 to 2023 and projected for subsequent
       periods. It demonstrates the financially healthy activity of RIDF that it has been operating sustainably
       as a financial intermediary institution lending to local governments for infrastructure development. The

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Regional Infrastructure Development Fund (P154947)



      ICR (p.17) reports that, despite challenging conditions like interest rate spread and smaller loan sizes,
      RIDF was able to operate sustainably in terms of financial ratios.
     Non-performing loans (NPLs): The project did not have any NPLs during project implementation and
      by project closing. The end target of less than 5 percent was met. However, the ICR (p.17) notes that
      The SNGs started their RIDF loan repayments after the completion of the construction of the
      corresponding subprojects and by project closing there was only one SNG that had repaid its loan in
      full. The remaining six SNGs will have completed their repayments by 2026. Their repayment
      performance up to the date of ICR did not signal any issue; therefore, no NPL case was expected.
     Proportion of the total loan portfolio concentrated in a single sector: The proportion of the total
      loan portfolio concentrated in one sector was 68.8 percent, higher than the target of 40 percent or
      less. Investment in hospitals had the largest share (approximately US$63.1 million) in the loan
      portfolio followed by public markets (approximately US$16.5 million) and roads (approximately
      US$12.1 million).

Additional outcomes reported in the ICR:

     Improvement of regulatory framework by the government for SNG borrowing: The security
      mechanism introduced by the project enabled pledging future fiscal transfer revenues as collateral for
      the loan application and their interception in case of repayment difficulties. This mechanism was
      institutionalized in the Finance Ministry Regulation (Peraturan Menteri Keuangan/PMK) No.
      121/PMK.07/2017 and was subsequently adopted for all other subnational lending instruments
      administered by PT SMI. In addition, the MoF issued PMK No. 125/PMK.07/2017 governing the
      contingency fund’s management related to the intercept mechanism to comply with the framework
      requirements (ICR, p.19). The development of the draft Law on Intergovernmental Fiscal Relation (UU
      Hubungan Keuangan Pusat dan Daerah/HKPD), which streamlined processes of subnational
      borrowing, was possible as a result of lessons learned from the project. The new law streamlined
      approval processes for SNG borrowing in the annual budget, moving away from approvals on a
      project-by-project basis. This change is expected to mitigate one of the significant challenges in
      subnational borrowing processes. It is also expected to facilitate a broader discussion at the local level
      on financing instruments available to SNGs, paving the way for integrated financing for infrastructure
      in the future (ICR, p.30).
     Improved capacity of PT SMI: By the project closing, PT SMI’s portfolio had expanded significantly
      from seven subprojects to 42 in public markets, water supply, and transportation sectors. Those
      subprojects were funded through PT SMI’s equity. Moreover, between 2020 and 2021, PT SMI
      extended loans for 124 subprojects as part of the PEN loan program. The experience gained through
      the implementation of RIDF contributed to this expansion. The project contributed to the formation of
      PT SMI’s non-PPP PDF Team through the PDF component (ICR, p.22). The division can now
      substantially contribute to the preparation of project technical documents, including feasibility studies,
      detailed engineering designs, environmental and social impact assessments, land acquisition and
      resettlement action plans, and temporary relocation plans. The project supported PT SMI’s becoming
      a reputable and capable domestic financial intermediary for infrastructure and encouraged other
      multilateral organizations to engage with it for similar operations in Indonesia (ICR, p.19).
     The project leveraged substantial government contribution for subnational lending through PDF.
      However, as these subprojects supported by the government contribution did not comply with the
      fiduciary and safeguard arrangements stipulated in the RIDF Project Operations Manual, these figures
      were not reflected in the Results Framework.


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Regional Infrastructure Development Fund (P154947)



The project’s achievements with respect to the majority of the identified PDO level and intermediate level
indicators remained below the targets. As reported in the ICR, this under achievement was attributable to
several factors. One of the problems was the capacity issue of both the SNGs and PT SMI. The technical and
financial capacities and the subproject readiness significantly varied among the SNGs. Although the project
offered project development support, the SNGs continued to have difficulty in preparing necessary technical
documents, managing procurement processes, and preparing subprojects for implementation. With the
project, PT SMI assumed new responsibilities and roles that required considerable time to develop the
necessary capacities. Another factor was the layers of approval processes required for borrowing at the
subnational level. Overall, these processes prolonged the loan-to-construction periods. Also, MoHA’s
decisions that put caps on the duration of the loans borrowed by the SNGs adversely affected the appetite of
the SNGs for RIDF loans. The loan tenure was short; the initially planned loan duration of three years was
short for this type of project. The project involved activities supporting SNGs to develop subprojects. Only
after that can the be submitted to the RDIF for financing. This process left very limited time for implementing
the subprojects, and repayment periods for the loans were short (Meeting with the project team, December
11, 2023). Despite these factors, the project positively impacted PT SMI and SNGs’ capacity development. In
addition, when the project implementation commenced, enabling environment for SNG borrowing was not
fully developed. As a result of the project implementation and the experience gained thereon, the project
contributed to the improvement of legal and regulatory framework for subnational borrowing. However, the
impact of these positive developments could not be fully captured because the results framework did not
include any relevant indicators. Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project’s objective is rated
Modest due to underachievement.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To increase access to infrastructure finance at the subnational level through a financially sustainable financial
intermediary.

Although the project objective was not revised, a split assessment of the project’s efficacy in achieving the
project objective is undertaken because of cahnges in the targets of the key performance indicators at the
second project restructuring.


Revised Rationale
Theory of Change: The revisions at the second project restructuring did not affect the theory of change.

Outputs:

      Number of subproject loans appraised: The project exceeded the revised end target of 30 and
       reached 33 loans.
      Number of subnational governments applying for RIDF Project Development Facility services:
       In total, 32 SNGs applied for PDF assistance, exceeding the revised end target of 30.


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Regional Infrastructure Development Fund (P154947)




      Number of projects prepared with assistance from the RIDF Project Development Facility:
       Thirty subprojects were prepared with assistance from the PDF, meeting the revised end target of 30.
      Number of SNGs applying to ERRC (this indicator was introduced at the second restructuring):
       A total of 16 SNGs applied to the ERRC, less than the target of 20. The PEN loans offered better
       terms, which negatively affected the demand for ERRC loans.
      Number of ERRC applications appraised (this indicator was introduced at the second
       restructuring): All 16 subprojects proposed to ERRC were appraised, exceeding the end target of 15.

Outcomes:

      Number of subprojects receiving RIDF loans (revised indicator): At project closing, 12
       subprojects had received RIDF loans, fewer than the revised target of 20. PT SMI offered a zero-
       interest loan with tenor of up to 10 years during its initial year. The Government’s launch of the
       competing PEN loan program with much more favorable terms reduced the appeal of RIDF and ERRC
       loans. These led to the cancellation of the undisbursed loan amount. At project closing, PT SMI’s
       portfolio had increased to 42 subprojects, including subprojects in public markets, water supply, and
       transportation sectors. RIDF financed 12 subprojects, while the remaining 30 were financed by PT
       SMI’s equity. Ten of the equity-financed subprojects were supported by the PDF component during
       various stages in their preparation. The Government’s launch of the competing PEN loan program
       with much more favorable terms reduced the appeal of RIDF and ERRC loans. These led to the
       cancellation of the undisbursed loan amount.
      Average tenor of loans approved by RIDF: Project achieved 4.75 year, and this was below the
       revised target of six years.
      Number of SNGs receiving assistance through ERRC (This indicator was introduced at the
       second restructuring): Although the ERRC was introduced to provide emergency and expedited
       infrastructure financing for SNGs, the ERRC only managed to provide a loan to one additional SNG by
       project closing - below the original target of 10 SNGs. Delays in regulatory approvals and direct
       competition from the PEN loan program with more favorable terms negatively impacted
       implementation of ERRC. By the end of the project, PT SMI was able to disburse loans for 124
       subprojects between 2020 and 2021 through the PEN loan program, while ERRC was able to finance
       only one road subproject in Lampung Selatan.
      Number of SNGs receiving capacity building trainings (This indicator was introduced at the
       second restructuring): In total, 89 SNGs received capacity building trainings, exceeding the end target
       of 75. The project supported SNGs through coaching clinics on procurement, market management,
       and environmental and social safeguards, including on temporary relocation and solid waste
       management. Through the project, the SNGs were trained on economic analysis, creditworthiness,
       gender, disability inclusiveness, and disaster risk management.



Overall, there was no major change in the level of achievement after the second restructuring. Therefore, the
rating for the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective remained Modest. In addition to the factors of
capacity issues and lengthy administrative processes for loan approval at the subnational level, the onset of
the COVID-19 pandemic severely impacted the project implementation. Lastly, the competing PEN program,
which offered more favorable terms then the ERRC, resulted in underachievement.



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Regional Infrastructure Development Fund (P154947)




                              Revised Rating
                              Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The objective to increase access to infrastructure finance at the subnational level through a financially
                            sustainable financial intermediary is rated modest before the restructuring due to low achievement.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            The objective to increase access to infrastructure finance at the subnational level through a financially
                            sustainable financial intermediary is rated modest after the restructuring due to low achievement.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                        Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement


   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Analysis:

   Ex-post Analysis: At appraisal, an economic analysis was not conducted because the subprojects to be
   financed by the RIDF were not identified. Instead, the PAD included a cost-benefit analysis framework to guide
   PT SMI in conducting an economic analysis and included two case studies (one on the road and the other in
   traditional market sectors) to illustrate the economic feasibility of the RIDF pipeline. On the other hand, the
   financial analysis at appraisal was comprehensive. With the assumption that assets would grow from US$22
   million to US$1,087 million in 10 years, the profit after tax for RIDF was expected to increase to US$26.4 million.
   Accordingly, the RIDF project could yield a return on assets of at least 1 percent after year 3, potentially
   increasing to 3 or 4 percent in the subsequent seven years. Moreover, the sensitivity analysis indicated that
   unless the NPL ratio rose to 15 percent or the net interest margin shifted to 0.65 percentage points, the RIDF
   project would be profitable (PAD, p.20).

   Ex-ante Analysis: At project closing, a full economic analysis was conducted based on the actual data using
   the cost-benefit analysis methodology provided in the PAD. The assumptions and the methodology were sound.
   To assess economic feasibility, the discount rate was set at 5 percent for 10-15 years, depending on the
   subproject. The economic analysis of RIDF-financed projects in Indonesia reveals positive results across the
   hospital, road, and public market sectors. The NPV is US$91.24 million, US$14.40 million, and US$48.38 million

                                                                                                                               Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Regional Infrastructure Development Fund (P154947)



for hospital, road, and public markets, respectively, with internal rates of return ranging from 25.91 percent to
34.01 percent. The analysis for both the RIDF and the PDF components concluded that despite administrative
challenges, these mechanisms exhibited high economic efficiency and were justifiable for local infrastructure
investments in Indonesia. Financial analysis of RIDF during its operation after 2018 concluded that despite
challenges with interest rate spread, smaller loan size, and differing debt-equity assumptions, RIDF has been
able to operate sustainably in terms of financial ratios (ICR, p.53). The ICR reports that this sustainability
enables RIDF to continue supporting vital infrastructure investments in the future and is alone an improvement
for Indonesia’s municipal lending ecosystem compared to the previous practices.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: There were some shortcomings in the project’s administrative and
operational efficiency. The project had significant implementation delays resulting from layers of approval
processes extending the loan-to-construction timeframe. The limited capacity of SNGs in project preparation
particularly with respect to guidelines for environment and social safeguards requirements delayed project
preparation timeline. In addition, the procurement departments of the SNGs had limited capacity for subnational
procurement and were not familiar with the World Bank procurement procedures. These delayed the
procurement of goods and civil works for the construction of subprojects. By project closing, only 44.7% of loan
proceeds had been disbursed despite the project team’s efforts to extend the implementation period to facilitate
further disbursements and completion of activities.

Although the economic and financial analysis reveals positive results at closing, due to significant administrative
and operational inefficiencies, the efficiency of the project is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                               25.91
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives is rated substantial. The efficacy ratings both before and after the restructuring are
modest. Efficiency is also rated modest. The project’s outcome rating is moderately unsatisfactory before and
after the project restructuring. Therefore, the project’s overall outcome rating is moderately unsatisfactory.




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Regional Infrastructure Development Fund (P154947)



a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional Capacity Risk: At appraisal, PT SMI was a young financial institution assuming new roles
related to subnational borrowing and was not familiar with the World Bank project requirements. Therefore,
the level of institutional capacity risk was considered to be substantial. By project closing, PT SMI expanded
its subproject portfolio from seven to forty-two RIDF projects and 124 PEN projects. In addition, the institution
strengthened its environmental and social management capacity (another substantial risk factor identified at
appraisal) by developing its framework and establishing a dedicated unit for dealing with these issues. Also,
the project directly contributed to the formation of a specific unit to prepare project technical documents, such
as feasibility studies and detailed engineering designs. The ICR (p.30) reports that shortly after the project
closing, the MoF elevated the financial institution to a full-fledged local development bank for SNGs. The
institutional capacity risk is, therefore, assessed as low.

Regulatory Risk: At appraisal, the regulatory risk was considered substantial. Although the regulatory
environment at appraisal allowed for subnational borrowing consistent with the proposed RIDF model,
additional regulations for the sustainability of RIDF results were still needed. As a result of the experience
gained from the implementation of RIDF and the lessons learned from the facility practice, the Law on
Intergovernmental Fiscal Relation (UU Hubungan Keuangan Pusat dan Daerah/HKPD), which streamlined
processes of subnational borrowing, was developed. The ICR (p.30) reports that this change is expected to
mitigate one of the major challenges in subnational borrowing processes and expected to pave the way for
integrated financing for infrastructure in the future. The security mechanism introduced by the project was
institutionalized in the Finance Minister Regulation (Peraturan Menteri Keuangan/PMK) No.
121/PMK.07/2017 and was subsequently adopted for all other subnational lending instruments administered
by PT SMI. These regulatory improvements further institutionalized subnational borrowing, expected to
sustain the project results.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project had high strategic relevance as it supported GOI’s and the World Bank’s relevant priorities
  and strategies. At appraisal, a task team composed of technical experts in relevant sectors, including
  municipal finance, urban planning, and developments, took part in project preparation. Implementation
  arrangements were sufficient. PT SMI was determined to be the implementing agency for RIDF. The
  Directorate General of Budget Financing and Risk Management of MoF was to have the primary
  responsibility for managing the World Bank and AIIB loans for RIDF, as well as overseeing the security
  mechanism for RIDF. By design, RIDF’s implementation period for this financing project was short. The
  project involved activities to support SNGs in the development of projects. Only after that can the projects
  be submitted for financing. This process left very limited time for the construction of the projects. This
  also negatively affected the appetite of the SNGs for loans with short repayment periods. Some risks,
  such as procurement and environmental and social management, were correctly identified at appraisal.

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Regional Infrastructure Development Fund (P154947)



  However, regulatory and implementing agency capacity risks were not assessed thoroughly, and
  mitigation measures were insufficient. PT SMI was a young institution assuming new responsibilities with
  the RIDF project. This situation required some time to develop capacity. This process negatively affected
  project implementation. The layers of regulatory approvals to be provided by MoHA and the local
  legislature prolonged the processes and further limited the duration of the borrowings of the SNGs. The
  M&E framework had some weaknesses. The capacity improvement achieved by the SNGs (through
  benefitting from PDF) and PT SMI (through implementing RDIF and the World Bank’s implementation
  support) by project closing could not be captured as the results framework did not include any indicator
  for assessment of this progress.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The task team at appraisal continued to supervise the project except for two task team leader changes
 during project implementation. The availability of most of the team in the country enabled close support to
 the borrower and facilitated the identification of implementation problems. Throughout the implementation,
 the World Bank supported PT SMI on environmental and social safeguards, procurement, and financial
 management through coaching clinics and training, which significantly contributed to the capacity
 development of PT SMI. The task team carried out regular supervision missions every six months, some of
 which were virtual due to COVID-19. The progress and guidance were recorded in twelve Implementation
 Status and Results Reports. Supervision and midterm review documentation, including Aide Memoirs,
 Management Letters, and ISRs, was thorough and included clear action items to expedite implementation
 (ICR, p.29). The World Bank team’s focus on development results was demonstrated by their effort to
 address the changing needs of the borrower and to restructure the project accordingly. In this respect, the
 ERRC component was introduced, and the results framework was revised. Loan and grant closing dates
 were extended to accommodate the project's slow progress. However, the weaknesses in the M&E
 framework mentioned in the efficacy section above and the M&E quality section below were not addressed
 during the project’s five restructurings. The ICR (p.29) states that the end targets in the results framework
 could have been reduced further to reflect the persistent obstacles identified during the mid-term review of
 the results framework.

 Given the moderately unsatisfactory quality at entry and moderately satisfactory quality of supervision, the
 overall Bank performance is rated as moderately unsatisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Regional Infrastructure Development Fund (P154947)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 PT SMI was principally responsible for project monitoring, including providing data on the PDO and
 intermediate results indicators. The MoF was to monitor the performance of the RIDF. The theory of
 change was sound but was not fully reflected in the results framework, which had substantial weaknesses.
 The first group of PDO indicators aimed to capture the increase in infrastructure financing at the
 subnational level. These indicators were sufficient to provide evidence of the achievements. The second
 group of PDO indicators assessed the financial performance and sustainability of the financial intermediary.
 As reported in the ICR (p.25), relevant data with respect to several non-performing loans were not
 immediately available by the end of the project closing since many of the borrowed loans were in their
 grace periods. This indicator was not measurable; therefore, the achievement of this indicator was reported
 based on assumptions and limited information. Another weakness in the results framework was that the
 PDO indicators in the results framework could not capture the project's impact on institutional strengthening
 of PT SMI and the improvement in SNGs benefitted from PDF. The intermediate results indicators captured
 the implementation of project inputs rather than the achievement of the project outputs.



b. M&E Implementation
  PT SMI collected and reported M&E data during implementation and conducted site visits to assess
  subproject progress. The M&E implementation covered financial management, procurement processes,
  and safeguards. PT SMI prepared quarterly project implementation reports identifying potential issues to
  follow up on and the current ones to find solutions. The ICR (p.26) reports that PT SMI developed
  separate Environmental and Social Monitoring Reports to record the implementation status of Corrective
  Action Plans, pending issues, and respective follow-up actions. A web-based monitoring tool with a user-
  friendly database was also developed for the M&E function. The mid-term review was conducted in the
  last quarter of 2019 to assess implementation progress. Two new indicators were introduced to cover
  ERRC in the results framework, and intermediate indicators were revised to match implementation
  progress. However, the weaknesses in the results framework were not addressed through project
  closing. Also, the subprojects supported by the PDF but financed under PEN or other programs were not
  considered as contributions to increased access to finance, and the results framework did not include any
  indicator to capture this impact. The INIS TF grant funded two pilot impact evaluations for the Central
  Lombok market and the Banjarbaru market subprojects. Findings and recommendations from these
  studies are expected to inform future projects of a similar nature.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E findings were regularly reviewed by the project team and the implementing agency to make
  appropriate adjustments to the implementation plan, depending on the status of physical progress. For
  example, a new component (ERRC) was added to meet emerging needs of the SNGs, also the
  durations of the loan agreement and the grant agreement were extended meet implementation progress.
  The findings of the mid-term review were not fully reflected on the changes introduced in the end targets.
  The ICR (p.29) argues that the end targets in the results framework could have been reduced further to
  reflect the persistent obstacles identified during the mid-term review on the results framework.



                                                                                                  Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Regional Infrastructure Development Fund (P154947)



  Overall, the M&E design had shortcomings since the results framework did not include any indicators
  which could capture the impact of the RIDF implementation on PT SMI and the impact of the PDF on the
  capacities of the SNGs. In addition, the M&E implementation did not cover the increased access to
  finance achieved though the subprojects supported by the PDF but financed under PEN or other
  programs.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category Financial Intermediary (FI) under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP
   4.01) and triggered Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36), Pest Management (OP 4.09),
   Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)
   and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) safeguard policies as a precautionary step considering the wide
   scope of the project. The ICR (p.27) reports that during implementation, the Forests, Pest Management,
   and Safety of Dams safeguard policies were found to be irrelevant to the RIDF subprojects, given the nature
   of these subprojects. An umbrella environmental and social management framework was developed to
   cover the requirements of the identified safeguard policies. SMI, through its safeguard team, prepared
   environmental and social due diligence reports for each subproject, including corrective action plans to
   address the deficiencies in safeguard management.

   Grievance Redress Mechanisms were set up at PT SMI and local government levels. PT SMI had a focal
   point for managing complaints and follow-up progress in environmental and social management
   requirements. At the local level, complaints were filed and addressed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement: Procurement activities under PDF were carried out by the SNGs. These included
   procurement of goods and civil works for the construction of subprojects. Due to the limited capacities of
   the SNGs on the procurement methods, implementation delays were experienced. However, this was
   compensated through one-on-one coaching clinics to SNGs offered by the World Bank and PT SMI. As a
   result, the quality of the procurement improved, and relevant processes were expedited. PT SMI managed
   procurements under the PDF component without any major difficulty.

   Financial Management: Although PT SMI did not have previous experience in financial management of
   World Bank projects, with the implementation support from the project team and training, the institution
   increased its capacity significantly (Meeting with the project team: December 11, 2023). PT SMI
   maintained adequate accounting records of all transactions and submitted Interim Financial Reports timely
   and regularly, and in most cases, even ahead of time. External audit reports were unqualified on the



                                                                                                 Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Regional Infrastructure Development Fund (P154947)



   fiduciary and financial management of the project (ICR, p.28). At the time of project evaluation, all project
   funds were accounted for.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The operationalization of ERRC was delayed due to the time taken by the GOI and the lengthy
   administrative processes. Subprojects that were prepared under PDF during the COVID-19 pandemic were
   financed by another loan program offered by PT SMI (PEN loan) with more favorable terms compared to
   ERRC hurting prospects of the program. PT SMI was able to disburse loans for 124 subprojects between
   2020 and 2021 through the PEN loan program, while ERRC was able to finance only one road subproject.
   The delays in ERRC motivated GoI to develop an alternative program to compensate for the negative
   economic impacts caused by COVID with more favorable terms.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately             Moderately
Outcome
                                Unsatisfactory         Unsatisfactory
                                Moderately             Moderately
Bank Performance
                                Unsatisfactory         Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                    High


12. Lessons

The following are lessons taken from the ICR with some paraphrasing:

      Complementary financing terms across instruments of the financing program can help
       quick adaptation to emergency situations such as the COVID-19 pandemic. During the
       implementation, PT SMI offered ERRC and PEN loans under the same fund-based profit
       margin mechanism, leading to direct competition between the two programs. The PEN loan
       program, offering a zero interest rate, had more favorable terms compared to the ERRC and
       was preferred by the SNGs. The ERRC could have been positioned differently and offered
       fee-based, with the profit margin calculated as a fixed-sum service fee rather than as interest
       on the loan amount. As ICR reports, this could have addressed the negative stigma often



                                                                                                     Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Regional Infrastructure Development Fund (P154947)



         associated with lending and interest rates, which are culturally sensitive topics to the
         Indonesian public.
        If designed with modest goals, framework projects can successfully deliver proof of
         concept, achieve their targets, and provide subnational governments the opportunity
         to think about their long-term goals. Although the RIDF project was initially designed as a
         two-phase project, targets were ambitious compared to the limited implementation period,
         capacity constraints, and required approval procedures. This first phase project could have
         been framed as a ‘pilot’ with moderate goals, aiming to deliver proof of concept and
         encourage new borrowers. The moderate targets would have also increased the project’s
         likelihood of success, as failure at this stage risked discouraging potential borrowers from
         considering the subnational loan instrument.
        Matching the implementation period with the project's ambition level can help improve
         the project's achievements. RIDF had a short implementation period compared to projects
         of a similar nature. In addition, MoHA’s requirement of a five-year loan tenor for SNGs based
         on election cycles and a lengthy internal approval process severely curtailed SNGs’ interest
         in RIDF. These limitations narrowed the sectoral scope of the subprojects down to largely
         revenue-generating hospitals, markets, and roads.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a comprehensive overview of the project. It is concise and candid in explaining the issues
encountered in the design and implementation phases. It is internally consistent, and there is a logical linking of
the various parts of the report (i.e., efficacy with bank performance). The report follows the Bank's guidance
and adequately describes the reasons for the ratings. The ICR is to be especially commended for openly
discussing the reasons that negatively affected the project implementation and performance. Although the PDO
was not achieved, the ICR clearly articulates factors related to project design and bank performance while
drawing useful lessons from these. The narrative is highly evaluative rather than descriptive. The ICR makes an
excellent effort to describe the project's impacts using additional evidence captured by the M&E framework.
The discussion in the Lessons and Recommendations section is clear, useful, and based on the evidence
outlined in the ICR. However, they are more in the form of findings and recommendations rather than lessons,
but overall, the ICR is a very sound document.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                     Page 18 of 19
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Regional Infrastructure Development Fund (P154947)




                                                                                  Page 19 of 19
