     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somaliland Civil Service Strengthening (P155123)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023794

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P155123                                     Somaliland Civil Service Strengthening

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Somalia                                     Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A2810,TF-A7321                           30-Jun-2021                                           9,990,055.82

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Jun-2016                                 30-Dec-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             10,000,000.00                                   10,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              10,000,000.00                                   10,000,000.00

 Actual                                          10,000,000.00                                    9,990,055.82




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Mees Daniel van der         Clay Wescott                  Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC (Unit 1)
 Werf




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) for the Somaliland Civil Service Strengthening was stated in the
   Grant Agreement as “to strengthen basic functions for payroll, human resources and policy management in
   selected central agencies and line ministries” (Page 5). The Project Appraisal Document formulated the PDO
   the same way. The PDO was not changed during the restructurings.




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somaliland Civil Service Strengthening (P155123)



   Parsing of the Objective: For this review, the PDO will be parsed into three objectives in line with its first
   three components, which remained consistent throughout the project:

         PDO 1: to strengthen basic functions for payroll in selected central agencies and line ministries;
         PDO 2: to strengthen human resources in selected central agencies and line ministries;
         PDO 3: to strengthen policy management in selected central agencies and line ministries.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  04-Jun-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Strengthening the policies, procedures, and systems for civil service management
   (appraisal cost: US$ 3.9 million, actual US$ 4.32 million, equivalent to 39 percent of the project amount).
   This component supported the government in strengthening the foundations for managing its workforce and
   reducing development risks posed by an ever-costlier civil service. The main implementing agency for
   Component 1 was the Civil Service Commission (CSC), working in close collaboration with the Ministry of
   Finance and Development (MoFD) (on payroll reform) and the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (on
   pension policy). This component was split into three activity-oriented sub-components: (1.1) Civil Service
   Headcount and Payroll Management, (1.2) Human Resource Management, and (1.3) Public Sector Pension
   Reform.

   Component 2: Strengthening the core capacity of targeted ministries (cost at appraisal: US$ 3.6
   million, actual: US$ 2.71 million, equivalent to 36 percent of the project amount). This component aimed to
   improve core HR and policy functionality in two central and two sector ministries, departments, or agencies
   (MDAs) on a pilot basis. The main central implementing agencies for this component were CSC and the
   Civil Service Institution (CSI, administratively subordinated to CSC), with targeted MDAs as the main
   beneficiaries and implementing partners. The component was split into the outcome-oriented sub-
   components: (2.1) Reorganization of Key Departments in Targeted MDAs; (2.2) Civil Service Talent
   Management Program; and (2.3) Management and Common Services Training.

   Component 3: Strengthening policy management capabilities at the center of government (appraisal
   cost: US$ 0.75 million, actual: US$ 0.29 million, equivalent to 7.5 percent of the project amount). This
   component was to support building basic processes and standards for policy management at the center of
   the Somaliland government. It was expected to provide the framework for improving basic policy




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somaliland Civil Service Strengthening (P155123)



   development functions and capacities in pilot line ministries targeted under Component 2. It was expected
   that this sub-component would be implemented starting in year 3 of the project.

   Component 4: Project management and support in delivery (appraisal cost: US$ 1.75 million, actual:
   US$ 2.68 million, equivalent to 17.5 percent of the project amount). This component was to support the
   management, coordination, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of project activities. It was also to pilot
   innovative approaches to mobilizing teams to support the implementation and delivery of project activities
   under Components 1–3.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The Project's original cost at appraisal was US$ 10 million, to be committed through the
   Somalia Multi-Partner Fund (MPF). The actual project cost at closure was US$ 9,99 million. There were
   eight restructurings of which three included a change in components and costs. The November 18, 2020,
   change allowed the reallocation of funds across categories as requested by the Government of Somaliland
   (GoSL). The June 10, 2022, change was necessitated by a change in how the Advisors were hired, a
   reduction in the number of Talent Management Program (TMP) staff to be hired and paid, and a need to
   replenish the project management component caused by implementation delays. The September 22, 2022,
   change was necessitated by a delay in the filling of positions for Advisors and, thus, a need to reduce their
   fees while replenishing the project management component to cater for expenses under this component
   during that period of delay. The restructuring that revised the results framework and reduced the target of
   the Talent Management Program (TMP) PDO level indicator (DPO-4) downward took place on November
   18, 2020. At that point, US$ 5.98 million had been disbursed.

   Financing: A US$ 7.5 million grant (TF0A7321) and a US$ 2.5 million grant (TF0A2810) from the Somalia
   Multi-Partner Trust Funds financed the project.

   Borrower Contribution: The Federal Government of Somalia and the Government of Somaliland did not
   contribute financially to the project.

   Dates: The Bank approved the Project on June 30, 2016, and became effective on October 26, 2016. The
   original closing date was June 30, 2021. This was, however, revised on June 4, 2020, to December 30,
   2022, to account for delays caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The Somaliland Government needed greater capacity to manage its workforce, three elements of
which CSSP aimed to address. To decrease fragility, the Government of Somaliland needed to
strengthen its capacity, reduce social tensions, and set an agenda for political and institutional reform. To
support this, CSSP aimed to address three civil service challenges. First, politicized human resource
management (HRM) practices coupled with weak establishment controls and an absence of a mechanism
for removal of “ghost” and unproductive civil servants had resulted in an underproductive civil service and a
large wage bill accounting for half of total government expenditures. The lack of a pension system

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 18
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Somaliland Civil Service Strengthening (P155123)



prevented MDA from acquiring staff with new skills and exacerbated fiscal pressures as it created pressure
for the government to maintain a high number of above-retirement-age civil servants on the payroll.
Second, the limited capacities of MDA to carry out their core functions was largely driven by the
government's weak HRM capacity and the lack of effective procedures and systems for human resource
(HR) planning, recruitment, and personnel development. An outdated grading structure and low levels of
pay, coupled with a pay structure that largely precluded meaningful pay growth over one's civil service
career, limited career development opportunities and contributed to high attrition of qualified staff to the
development, private, and non-governmental organization sectors, leaving the remaining government
workforce demotivated and with high absenteeism rates. Third, weak policy formulation and monitoring
systems hampered the government’s effectiveness and accountability for results. Weak policy analysis and
coordination capacities at the center of government and the absence of clear procedures on policy
formulation contributed to poor quality submissions to the cabinet, thus creating bottlenecks for cabinet
decision-making. Consultations during policy development were weak, and limited consideration was given
to the implementation and financing of policy proposals. Similarly, there was no effective monitoring or
reporting on key policy initiatives or service delivery, leading to a lack of accountability for government
performance.

The Project Development Objective was highly relevant and well-aligned with Bank-supported
strategies. The FY2014-2016 Interim Strategy Note (ISN) focused on two areas: (i) strengthening core
economic institutions and (ii) expanding economic opportunity. Under the first area, it noted that
"Somaliland and Puntland also need sustainable capacity development investments, including in civil
service reform.” The FY2019-23 Country Partnership Framework (CPF), launched when the project was
active, included a 'Strengthening Institutions to Delivery Services' focus area. The CSSP focused squarely
on core institutional mandates of the government: human resource management and policy management,
and the project’s focus on enhancing establishment and payroll controls aligns with the CPF’s aim of
ensuring adequate fiscal space for the government to meet its core functions, including service delivery.

The ICR included a justification for the inclusion of the Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLI). It
argued that they provided additional financial incentives to the client and provided a clear indication of the
progress of the project based on the scheduled timeframe. They were found to be helpful in ensuring the
completion of key project activities and their outputs.

A stronger focus on recruitment policy could have better supported the achievement of the PDO.
The project aimed to strengthen meritocratic HRM practices but had only a limited focus on strengthening
merit-based recruitment. Merit-based recruitment was used to select the TMP staff. The TMP recruitment
manual was afterward available to the GoSL to guide other hiring. The project also created a legal
framework supportive of meritocratic HRM practices within the civil service and aimed at ensuring
performance-focused management. Yet a more direct focus on hiring practices and a related indicator could
have better supported the achievement of the PDO. Of civil servants employed after the first round of
registration at project close, 36.1% had been recruited competitively.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

                                                                                                        Page 4 of 18
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Somaliland Civil Service Strengthening (P155123)




EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To strengthen basic functions for payroll in selected central agencies and line ministries.

               Rationale
               Relevance of the PDO indicator: The PDO responded to politicized human resource management (HRM)
               practices coupled with weak establishment controls and an absence of a mechanism for the removal of
               "ghost" and unproductive civil servants. The overall theory of change was that revising the Civil Service Law
               and related Combined Administrative Regulations would create a legal framework that supports more
               meritocratic Human Resource Management (HRM) practices. The second element was creating HR records,
               identifying and reducing “ghost” workers and post-retirement age civil servants, including through a new
               pension policy and pension law. This was an appropriate approach for strengthening the basic payroll
               functions. The PDO indicator effectiveness of payroll controls (assessed by the degree of integration and
               reconciliation between personnel records and payroll data) was clearly defined and measurable, with credible
               data available in the ICR. The DLIs were effectively used to ensure the timely delivery of key elements of the
               TOC.

               The achievement of this PDO feasible despite Somaliland's fragile context. Therefore, the relevance of the
               PDO is rated Substantial.

               Intermediate results and key outputs:

               Pay and Grading Policy:

                     Development of the new pay and grading policy and the system is completed, and documents are
                      translated

               Headcount:

                     Biometric database created for all civil servants registered.
                     Conducted 2 payroll audits to identify control weaknesses and ghost workers (IRI-4) (DLI).
                     1,626 ghost workers were removed from payroll, for an estimated net savings of roughly US$2.1
                      million in 2017.

               Pension Policy and Law:

                     Severance policy and pension policy and law approved by the Public Service Reform Steering
                      Committee (PSRSC) and submitted to the cabinet (IRI-5); these were awaiting Cabinet approval at
                      project close. They have since been approved and are now in parliament to be voted upon.

               Payroll management:

                     Verification of payroll and personnel records is done monthly; reconciliation of payroll and personnel
                      records is done quarterly; and the process is now automated.

                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Somaliland Civil Service Strengthening (P155123)




      Both soft and paper-based personnel files are created at each MDA; CSC has back-up paper-based
       files for all employees under CSC.
      70% of civil servants have verified and completed personnel records in the central HR personnel
       database of satisfactory quality (IRI-6) (DLI). The rest were in the process of finalization as of the
       project closing date. At the moment of ICRR publication this had risen to 95%.

Outcomes against targets:

The effectiveness of payroll controls was assessed through the degree of integration and reconciliation
between personnel records and payroll data (PDO-1). The target was for the reconciliation of the payroll with
personnel records to take place at least every six months. This target was exceeded by achieving continuous
payroll and cleaned payroll lists being uploaded to the Somaliland Financial Management Information System
(SLFMIS). Payroll data is also being reconciled with personnel records. Intermediate results Indicator 3 (IRI-3)
‘Pay policy and revised pay and grading structure approved by the Public Service Reform Steering
Committee (PSRSC) and submitted to the cabinet’ was not achieved.

The DPO indicator target was exceeded. IRI-3 was not achieved, IRI-4 and IRI-5 were achieved, and IRI-6
was partially achieved with 70% against a target of 90%. Consequently, Objective 1 is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen human resources in selected central agencies and line ministries.

Rationale
Relevance of the PDO indicator: The PDO responded to the limited capacities of MDAs to carry out their
core functions. It largely reflected the government’s weak HRM capacity and the lack of effective procedures
and systems for human resource (HR) planning, recruitment, and personnel development. The overall theory
of change was that revising MDA organizational structures, building the capacity of staff, inserting TMP, and
establishing a new pay and grading system would improve the cadre of civil servants and MDA performance.
While it is likely that the limited capacity of MDAs is not only due to weak human resources, it is likely that
strengthening them could have a significant impact on MDA capacity. This is in line with the project’s stated
intention to not directly improve service delivery, which would require sector-specific investments, but to
create preconditions for that, including strengthened human resources.

PDO indicator 2 (improved HR development functionality in targeted MDA) was defined as the number HR
functions in MDAs established or reorganized and their staffing tables developed, approved, and staff
received relevant training. While this is an input for strengthening HR functionality and human resources in
general, it was not a suitable indicator for overall human resource capacity. PDO indicator 4 (Number of
Talent Management Program (TMP) recruits deployed to targeted MDAs) was similarly output-focused. Both
indicators were clearly defined and measurable, with credible data available to the ICR, including baseline
data. The DLIs were effectively used to ensure the timely delivery of key elements of the TOC.


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Somaliland Civil Service Strengthening (P155123)



The achievement of this PDO feasible despite Somaliland's fragile context. Therefore, the relevance of the
PDO is rated Substantial.

Intermediate results and key outputs:

Training programs

      The partnership created with the Ghana Institute of Management and Public Administration (GIMPA),
       which supported capacity building through the Training of Trainers.
      CSC conducted induction, leadership, and specialized training for staff from various MDAs and
       launched various short-term and long-term courses for both civil servants and the public; 480 civil
       servants were trained, 75 curriculums and course content developed.
      131 staff from target MDA who have completed specialized (non-GIMPA) training programs supported
       through the project (IRI-1).

MDA organizational structure streamlining:

      26 MDA (23 ministries and 3 agencies) with revised organizational structures approved by the PSRSC
       (IRI-2); diagnostics and re-organization of the remaining 18 are ongoing. As of the ICRR publication,
       the number of ongoing restructurings was reduced to 11.

Enhancement of Civil Service Law and Regulations:

      Revised civil service law and civil service regulation have been approved by the PSRSC and
       submitted to the cabinet (IRI-7).
      National employment policy developed and is operational.

Human Resource Management:

      16 improved HR procedures (including establishment control, recruitment, HR records management,
       termination, and retirement) approved by the PSRSC and submitted to the cabinet (IRI-8) (DLI). These
       HR policies are being implemented in 18 MDAs.
      Progress was made towards a merit-based recruitment process, with 36.1 percent of those employed
       after the first round of registration being recruited competitively.
      First civil service appraisal conducted in 22 MDAs.

Outcomes against targets:

The HR development functionality of 26 targeted MDAs was improved, against a target of 4 (PDO-2). 46 TMP
recruits were deployed to targeted MDA against a downwardly revised target of 57 (PDO-4). Together these
indicators formed one Disbursement Linked Indicator (DLI). The shortfall in DPO-4 reflected a government
decision considering both the fiscal impact and the demonstrated security risks posed by candidates for
positions within the Office of the Presidency should they be recruited without robust security screening, which
would have violated the open competition requirements under the TMP protocol. Thus, failure to meet the
target reflects greater government ownership and fiscal realism rather than poor performance on the PDO-4
indicator.


                                                                                                 Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Somaliland Civil Service Strengthening (P155123)



PDO-2 was exceeded, and PDO-4 was partially achieved. IRI-1 was partially achieved with 131 against a
target of 160, IRI-2 was exceeded, IRI-7 was achieved, and IRI-8 was exceeded. Consequently, Objective 2
is rated substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To strengthen policy management in selected central agencies and line ministries.

Rationale
Relevance of the PDO indicator: The Government of Somaliland’s capacity to design, draft, and set policy
and its monitoring systems were weak hampering the government’s effectiveness and accountability for
results. The PDO relevantly responded to this. The overall theory of change was that revising Cabinet
procedures and developing a Cabinet Management System would strengthen the capacity at the center of
government to formulate policies and ensure effective and accountable implementation through systematic
oversight. This would, in turn, improve the quality of Cabinet submissions and Cabinet decision-making. While
the TOC presents a sound approach to strengthening policy management, it is important to acknowledge that
processes are not the only (or even the major) factors influencing the quality of Cabinet decision-making.

PDO indicator 3 (improved policy development functionality in targeted MDAs) was measured by the number
of policy development units established or reorganized and their staffing table developed, approved and staff
received relevant training. While that can be an important input, the desired outcome is not measured, similar
to PDO 2 and PDO 4. The indicator was clearly defined and measurable, with credible data available.
However, with just one relevant indicator, which is output-focused, limited insight is gained into whether the
intervention achieved the desired objective.

The achievement of this PDO was feasible despite Somaliland's fragile context. Therefore, the relevance of
the PDO is rated Modest.

Intermediate results and key outputs:

      Policy and Planning departments were created in 18 MDAS and staffed with trained personnel.
      Four consultants were hired to support policy functions at the Office of the President.

Outcomes against targets:

Policy management units were established and staffed, and staff trained in policy management in 18 MDAs
against a target of 4 (PDO-3). A Cabinet Information Management System was not created, this became part
of CSSP II. Given the modest relevance Objective 3 is rated Substantial



Rating

                                                                                                 Page 8 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Somaliland Civil Service Strengthening (P155123)



                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            As discussed in detail in the M&E section, the PDOs were largely output-oriented and needed to capture the
                            intended outcomes of strengthened payroll, human resources, and policy management. Of the four DPO
                            indicators, 3 out of 4 met their target. Of the IRI, 5 out of 8 achieved their target. All DLIs were satisfied prior
                            to project closing. Several were exceeded, including the number of improved HR procedures enacted and the
                            number of HR units established and reorganized.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   A quantitative projection of rates of return was not developed at the project design stage as it was considered
   not applicable for an institutional capacity-building project. The ICR did include a qualitative analysis of how
   project economic resources and inputs have been converted into results.

   The project was largely successful within its original project envelope but experienced significant
   delays. The project achieved most of its indicator targets and exceeded two of its PDOs significantly without
   exceeding the estimated cost at appraisal. However, the actual Project Coordination Unit (PCU) cost was about
   50 percent higher than estimated at appraisal. This was due to FCV conditions, PCU staff, and government
   counterparts’ steep learning curve, COVID-19-related delays, and the need to rebid some contracts. As a result,
   the project was extended by 18 months. Reallocations between project components covered the incremental
   financial cost of extra implementation time. Overall project efficiency is rated modest.


   Efficiency Rating
          Modest


          a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
            and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                                          Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                                                  0
                   Appraisal                                                            0
                                                                                                                   Not Applicable


                                                                                                                                   Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Somaliland Civil Service Strengthening (P155123)



                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The reforms launched under the CSSP are still in the early stages. The pay and grading reform policy
documents prepared with the assistance of the project are only now, after project completion, being enacted into
law. This leaves implementation to be accomplished, which is likely to prove challenging. Similarly, the pension
reforms are still in embryonic stages. They are essential to enhance the attractiveness of civil service
employment and facilitate compliance with the mandatory retirement age requirements of the Civil Service Law,
to ensure fiscal sustainability of the wage bill and allow an infusion into the civil service of the full range of
knowledge and skill sets needed in a now modernizing economy. The intended development of the Human
Resource Management Information System (HRMIS) was deferred to CSSP II, as was the pension (PMIS)
system. These systems would ensure compliance with the new HRM policies, procedures, and regulations,
including the Civil Service Law, and improve the capacity to assess the impact of these HRM laws on objectives
like meritocratic practices, skill and talent retention, performance focus, fiscal sustainability of wages, and
gender equity. Without this system, assessing the project’s outcome-level impact is challenging. Under
Objective 3, strengthening policy management, the project developed various systems, policies, manuals,
guidelines, regulations, and procedures governing policy planning, development, and oversight. Yet, many exist
only in prototype form and, while available to staff, were not yet required to be used. These include (i) a
Management Information System, (ii) a Diary Management System, and (iii) a Record Keeping System. They
had not been populated and were not operational. Given that those systems are key to ensuring compliance
with the various procedures mandated in the policies, manuals, regulations, and guidelines, the process of
implementing them and getting the relevant staff to use them correctly is an essential remaining challenge.
Thus, as the ICR confirms, much more remains to be accomplished to ensure the sustainability and impacts of
these reforms, which will require future donor support.

Although, as described above, key results of the instigated reforms have still to materialize, some
results have already been observed. The biometric database has enhanced employment controls and
analytic possibilities, payroll error rates have been reduced from 30% to 5%, and the strengthening of the
central payroll management agencies has dramatically increased the speed of regularizing appointments and
issuing recruits with their job identification cards. The MDAs that have implemented the new structures have
reported improvements in their operations, especially those that have managed to recruit all the key staff for the
new positions created. Interviews conducted by the ICR team suggest that the Law and its Combined
Administrative Regulations are yielding more meritocratic, performance-focused HRM practices.

The Relevance of the PDO is rated High, the overall efficacy is Substantial, the efficiency is rated Modest, and
the overall outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Somaliland Civil Service Strengthening (P155123)




The risk to the project's development outcomes is significant, especially as many of the reforms are
unfinished. As discussed, various reforms will require long-term and continuous follow-on efforts to ensure
sustainable impacts. The HRM reform development outcomes depend fundamentally on the implementation
of HRMIS and the pay and grading and pension reforms that are expected to be implemented under the
follow-on CSSP II and SERP. These processes are likely to be challenging. Given the Somaliland
environment and worldwide experience with the design and implementation of such electronic systems, it is
likely that procurement and implementation of HRMIS will require the whole CSSP II project implementation
period and, in the case of PMIS, even more time. Implementation of the pension policy and law, as apparent
from the delays, is a complex process, requiring the development of detailed procedures and regulations,
assignment of responsibilities for managing the pension system, and development of needed capacities by
the relevant pension entities, including, among other things, a pension fund administrator, as well as an ICT-
based PIMS, and so on. As the ICR confirms, the CSSP II will be supporting that process. Still, even that
project may prove too short, given the challenges and international experience with designing and
implementing similar pension reforms in an FCV environment. Similarly, the implementation of policy
management reforms and the ICT-based policy management system remain to be accomplished under the
CSSP II. Despite CSSP’s engagement, CSSP II will also need to continue to provide significant
strengthening to CSI. The need for this significant continued support entails considerable risks to the
development outcomes, especially considering Somalia’s FCV challenges.

A fiscally sustainable wage bill is increasingly out of sight. The elimination of 1,626 “ghost workers”, did
achieve an estimated net savings of roughly US$2.1 million/year. However, according to GoSL data, the
government has been adding, on average, roughly 1,300 additional staff per year over the 2012-2022 period.
This means that continuous growth of the civil service payroll quickly erased the savings achieved although
elimination of non-working staff is still likely to have boosted civil service productivity.

The long-term benefits of the TMP mechanism are uncertain. The TMP has helped to infuse MDAs with
skilled staff, but there was no obligation for the TMP to transfer their skills, and there is no evidence that they
did. To entice candidates, TMP also provided significantly higher salaries to TMP staff than to civil servants
serving in similar capacities, which had drawbacks. The large salary differentials created morale problems for
lower-salaried civil servants, which almost certainly compromised the productivity of those other civil servants
as well as limited the knowledge transfer from TMP staff to regular civil servants. When the new civil service
salary reforms are finally implemented, including aligning TMP staff salaries with civil servant salaries, one
can expect significant turnover among those TMP appointees, although the Pay and Grading Reform should
help to mitigate this. How many TMP appointees currently remain with the GoSL is unknown.

Attrition of trained staff remains a risk although mitigated through training of trainers. A significant
share of project activities involved training GoSL personnel. This makes development outcomes vulnerable
to government staff turnover which can be high in FCV environments. The project aimed to mitigate this by
establishing a group of local trainers. These trainers would be capable of conducting training independently,
without relying on support from the bank or other donors. These trainers remain in place. Retention is also
aided by the fact that the GoSL is the main possible employer for people with such a skillset in Somaliland,
as the private sector remains small and international donor projects are few.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

                                                                                                       Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somaliland Civil Service Strengthening (P155123)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  The PAD was overly optimistic in some of the project’s core assumptions, including timelines,
  capacity, and personnel performance. Given the fragility, risk of instability, and acute institutional
  capacity constraints at the time the CSSP was being prepared, it was processed using the condensed
  procedures (under OP/BP 10.0, paragraph 12). While this allowed the project to launch quickly, it meant
  that the process of bringing counterparts, both PCU staff and government counterparts, up to speed on
  World Bank requirements and procedures occurred largely during project implementation rather than
  project preparation (as discussed below). This contributed to the slow progress during the early years of
  the project. To account for this, at design, more time should have been allocated for activities requiring
  legislative action (for example, pension reform, pay, and grading reforms), as well as those requiring
  preparatory work (identification of information requirements, needs analysis, preparation of specifications,
  etc.) for the introduction of major ICT systems, such as a HRMIS, especially in the context of
  Somaliland’s FCV conditions. The delayed implementation of ICT monitoring systems hampered the
  project's ability to assess the achievement of its medium-term outcomes. Yet, even with those systems in
  place, many of the desired medium-term outcomes and most impacts could not have been assessed
  during the project’s duration. Further reflections on M&E can be found below.

  The funding allocated to the Project Management Component at appraisal was inadequate. The
  project was designed to be implemented in five years; actual implementation took 6.5 years, a 30 percent
  increase. Yet even without delays, the assigned financing was insufficient as finding and hiring qualified
  people was more expensive than expected. While the project design tried to factor a skills premium into
  the budget, the cost was still underestimated (by almost 20 percent). Overall, while the PAD estimated
  this component cost at US$1.75 million, it ended up absorbing US$2.68 million, an increase of about 50
  percent. The project could have benefitted from measures to address several of the risks discussed
  under Risk to Development Outcome. These include measures aimed at curtailing the growth of the
  public payroll and measures to ensure knowledge transfers from TMPs to their colleagues.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Low government capacity challenges were not sufficiently proactively addressed to avoid delays.
 As the focus of the project was building core government capacities, it should not have been surprising that
 limited human resource capacities and limited financial capacities would cause challenges. Yet these often
 hampered progress on project implementation, including major procurement actions, such as the HRMIS
 and related government decision-making. It also hampered progress on pension reform mostly because
 the government was unwilling to assign dedicated, full-time staff to work on the pension reforms, opting
 instead to assign it to staff who continued to shoulder their prior responsibilities. The Pension Policy and
 Pension Law have both been through multiple drafts and remained works in progress as the CSSP closed
 on December 30th, 2022, leaving much of that reform agenda to depend on future projects. The Cabinet
 eventually approved the Law and Policy on September 21, 2023. However, considerable work will likely
 remain on the design and implementation of a civil service pension system even after the follow-on CSSP II
 project. Removing existing over-retirement-age civil servants from the payroll will almost certainly only
 occur once a pension system is in place to ensure economic security for those civil servants and their

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somaliland Civil Service Strengthening (P155123)



 immediate families upon retirement. Finally, building the training capacity of the CSI also proved
 particularly challenging in part due to its very weak capacity. Despite the challenges of re-engagement in a
 highly fragile and conflict-afflicted environment, supervision missions did not exceed the World Bank norm
 of two supervision missions per year. A more proactive identification of opportunities and resolution of
 threats would have been appropriate.

 The World Bank devoted significant resources to the supervision of the CSSP, yet challenges
 persisted. Notwithstanding the supervision mission, it should be noted that task team leaders were able to
 devote significant resources to day-to-day supervision. Both supervision missions and day-to-day oversight
 included engaging a team of specialists with detailed expertise and experience in HRM, establishment and
 payroll control, pay reform, institutional reform, policy management, M&E, pension reforms, as well as
 procurement of complex IT systems. The World Bank's technical team provided feedback to both the
 government and its PCU team, as well as to consultants hired under the project during the procurement
 stage and the contract execution stage of each major project activity. Procurement documents received
 extensive feedback from procurement and technical experts financed by the World Bank, resulting in
 virtually every initial procurement document being revised multiple times by the PCU/government. While
 this often led to frustration on the part of the PCU and the government, as well as frequent delays in the
 procurement process, it resulted in more carefully and sensibly prepared procurement documents, thus
 ensuring better odds of receiving responsive bids from interested firms. Finally, every output of every
 consultant hired and paid by the project was subjected to detailed review by World Bank-financed experts
 in the relevant field, including the HRM, pension reforms, center-of-government policy processes, M&E,
 organizational reviews, training, and capacity building. This too frequently led to delays in finalizing
 individual outputs, but those outputs were typically significantly improved. Moreover, the government team
 appreciated, and often explicitly requested, World Bank feedback and wielded it as leverage with
 consultants, insisting that they revise the relevant outputs to be responsive to the concerns raised by both
 the World Bank’s technical team as well as to those they raised.

 COVID-19 ruled out in-person World Bank supervision missions for more than a year. COVID-19
 restrictions also impeded visits of various consulting teams hired under the project, making their work more
 difficult and time-consuming and sometimes compromising the personal relationships that are crucial to
 ensuring a consulting assignment adequately addresses the client’s interests and needs. These impacts
 were particularly onerous in the low-capacity FCV environment of Somaliland.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s outcome indicators did not sufficiently capture all desired project outcomes. The
 Results Framework was relevant to the project activities and the indicators were appropriate for

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somaliland Civil Service Strengthening (P155123)



 measurement of the project outputs. However, the PDO and IRIR indicators did not capture evidence that
 demonstrated the impact of the outputs of project activities. The M&E framework failed to capture
 systematic evidence on how effectively the HRM reforms were achieving their core objectives: (i) ensuring
 more meritocratic/merit-based HRM practices, (ii) enhancing the capacity to attract and retain the full range
 of skill sets and experience needed, (iii) ensuring more performance-focusing management, (iv) ensuring
 greater gender fairness in HRM practices, and (v) ensuring a fiscally sustainable wage bill. This occurred
 despite the existence of readily monitorable evidence of those impacts, according to the ICR. Capturing
 such evidence during CSSP might have been challenging, given the low capacity, but should be addressed
 as the government moves forward with the design and implementation of an HRMIS under the follow-on
 CSSP II and SERP projects. ICR Annex 7 guides how this can be accomplished. The ICR stated that the
 Bank team also aims to design more impact-oriented DLIs for future projects.



b. M&E Implementation
  There were effective updates of project progress through quarterly reports and DLIs. Importantly,
  the M&E system included independent verification of project results, to which disbursements were
  pegged through DLI. This provided a clear indication of the progress of the project based on the
  scheduled timeframe.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E framework informed interventions to improve the feasibility of reaching the project’s
  targets, including the extensions of the project closing date. The M&E findings played an important
  role in (i) informing corrective actions when some activities fell behind schedule (HRMIS procurement,
  pension design, pay, and grading), (ii) adjusting planned activity timelines and actions for those slowly
  progressing activities, and (iii) restructuring project activities and expenditures within a fixed project
  budget.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   No environmental and social safeguard policies were triggered. The project has been assigned a Category
   C under the World Bank safeguard policy OP/BP/GP 4.01. A Grievance Redress Mechanism was not
   formally required at the time of the project's approval. During the entire period of the project implementation,
   a few complaints were received during the procurement phase, which were resolved through normal
   procurement clarifications.




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somaliland Civil Service Strengthening (P155123)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The project faced some challenges in payment processing, asset management, and audit
   oversight. The project maintained adequate accounting capacity and satisfactory internal control
   arrangements throughout implementation. The latest Financial Management review of project activities,
   however, noted delays in processing payments to vendors beyond the stipulated timelines, inadequacies in
   the management of project assets, absence of internal audit oversight, and gaps in the contracts
   management report extracted from the SLFMIS. Both the level of disbursements and the rate of budget
   absorption were noted to be satisfactory. There were no overdue audits at the date of closure.

   Project procurement adapted to challenges through capacity building and procedural
   improvements to mitigate delays. Project procurement was conducted following the World Bank's
   procurement guidelines under IBRD loans and credit and by the project's approved Procurement Plan.
   Since the national procurement law was not fully operational, the customized World Bank's standard
   procurement documents were used to approach the national market. Initially, there were delays in
   procurement, mostly associated with the operating environment, weak capacity of procurement staff as
   well and unfamiliarity with the World Bank's procurement requirements. As the implementation progressed,
   attention was given to additional procurement support, which included hands-on support by the World
   Bank procurement team, capacity building of the PCU staff, as well as prior review of all procurement
   transactions. Recommendations made during the mid-term review, combined with the training, resulted in
   improved processes and a reduction in procurement processing turn-around time. Towards the tail end of
   the project, procurement delays were experienced due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Mitigation measures
   taken that included contracts/bids extensions, allowing bidders/suppliers/consultants to submit their
   bids/proposals electronically with secured passwords as well as online opening of bids/proposals.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR reported no unintended impacts except that the large salary differentials with TMP staff created
   morale problems for lower-salaried civil servants.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                  The project was not sufficiently
                                                                                  adapted to its FCV environment,
                                                                                  could have had a stronger M&E
Bank Performance                Satisfactory            Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                  framework, and did not
                                                                                  successfully mitigate
                                                                                  implementation challenges.

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somaliland Civil Service Strengthening (P155123)



                                                                                 There were significant
                                                                                 shortcomings in the M&E
Quality of M&E                  Substantial             Substantial              system’s design as it was
                                                                                 unsuitable for assessing project
                                                                                 impacts.
Quality of ICR                  ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

Operating in environment like Somaliland requires patience, time, and resources as well as
continuity. Institutional reforms in Somaliland require timelines well beyond that of a typical project,
especially those that call for legislative or executive actions. Adaptability is a virtue in such
environments. Institutional reforms require continuous adaptability to changing circumstances and
challenges. Extensive World Bank implementation support significantly improved the quality of
project activities, their outputs, and their impacts. Limited experience and expertise in implementing
agencies with large and/or complex procurements (for example, design and procurement of complex
IT systems) resulted in multiple iterations – from preparation of terms of references and evaluation of
proposals to contracting vendors. Lack of continuity and predictable (in terms of timing and funding)
long-term support to reform efforts significantly affected not only the implementation of specific
reforms but also their sustainability.

Donor-financed salary enhancements should be introduced with an agreed exit strategy. The
CSSP facilitated salary enhancements for TMP staff. While higher salaries succeeded in attracting
and retaining needed talent and motivation, they demoralized regular civil servants in similar
positions and reduced knowledge transfer to regular civil servants because of that. Donors should
have worked through the tradeoffs posed by such salary enhancements and adopted a well-defined,
enforceable exit strategy from funding higher salaries before launching the TMP-style mechanism.
Clear milestones would have ensured that the government took responsibility for financing the
higher salaries, including TMP recruits, under a new pay regime. Finally, the project should have
ensured all staff recruited were aware at the time of their recruitment of the exit strategy. This could
have helped defuse pressure from staff to retain their higher salaries in the post-salary reform/post-
project environment.

The operation would have benefitted from more time for learning. The shortened project
preparation cycle meant that bringing counterparts (both PCU staff and government counterparts) up
to speed on World Bank requirements and procedures occurred largely during project
implementation rather than during project preparation. This particularly impacted the preparation of
terms of reference and bidding documents, as well as in preparing bid evaluation reports, particularly
for more complex procurements. For instance, the procurement process for the assessment and
design of HRMIS development– took multiple iterations. By the close of CSSP, the second stage
contract (for the design and development of HRMIS specifications) was only being launched. Given
the Somaliland environment and worldwide experience with the design and implementation of such
electronic systems, it is likely that procurement and implementation of HRMIS will require the whole
CSSP II project implementation period and, in the case of PMIS, probably even more time.
Moreover, as the project neared its close, turnover among the ranks of the PSRSC spiked as



                                                                                                    Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Somaliland Civil Service Strengthening (P155123)



changes in political leadership occurred, which slowed key project activities, pension reform in
particular. Calculating in additional time for learning in the design stage would have been beneficial.

Future similar engagements will require stronger mitigation of low government capacity. It
should not have been surprising that limited human resource and financial capacities would cause
challenges. It hampered progress on pension reform mostly because the government was unwilling
to assign dedicated, full-time staff to work on the pension reforms, opting instead to assign it to staff
who continued to shoulder their prior responsibilities. Moving forward on such demanding reforms
requires full-time, dedicated civil servants. The Pension Policy and Pension Law have both been
through multiple drafts and remained works in progress as the CSSP closed. The Cabinet eventually
approved the Law and Policy on September 21, 2023. However, considerable work remains on the
design and implementation of a civil service pension system even after the follow-on CSSP II
project.

Strengthening public sector training institutes needs to focus on building capacity to design
and deliver a small number of courses rather than on developing many courses. A more
promising approach would be to limit the number of courses developed under such a contract to, for
example, three or four courses and to deeply involve the beneficiary entity’s faculty (CSI faculty in
this case) in the curriculum development process for each of those limited number of courses.

It is important and feasible to monitor institutional reform impacts. Due to the limitations of the
results framework, this ICRR can draw only limited conclusions about the project's impacts. Annex 7
of the ICR provides a set of readily monitored indicators to assess the extent to which a typical core
set of HRM reform objectives is being achieved. These can be monitored with or without an
electronic HRMIS, though it is considerably easier with such a system up and running.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR offers an in-depth summary of the project, substantiating its ratings with available data and
evidence. While adhering to most of the established guidelines, the report endeavors to cross-reference data
to arrive at its conclusions and maintains a results-oriented focus. Although the quality of the evidence and
analysis is generally robust, there needs to be more data completeness. The ICR did not discuss the
operation’s objective’s relevance in relation to the ISN or Somalia’s or Somaliland’s Somalia National
Development Plans and only briefly the use of the DLIs. The ICR helpfully included a Theory of Change, which
aids the reader in understanding the project logic. However, there was inconsistency in the formulation of
intended outcomes and impacts between the body of the ICR, the theory of change, and Annex B. Key outputs
by component. This might be due to confusion caused by the 3 objectives of the theory of change and the 4
objectives of Annex B. Key outputs by component. There is also some repetition, especially around reporting
the outcomes in sections II.B. Achievement of PDOs (Efficacy), II.D Justification of the overall outcome rating,
and II.E Other outcomes and impacts. The ICR helpfully presents alternative evidence in the Efficiency section.
It is also frank in its assessment of the shortcomings of the M&E framework. While the discussion of evidence is

                                                                                                     Page 17 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somaliland Civil Service Strengthening (P155123)



at times thin, this is a consequence of the shortcomings of the M&E framework rather than the ICR. Finally, the
ICR identifies a set of robust and informative lessons derived directly from the project experience, which should
be useful to inform future engagements, as well be the Annex 7 Recommended HRM Impact Indicators. The
quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 18 of 18
