     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Education Response Project (P174214)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023777

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P174214                                   COVID-19 Education Response Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Chad                                      Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-B4661                                  31-Mar-2022                                          4,791,146.13

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 11-Feb-2021                               30-Dec-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            6,800,000.00                                   6,800,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             6,800,000.00                                   4,791,146.13

 Actual                                         4,822,317.45                                   4,791,146.13




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz         Denise A. Vaillancourt      Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                         Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Grant Agreement (page 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 10), the project
   objectives were as follows:

           To improve access to multimodal distance learning for primary and lower secondary students
            in targeted provinces.
           To ensure a safe and effective reopening of schools in selected areas.

                                                                                                Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Education Response Project (P174214)



         To strengthen the resilience and emergency management capacity of the education sector.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Ensuring learning continuity by expanding distance learning opportunities for primary and
   lower secondary students in project-targeted provinces (Appraisal: US$ 3.6 million; Actual: US$ 2.7 million):
   This component aimed to establish and/or scale up existing distance learning systems in order to reduce
   the impact of COVID-19 on teaching and learning. Activities included: expanding multiple education delivery
   modalities such as paper-based resources, mobile phones, radio/audio, video/television, and online
   teaching and learning platforms; and training of approximately 5,000 teachers, particularly female teachers,
   in online and distance learning methodologies. According to the design document (PAD, para. 25), the
   distance learning strategy supported under this operation was expected not only to blunt the immediate
   effect of COVID-19, but also to serve as an alternative training modality that the ministry would adopt and
   mainstream in the future.

   Component 2: Preparing the safe reopening of schools in project-targeted provinces (Appraisal: US$ 2.7
   million; Actual: US$ 1.4 million): This component aimed to mobilize communities to return to school and
   ensure safe environments. Activities included: media campaigns to encourage parents and communities to
   send children back to school and maintain good hygiene practices, including gender-sensitive campaigns;
   implementation of water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) activities in approximately 4,200 schools; and
   provision of psychosocial support services to teachers, students and parents. Because schools reopened in
   October 2020, 11 months before the project’s effectiveness, the thrust of activities supported the
   establishment and uptake of WASH activities and psychosocial services in project-targeted schools.

   Component 3: Building a resilient education sector and supporting project oversight (Appraisal: US$ 0.5
   million; Actual: US$ 0.7 million): This component aimed to support institutional strengthening of the Ministry
   of Education to help respond to COVID-19 and future shocks, as laid out in the PNCET 2020-2024,
   including: droughts, floods, food insecurities, population displacement and epidemics. Activities included:
   the provision of information technology (IT) equipment; phone surveys; attendance tracking; and studies on
   access to and use of distance learning tools.

   The following minor modifications were made to the component activities at the September 2022
   restructuring:

         Component 1: The number of materials and pedagogical resources increased, due to the Ministry's
          decision to cover all key subjects in the three sub-cycles of education which included mathematics
          and reading for primary, biology and physics for junior secondary and secondary (grades 10 and
          11), and basic subjects for Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET). Rather than
          creating a new dedicated phone line, the existing TCHADEDUCATIC platform was strengthened to

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    COVID-19 Education Response Project (P174214)



         facilitate interaction between teachers and students, and the target number of teachers to be trained
         increased to 10,000. Lastly, the restructuring also added an activity to equip eight school-based
         infirmaries.
        Component 2: Direct psychosocial support to communities—through web platform or by phone—
         was dropped because schools resumed at the beginning of the 2020-2021 school year. Instead,
         training of teachers and PTAs on COVID-19 prevention and the detection of signs of psychological
         distress was developed.
        Component 3: Tracking dropout and attendance rates and the related impact study were cancelled
         given that schools resumed in October 2020.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost

        The project cost at appraisal was US$ 6.8 million. The actual project cost was US$ 4.8 million.
        The actual project cost was lower than expected due to the modification of activities, as schools
           reopened during the project period.

  Financing

        The project was financed by a Global Partnership for Education grant in the amount of US$ 6.8
           million, of which US$ 4.8 million was disbursed, including US$122,500 used for the Bank’s fee (for
           its role as grant agent).

  Borrower contribution

        There was no planned Borrower contribution.

  Dates

        February 11, 2021: Project approval.
        September 17, 2021: Project effectiveness.
        March 30, 2022: The project closing date was extended from March 31, 2022, to June 30, 2022.
        July 7, 2022: The project closing date was extended from June 30, 2022, to September 30, 2022.
        September 12, 2022: There were initial implementation delays due to the length of time needed to
         produce a satisfactory Project Implementation Manual, a slowdown in government functioning due to
         COVID-19, and the death of the President of the Republic which resulted in the Bank triggering OP
         7.30 policy (dealing with de facto governments). Therefore, the project was restructured to modify
         project activities (and therefore indicators and targets) and financing allocations. Note: The Bank re-
         engaged with the Republic of Chad on June 25, 2021.
        September 30, 2022: The project closing date was extended from September 30, 2022
         to December 30, 2022.
        December 30, 2022: Project closing.




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 14
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       COVID-19 Education Response Project (P174214)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Chad is a low-income country in the African Sahel region with a population of over 15 million people, the
majority of whom live in rural areas. Despite recent economic growth, poverty rates in Chad remain high,
with nearly half of the population (47 percent) living below the poverty line (2020). In education, learning
outcomes are very poor with a total of five expected years of schooling per child. Results from large-scale
learning assessments in Chad indicate that 97 percent of students do not achieve the minimum proficiency
level at the end of primary school.

In March 2020, Chad reported its first confirmed case of COVID-19. Schools were closed soon after on
March 20, 2020. The impact of COVID-19 on the education sector included students not having access to
learning opportunities and a large number of students being at risk of malnutrition following their loss of
school meals. Although schools reopened on October 1, 2020, negative impacts were likely to continue for
some time, including deterioration of learning outcomes, higher rates of dropout, especially for girls,
deterioration of student’s nutritional status, physical and mental health, increased exposure to violence
and/or other threats for girls (e.g., in refugee camps), and increased rates of early marriages and teenage
pregnancies.

The country's National Development Plan for 2017-2021 aimed to develop Chad into an emerging country
by 2030, with the improvement of the human capital base of the country as a core objective. The project
objectives were highly consistent with the country's COVID emergency education response plan identified
priority areas of providing alternative opportunities for distance learning, providing psychosocial support and
child protection and developing water, sanitation, and hygiene facilities; the fourth priority area of school
feeding was not covered by the project given the limited resource envelope available.

The Bank's Country Partnership Framework for 2016-2020 - in place before COVID-19 - included building
human capital as a key engagement area, with primary completion rate and secondary dropout rates of
adolescent girls as key indicators. More recently, the Bank's systematic country diagnostic report (2022)
identified improved access to and quality of education as a key pathway to progress.

Schools reopened in October 2020 after the project had been prepared but not yet approved, putting into
question the relevance of PDO 1 - to improve access to distance learning. According to the project team,
this project objective and the related activities remained in place due to the uncertainties during that period;
for example, in January 2021, the schools in N'Djamena were closed temporarily. IEG still considers this
objective to be relevant, given that enhanced distance learning capacity was not only expected to address
the immediate impact of COVID-19, but also to enhance education sector preparedness in the likely cases
of future shocks (environmental, food insecurity, population displacement or epidemics) (PAD, para. 25).




Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 14
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  COVID-19 Education Response Project (P174214)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To improve access to multimodal distance learning for primary, and lower secondary students in targeted
               provinces

               Rationale
               The theory of change was clear. Due to the lack of widespread access to digital connectivity, online solutions
               for education delivery would be insufficient. Therefore, distance learning activities focused on paper-based
               resources (printed materials, books, etc.), mobile phones, radio/audio interaction, video/television, and some
               online teaching and learning platforms. Teacher training aimed to prepare and deliver educational content
               through a multi-modal distance learning system. These activities were likely to lead to the intended outcome
               to ensure continuity of learning and mitigate potential learning loss of children.

               The project’s activities targeted six provinces (N’Djaména, Guéra, Logone Occidental, Logone Oriental,
               Moyen Chari, and Kanem), which accounted for more than 40 percent of schools and students and over 90
               percent of the confirmed COVID-19 cases. This comprised 550,000 primary and lower secondary students
               accessing the distance learning options and 5,000 teachers receiving training.

               Outputs

                     Development, printing, and distribution of take-home packages of learning materials. 400,000
                      materials were printed and distributed to primary and secondary students as well as
                      technical/vocational education and training (TVET) learners.
                     Development of interactive content/ distance learning modules for radio, television and the internet
                      cloud. Mobile phones were also used to deliver radio content.
                     Strengthening of the TCHADEDUCATIC digital learning platform, which was also being used as the
                      dedicated and functional hotline for ongoing interaction between teachers and students.
                     Training of 8,054 teachers (original target: 5,000; revised target: 10,000). Of these, 27 percent were
                      female (target: 35 percent). As noted in the ICR (page 18), the shortcoming in meeting targets was
                      because schools had reopened, and some teachers were not able to leave their schools for the
                      training activities.

               Outcomes

                     605,042 students were able to access distance learning programs (take-home packages, online, radio
                      and TV), exceeding the target of 550,000. Of these, 47 percent were girls, achieving the target of 45
                      percent. According to the beneficiary survey (as reported in the ICR), 24 percent of students followed
                      remote classes once per week, and 71 percent of students followed remote classes two to three times
                      per week.




                                                                                                                Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   COVID-19 Education Response Project (P174214)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To ensure a safe and effective reopening of schools in selected areas

Rationale
The theory of change was clear. School closings were expected to negatively impact students and parents
beyond learning setbacks, because of lost routine and social contact, expectations to adapt to new modalities
of learning, emotional and psychological stress, and fear and threats to their physical and psychosocial well-
being. The activities to mobilize and inform communities, provide WASH facilities and materials, and
provide psychosocial support services were likely to lead to the intended outcome to facilitate safe and
effective return to schools.

These activities were intended to benefit 4,200 schools with WASH support and 150,000
parents/students/teachers with psychosocial support.

Outputs

      Development of radio/television campaigns to encourage parents and communities to send children
         back to school and maintain good hygiene practices during and after the COVID-19 pandemic. These
         include campaigns focused on girls at risk of dropping out, as well as measures to prevent gender-
         based violence. The ICR (page 19) reported anecdotal feedback that the awareness campaigns
         generated overwhelming public interest even among the untargeted population.
        Distribution of sensitization kits to all 4,200 project schools for continued use on how best to conduct
         sensitization training for parents.
        Implementation of WASH activities for adequate sanitation and hygiene practices, including
         installation of hand-washing devices and soap at schools; provision of soap, hand-washing kits,
         hygiene kits for girls, and face masks; and sanitization of schools.
        Equipping of eight school infirmaries with basic health and care materials and equipment, due to the
         low number of schools with infirmaries that could provide care for students affected by the COVID-19
         pandemic and other illnesses.
        Design, piloting, and delivery of online-based psychosocial support services, and training of teachers
         on the detection of signs of psychological distress. The ICR did not report on whether service
         providers were hired to deliver the services or create a web-based and phone-based platform. 5,106
         teachers received training in psychosocial support (target: 5,000).

Outcomes

      The number of children previously enrolled in schools who return to school once the school system is
       reopened (including girls) was not reported. Since the reopening of schools preceded project
       effectiveness, the students’ return could not be attributed to the project.
      100 percent of schools were equipped with a minimum hygiene package for the prevention of COVID-
       19, surpassing the target of 80 percent.

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   COVID-19 Education Response Project (P174214)




      80 percent of schools were equipped with a functional WASH facility, achieving the target of 80
       percent.
      70 percent of children in primary and lower secondary school had access to psychosocial support to
       reduce the negative impacts of COVID-19 school closures in the program area, surpassing the target
       of 30 percent. Of these, 45 percent were girls, achieving the target of 45 percent. At least one teacher
       in every school was trained in psychological support.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To strengthen the resilience and emergency management capacity of the education sector.

Rationale
The theory of change was clear. Activities to strengthen the education ministries and agencies to sustain
operations in the event of any number of shocks and adapt to those shocks were plausibly likely to lead to the
intended outcome to build resilience in the education system. Activities were closely aligned with the
emergency education response plan (PNCET 2020-2024), including carrying out monitoring and evaluation
activities and enhancing capacity to conduct virtual meetings.

Outputs

      Provision of information technology (IT) equipment for the relevant emergency response units in the
       education ministries and agencies (110 such groups were formed), including the establishment of
       functional virtual meeting rooms. 25 education staff (target: 10) and 101 high level
       technicians received training on emergency response.
      Conducting of a beneficiary survey in 2022, which showed that 73 percent of the beneficiary students,
       74.1 percent of the teachers, and 75 percent of the parents were completely satisfied with the overall
       services provided by the project (no target identified). Approximately 75 percent of teachers felt that
       the distance learning activities were beneficial for their teaching activities and that students were able
       to continue their learning remotely.
      Activities to track drop out and attendance rates in all schools and to assess how students access and
       use distance learning tools were dropped due to reopening of schools.

Outcomes

      The National Contingency Plan for Education in Chad (PNCET, 2020-2024) was updated and
       validated by the Government and was being used to train the education administrators at all levels on
       emergency plans for any future shocks to the education system. The plan was also used to conduct a
       needs assessment within the education system in an effort to be prepared for any future shocks within
       the system.



                                                                                                   Page 7 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                COVID-19 Education Response Project (P174214)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Efficacy is rated Substantial due to substantial achievement for the first and third objectives, although modest
                            achievement for the second objective because the number of students returning to school could not be
                            attributed to the project and therefore was not reported on. The latter was a key outcome indicator that was
                            dropped during the September 2022 restructuring.




                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   At appraisal, there was no economic analysis prepared due to the emergency nature of the project, although the
   economic rationale for the project was briefly discussed.

   At completion, the ICR (Annex 4) presented a more extensive discussion of the economic rationale for the
   project, including the expected increase in income levels due to increased education, with returns to education
   higher for completing any level of schooling above primary education, and for women and rural areas. A cost-
   benefit analysis was also conducted for Component 1 (Increased access to multimodal distance learning for
   primary and lower secondary students), which represented 56 percent of project costs. The activities in
   Component 1 benefited 605,042 students and 5,000 teachers. Based on results of the beneficiary survey, which
   showed that 24 percent of students followed remote classes once per week, and 71 percent of students follow
   remote classes two to three times per week, the assumed benefit is a 10 percent increase in education quantity
   and therefore increasing schooling by 0.1 years and increased lifetime income of 1 percent. Costs are reflected
   by the actual project costs and teacher salaries (due to remote learning provided). Therefore, Component 1
   resulted in a net present value (NPV) of US$ 21.7 million and an internal rate of return (IRR) of 20.4 percent.
   There were likely additional benefits from the activities in the other project components, which were not included
   in the analysis.

   With regards to implementation efficiency, achievements/ targets (with the exception of one key project indicator
   which was dropped at project restructuring) were met with lower than planned disbursements. However, the
   initial project period was marked by lengthy and complicated procurement procedures as well as limited
   functioning of the government due to the pandemic and the passing of the President in April 2021. These
   contributed to lengthy implementation delays, and multiple project restructurings and closing date extensions -
   the original project period was twelve months but ended up being 21 months. The expected short-term benefits

                                                                                                                               Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      COVID-19 Education Response Project (P174214)



of the project (increased remote schooling in the absence of in-person schooling) were also significantly
diminished when schools reopened in October 2020, although longer-term benefits (increased resilience of the
education system) are still likely to be realized.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      56.00
 ICR Estimate                                               20.40
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objectives is rated Substantial due to strong alignment with country and Bank strategy,
notwithstanding somewhat diminished relevance with country conditions given that schools had reopened prior
to project approval. Efficacy is rated Substantial due to substantial achievement for the first and third objectives,
although modest achievement for the second objective because the number of students returning to
school could not be attributed to the project and therefore was not reported on (the latter was an original key
outcome indicator that was dropped at the time of the September 2022 project restructuring). Efficiency is rated
Modest due to lengthy implementation delays and diminished expected benefits of the project (increased
remote schooling in the absence of in-person schooling) due to schools reopening in October 2020, prior to
project approval.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There remains some risk due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, although the strengthening of the
remote/distance learning system (both content and infrastructure) has likely contributed to building resilience
within the education sector, including its enhanced ability to deal with other external shocks in the future. The
national strategy for continuity of education and learning during emergencies was also operationalized



                                                                                                       Page 9 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      COVID-19 Education Response Project (P174214)



through project support. Other risks of political instability and economic volatility also pose continued risks to
sustaining development outcomes.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The PDO was focused, while still appropriately addressing both short-run needs to provide access to
  alternative modalities for the delivery of education services and the need to ensure the sector’s
  preparedness and resilience going forward. The project design was directly aligned with the
  government's emergency education response plan, while also consistent with ongoing education reforms.
  The design drew from lessons being developed from the ongoing COVID-19 crisis and it was clearly
  targeted to the geographic areas that had the highest number of confirmed cases and over 40 percent of
  the schools. The implementation arrangements made use of existing structures in place from the
  ongoing Education Sector Reform project, although the project coordination unit's capacity to implement
  multiple project was insufficient, particularly in light of the quick-disbursing and short implementation
  period. According to the ICR (paras. 63 and 76), “…implementation arrangements would have benefitted
  from ensuring there was adequate staffing within the MENPC/PDU to implement several donor-supported
  projects.”

  The risk assessment appropriately identified the uncertainty of the COVID-19 pandemic and political
  instability as substantial risks. The mitigation measures to adhere to security procedures and use third-
  party monitoring were adequate, although the risk of limited government functionality could not be
  effectively mitigated. The monitoring and evaluation design was clear and simple, given the short
  implementation period. Even though schools reopened prior to project effectiveness, the unrevised
  distance learning activities and monitoring plan supported under the project still bode well for
  strengthened sector resilience and continuity of services, post-project, in the face of future shocks.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Project effectiveness was significantly delayed, which had a negative impact on implementation in light of
 the short project period. The Bank team, appropriately staffed with necessary fiduciary and technical
 expertise, worked proactively to address the implementation challenges by providing fiduciary support to
 the PCU, hiring consultants to provide additional support, and holding bi-weekly meetings with the PCU to
 ensure that implementation activities were progressing (ICR, para. 67). The project restructurings were
 utilized to make necessary course corrections to the project design and M&E design; the corrections could
 have been made in a more timely manner to mitigate inefficiencies, even though the limited government
 functioning was beyond the control of the Bank. The project team noted that, while the restructuring took
 the government longer than expected, most of the planned activities were still relevant to strengthen the


                                                                                                       Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Education Response Project (P174214)



 resilience of the education system in the face of future shocks and therefore maintained most of the project
 design.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Given the emergency nature of the project objectives and the short implementation period, the M&E design
 was simple and straightforward. Indicators were clear and measurable, with realistic targets, though mostly
 output-oriented given the emergency nature of the project. A notable shortcoming was the key project
 indicator - number of students returning to school - which had low relevance, when, ultimately, students
 returned to school prior to project effectiveness.

 Monitoring arrangements largely relied on remote data collection and reporting, including a Geo-Enabling
 Monitoring and Supervision tool. Evaluation activities included a beneficiary survey and phone surveys.



b. M&E Implementation
  Data collection was conducted regularly throughout the project period, providing information to monitor
  project progress. The Geo-Enabling Monitoring and Supervision tool could not be implemented as
  planned due to slow implementation progress and instability in project areas, leading to slow data
  collection and reporting. The beneficiary survey was conducted as planned to assess whether the project
  met the needs of beneficiaries.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (page 27), project monitoring data were made available for the results framework
  and used to inform course corrections and the analysis of project achievements. The beneficiary study
  was also by the Ministry of Education to update the education emergency contingency plan.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Education Response Project (P174214)




a. Safeguards
   The environmental risk was assessed to be Moderate, due to low expected environmental impact but
   potential health risks to communities, students, and teachers related to the reopening of schools (risk of
   disease transmission and solid waste and wastewater from handwashing facilities in schools). An
   Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared, which included an Infectious
   Disease Control and Waste Management Plan.

   The social risk was rated as Substantial due to potential exclusion of the poorest and most vulnerable
   households. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan was prepared that included awareness raising related to
   gender based violence, violence against children and sexual exploitation and abuse and
   sexual harassment. There were also activities to ensure communication was tailored to specific
   constituencies to address linguistic differences and take into account literacy levels.

   Environmental and social safeguards were monitored throughout project implementation, with ratings
   consistently in the satisfactory range. Moderate shortcomings were due to the government being slow in
   meeting the requirement to produce the ESMF thirty days after effectiveness.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management: Financial management performance was rated in the satisfactory range throughout
   the project period. The FM arrangements relied on the existing integrated financial management
   information used in the sub-region. According to the ICR (page 27), regular reporting, internal controls and
   timely completion and submission of interim financial reports were of acceptable quality. The required audit
   reports were submitted regularly with no qualifications.

   Procurement: Procurement performance was rated in the satisfactory range throughout the project period.
   Some shortcomings were noted with the project coordinating unit: weak procurement
   capacity, inconsistent entering of all procurement steps into the Bank's procurement tracking system. and
   most notably, lengthy procurement processes. The Bank team provided fiduciary support to ensure that
   procurement plans were updated and submitted. According to the ICR (page 28), the PCU executed the
   planned activities in compliance with procurement standards and regulations.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       COVID-19 Education Response Project (P174214)



                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                                                                  M&E was sufficient to assess
                                                                                  achievement of objectives, but
Quality of M&E                   Modest                Substantial
                                                                                  with moderate weaknesses in a
                                                                                  few areas.
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (pages 29-30), adapted by IEG:

        Utilizing readily adaptable approaches can help a project to remain relevant and effective in
         rapidly changing conditions. In the case of this project, even in a fragile context, modalities
         for delivering education content (i.e. e-learning platform, mobile phones), training on
         psychosocial support (i.e. integrated into other modules), and providing supplemental health
         care (i.e. equipping school dispensaries) were easily adjusted in response to changing
         circumstances.
        Projects of an emergency nature can benefit from the use of emergency procurement
         procedures agreed upon by the Bank and government, thereby reducing bureaucratic
         delays. In the case of this project, the necessary remote learning equipment (i.e. audio-
         visual equipment) required extensive technical specifications and procurement procedures,
         which led to significant delays and the need to revise/ cancel some activities. Given the
         short implementation period, more streamlined procurement procedures would have been
         beneficial.
        Beyond addressing short-term emergency needs, the design and implementation of an
         emergency operation can be an opportunity to provide support to the strengthening of sector
         resilience and continuity of services post-project. Even within the rapidly changing context of
         this project (with schools reopening prior to project effectiveness), investments in distance
         learning remained highly relevant both to (a) Government of Chad’s national emergency plan
         for education, which aimed to support continuity of learning in the case of any number of
         future shocks; and (b) to the project’s third development objective (to strengthen the
         resilience and emergency management capacity of the education sector).



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Education Response Project (P174214)



The quality of the evidence and analysis was satisfactory. Lessons were informative for future emergency
response operations. The ICR was results-oriented, concise, and mostly consistent with guidelines. A split
rating was not required in this situation - according to ICR guidelines, changes such as dropping old indicators
or adding new ones do not, in themselves (without changes in targets), trigger a split rating, as such changes
may reflect different (and presumably better) measure of a project’s achievement rather than raising or lowering
of a project’s ambition.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 14
