     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Human Capital DPO (P168697)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0023655

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                            Operation Name
 P168697                                 Human Capital DPO

 Country                                 Practice Area (Lead)
 Madagascar                              Health, Nutrition & Population



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                       Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-65670,IDA-D5770                    26-Mar-2021                                           99,378,718.97

 Bank Approval Date                     Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Mar-2020                            26-Mar-2021

                                        IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                         100,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                          100,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                       99,378,718.97                                             0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Denise A. Vaillancourt    Judyth L. Twigg            Eduardo Fernandez               IEGHC
                                                      Maldonado



2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The program development objective (PDO) was “…to support the Government of Madagascar’s investment in
human capital, through improving (i) human resources in health and education, (ii) availability and




                                                                                               Page 1 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Human Capital DPO (P168697)



predictability of financial resources in the social sectors, and (iii) legal protections for women and children”
(Program Document of February 28, 2020, pp. 3 and 21; and ICR, pp. 1 and 11).


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The three mutually reinforcing pillars corresponded to the PDOs (ICR, paras. 18-21):

Pillar 1: Better qualified, distributed, and performing human resources in education and health sectors
sought to address bottlenecks related to human resources in health and education.

      It aimed to improve the quality of teachers by (a) introducing standards for the teaching profession to
       raise the overall qualification level of educators in the country and (b) supporting the insertion of
       quality control measures in the recruitment of community teachers.
      In the health sector, it sought to support the strengthening of regulation and quality control
       mechanisms of the pre-service training of health workers.
      This pillar also aimed to support better management of human resources in health, education, and
       throughout the public service.

Pillar 2: More transparent and impactful investments in human capital sought to make new and existing
resources in the social sectors more predictable and transparent.

      It aimed to increase domestic resources to expand the priority national social safety nets (SSN)
       programs under the National Strategy for Social Protection, which were targeted to the poorest and
       most vulnerable households, where human capital deficits are concentrated. By providing income
       support, the cash transfers were meant to enable investments to strengthen human capital by
       increasing utilization of education and health services and by delivering behaviorally focused
       accompanying measures, including parental education, family planning, and early stimulation for
       children.
      By reforming the flow of funds to frontline health providers, the operation intended to improve the
       quality of health services delivery.
      Given that these actions imply even greater investments by the government, this pillar also supported
       efforts to increase fiscal revenues and improve transparency.

Pillar 3: Stronger legal frameworks for the protection of women and children aimed to strengthen legal
frameworks to better protect children and to advance gender equality.

      This pillar introduced legislation to better protect women against gender-based violence, sending
       strong signals throughout society about changing social norms.
      For child protection, actions supported the implementation of the National Strategy on Child Marriage
       (2018-2024) to abolish child marriage in order to protect children and adolescents from early marriage,
       pregnancy, and sexual tourism.
      This pillar recognized that there is a substantial human capital cost from gender-based violence and
       child marriage. For instance, child marriage is linked with: (i) high fertility and rapid population growth;
       (ii) poor health and nutrition, and violence; (iii) low educational attainment and learning; (iv) low labor
       force participation and earnings; and (v) low household and social participation, decision-making, and
       investments. Therefore, improving learning and service delivery outcomes as well as social sector


                                                                                                        Page 2 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Human Capital DPO (P168697)



       domestic financing (Pillars 1 and 2) would not likely transform human capital in the absence of
       initiatives to empower women and girls.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The total program cost of SDR 72.7 million (US$100 million equivalent) was financed by an International
Development Association (IDA) grant in the amount of SDR 63.2 million (US$87 million equivalent) and an IDA
credit in the amount of SDR 9.5 million (US$13 million equivalent). The operation was approved by the Board of
Executive Directors on March 26, 2020, became effective on May 21, 2020, and closed, as originally scheduled,
on March 26, 2021. The IDA financing of SDR 72.7 million was fully disbursed on May 27, 2020. Because of
slight changes in exchange rate, the equivalent amount in dollars changed to US$99.38 million.

This Development Policy Operation (DPO) was designed as the first in a series of two human capital DPOs. The
second DPO (for which an additional amount of US$100 million in IDA funding was allocated) aimed to support
two pillars: (i) more and better social services for underserved households and improved protection for women
and children; and (ii) more transparent and predictable investments in human capital. However, the second DPO
was ultimately dropped. The ICR notes (para. 1) that, because of COVID-19, the initial preparation of DPO2
(which started in August 2020) was entirely virtual. This proved to be too challenging for maintaining policy
dialogue with the government. Preparation took longer than expected with major blockages on some reforms,
and as a result DPO2 was eventually dropped in March 2022.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 The three PDOs/pillars of this DPO operation directly addressed three of the four longstanding and
 interlinked constraints to broad-based development in Madagascar, identified in the World Bank’s
 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) Update for Madagascar (April 2022), which have become all the
 more relevant with the ongoing COVID-induced crisis and famine in the South: (i) weak governance and state
 capture; (ii) low investment in physical, human, and natural capital; (iii) low and declining productivity coupled
 with stalled structural transformation; and (iv) high and rising vulnerability to shocks. PDO 1/Pillar 1 (improving
 human resources in health and education/better qualified, distributed, and performing human resources in
 education and health sectors) addressed critical elements of the (first) weak governance constraint, focusing
 particularly on strengthening governance and accountability of health and education human resources and
 their more equitable distribution. PDO2/Pillar 2 (improving the availability and predictability of financial
 resources in the social sectors/more transparent and predictable investments in human capital) addressed the
 (second) constraint of low investment in human capital. PDO2/Pillar 2 also, along with PDO3/Pillar 3
 (improving legal protections for women and children/stronger legal frameworks for the protection of women
 and children), addressed the (fourth) constraint, identified in the SCD Update, of high and rising vulnerability to
 shocks, especially through PDO/Pillar 2’s focus on expanding social safety nets funding and PDO/Pillar 3’s
 focus on protecting women and children, who are particularly vulnerable to shocks and whose empowerment
 and protection are critical to the uptake and effective use of social services.

 All three PDOs/pillars were highly supportive of one of three priority interventions, advocated in the Bank’s
 SCD Update to address the above-cited constraints to development: the boosting of human capital and
 resilience of the poor in order to (a) improve health and education; (b) empower women; and (c) strengthen

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 28
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Human Capital DPO (P168697)



safety nets. The SCD Update noted that improvements to health and learning outcomes would require the
mobilization of additional domestic resources and reforms. Health and education sector efficiency gains are
possible in the short term through reforms in human resources and public financial management, among
others. Greater access to prenatal care, assisted deliveries, and effective nutrition programs are key to
reducing maternal and child mortality and stunting rates, and improved girls’ access to secondary education in
underserved areas will contribute to reductions in high fertility. The SCD Update also asserted that
strengthened social protection systems will ensure greater resilience to shocks and can help stimulate better
nutrition outcomes and the demand for health, education, and water services, all contributing to improved
human development outcomes.

The PDOs were relevant to the Government of Madagascar's (GoM's) General State Policy, which has
been prepared but not yet finalized (due to COVID-related delays and the upcoming presidential elections,
scheduled for end-2023). The General State Policy is built around three complementary pillars: (a) the social
pillar (human capital), which is the strong focus of the PDOs of this DPF, (b) the economic base (accelerated,
inclusive, sustainable growth), and (c) the environmental base (Madagascar green island). The PDOs also are
supportive of the crosscutting priority of governance, emphasized in GoM’s General State Policy, including
improvements to the autonomy and accountability of local authorities.

The PDOs were also relevant to the World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of
Madagascar for the Period FY2023-FY2027 (March 28, 2023), which supports two of its three higher-level
outcomes (HLOs). HLO-2 (improved human capital outcomes) focuses on making growth more inclusive by
addressing weaknesses and inequities in public service delivery, especially health and education services;
reducing spatial and gender inequalities; and addressing challenges specific to women. Objectives 2.1
(increase access to quality education and health services) and 2.2 (promote women’s and girls'
empowerment) are supported by DPF objectives. HLO-3 (enhanced resilience against shocks) focuses on
strengthening resilience to shocks, especially of the poor and vulnerable, that can undermine improvements in
growth or worsen socioeconomic inequalities. Objective 3.3 (improve social protection and livelihoods) is also
supported by DPF objectives. The PDOs are also relevant to and supportive of the CPF’s crosscutting themes
of governance.

The DPO objectives provide strategically complementary support to policy areas directly supported by
investment project financing (IPF) operations in the health, education, and social protection
sectors. An ongoing health operation, Improving Nutrition Outcomes (P160848), designed as a multi-phase
approach instrument, supports continuous training of health professionals and reforms in pre-service
education. The Basic Education Project (P160442) financed technical assistance accompanying the policy
reforms supported through this DPO (actions around teacher standards, developing the National Teaching
Career, and new recruitment policies for community teachers). Social protection policy areas featured in the
National Social Protection Strategy received support under the Social Safety Net Project (P149323), which
helps strengthen institutional capacity to manage social protection programs through technical
assistance. Additionally, the DPO’s support to governance complemented activities financed by other projects:
the Integrated Growth Poles Project (P083351) (strengthening decentralized actors’ capacity to better spend
local development grants); the Public Sector Performance Project (P150116) (improving the flow of resources
to improve local service delivery and budget transparency); and the proposed Digital Governance and
Identification Management System Project (P169413) (aiming to support the rationalization of digital systems
in government, for which the DPO laid the groundwork).




                                                                                                 Page 4 of 28
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Human Capital DPO (P168697)



Table 1: Objectives and Prior Actions (PA) for Madagascar Investing in Human Capital Development
Policy Financing (P168697)
Objective 1: Support the Government of Madagascar’s investment in human capital, through improving
human resources in health and education/Pillar 1: Better qualified, distributed and performing human
resources in the education and health sectors
Establishment of teacher standards
PA1: To improve the quality of the Malagasy teaching workforce, the Ministry of National Education and
Technical and Vocational Education (MENETP), Ministry of Labor, Employment, Civil Service and Social
Laws, and Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) have established the national teaching career and
teaching skills requirements (PD, p. 24).
Transparent and professional teacher recruitment and promotion
PA2: To expand the application of quality control measures for the recruitment of community teachers,
MENETP has expanded the piloting of new procedures and qualifications for the hiring of non-civil service
teachers in primary schools by Parents’ Associations (FRAM) to eight additional Ministry of Education School
Districts (CISCOs) (Ambalavao; Manakara; Toliara II; Brickaville, Antsiranana II; Befandriana nord;
Ambohidratrimo; and Antanifotsy) starting from the 2019-2020 school year (PD, p. 25).
Independent regulation/quality control mechanisms for pre-service training in the health sector
PA3: To improve quality control of institutions providing training for workers in the health sector, the Ministry
of Public Health has created a health training institute inspection and quality control commission and
established its organizations and functions (PD, p. 26).
Modernized human resource management and systems
PA4: To allow for systematic counting of all public education and health professionals and rationalization of
the distribution of human resources throughout the civil service, the Prime Minister, Head of Government,
has obligated all institutions and ministries, decentralized territorial collectivities, and public institutions and
bodies to use AUGURE (l’Application Unique pour la gestion Uniforme des Ressources humaines de
l’Etat), a single system for harmonized management of civil servants, and the nomenclature of positions
validated by the Ministry in charge of civil service for the management of their personnel (PD, p. 27).
Objective 2: Support the Government of Madagascar’s investment in human capital, through improving
availability and predictability of financial resources in the social sectors/Pillar 2: More transparent
and predictable investments in human capital
Greater, more consolidated financing for safety nets
PA5: Support the expansion of the three priority social safety net programs in Madagascar: Human
Development Cash Transfers (TMDH), Productive Cash for Work (ACTP), and Emergency Drought
Response Program (FIAVOTA) (PD, p. 29).
Transferring funds to frontline service providers in the health sector
PA6: To facilitate channeling financing to public primary healthcare centers (CSBs) for community health
programs and improve related decentralized public financial management and budget execution at the
commune level, the Prime Minister, Head of Government, has established rules relating to the management
of budget allocations by the Ministry of Public Health to CSBs for community health programs, including, inter
alia, provisions for the direct transfer of such CSB allocations to dedicated sub-accounts within the relevant
communes’ existing treasury accounts, and for expenses to be executed in accordance with a CSB
allocation procedures manual to be elaborated by the Ministry in charge of health and integrated within
commune budget procedures (PD, p. 30).
Improved transparency in budget execution
PA7: To enhance transparency, oversight, and accountability of budget processes and improve the efficiency
of budgetary allocation and spending, the Prime Minister, Head of Government, has established rules and

                                                                                                       Page 5 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Human Capital DPO (P168697)



 principles of access to and use of data related to the budgeting of public entities, based on payments and
 cash, in revenues and in expenditures, in a format compliant with open data principles, applicable to users of
 (a) the Public Treasury Information System (SIT), the interface that permits collection or receipt of data from
 data providers, and (b) the Public Treasury’s Open Data Portal, a web-based platform through which the
 public may access the Treasury’s open data relating to budget execution (PD, p. 31).
 Greater fiscal revenues for social spending
 PA8: To reinforce the capacity to transparently evaluate the efficiency of tax expenditures with a view to
 optimizing tax revenues, MEF has established the framework for periodic evaluation of the efficacy of tax and
 customs exemptions and other preferential tax regimes, including the division of responsibilities, the sharing
 of information, and methodologies, with the view of achieving the socioeconomic objectives of fiscal
 spending (PD, p. 32).
 Objective 3: Support the Government of Madagascar’s investment in human capital, through improving
 legal protections for women and children/Pillar 3: Stronger legal frameworks for the protection of
 women and children
 Strengthened legal frameworks for women and children
 PA9: To strengthen the legal regime for the prevention and prosecution of acts of gender-based violence
 (GBV) and the protection of victims of GBV, Parliament has enacted a law relating to combatting GBV (PD,
 p. 33).




b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

The DPF was structured around three pillars, supported by nine PAs, focused on the social sectors (health,
education, and social protection) and gender. They supported reforms that were well aligned with the country’s
constraints and priorities and with the Bank’s current CPF, and they were chosen in close consultation with the
key stakeholders of those sectors. The design and implementation of reforms captured in the nine PAs have
placed human capital development at the center of the policy dialogue in the country and succeeded in rallying
the attention and support of the government and stakeholders around policy challenges of the social
sectors. The synergies across these reforms have created a policy foundation supportive of better health and
education services, expanded social protection, and improved protection for women and children. All of these
are expected to enable Madagascar’s population to reach their potential as contributors to more sustainable
and inclusive growth in the country.

Objective 1: Improving human resources in health and education

Pillar 1: Better qualified, distributed and performing human resources in education and health sectors

Overall, all four PAs under this Pillar address critical constraints to the achievement of PDO/Pillar 1 and make a
substantive and credible contribution to achieving that objective.

The main driver of poor learning outcomes in Madagascar is the poor quality of the teachers (ICR, para.
28). PA1 and PA2 directly supported the objectives of improving the qualifications of teachers and their
performance by addressing key constraints. PA1 addressed the lack of clear quality standards and skills

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 28
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Human Capital DPO (P168697)



requirements for teachers, which undermined GoM’s ability to monitor and ensure quality. It established a
National Teacher Career Policy and Skills Requirements, creating minimum standards for entry into the
teaching profession. This provided MENETP with a framework for: ensuring that all teachers meet these
requirements; guiding a two-year training for teacher certification, required for all teachers under this new
policy; strengthening career management; enhancing regulation of the recruitment of community teachers; and
implementing performance-based contracts, as envisioned by MENETP. Rating: Highly Satisfactory.

PA2 addressed the issue of the very low quality of unsubsidized community teachers, recruited by communities
without any guidelines or quality control. The ICR (para 4) estimates that there were 47,000 unsubsidized
community teachers without formal training or qualifications in 2019. PA2 established quality control measures
for the recruitment of community teachers, directly supporting teacher quality improvements. Measures included
a content-knowledge test for community teachers’ recruitment, setting a minimum competency requirement to
enter civil service. This reform ensured that selection of recruits would be based on objective and transparent
criteria (pedagogic competencies and subject-matter knowledge), which ultimately would strengthen the quality
of the teacher workforce and improve learning. Rating: Highly Satisfactory.

A main cause of the very low quality of clinical staff in health facilities is the poor quality of pre-service
training provided by training institutions. While these institutions are supposed to receive accreditation
certificates from the Ministries of Health and Higher Education, there was no effective regulatory body to ensure
accreditation quality (ICR, para. 3). PA3 established an Inspection and Quality Control Commission for Health
Training Institutes, enabling better regulation of institutions providing training for health providers. Comprised of
Ministry of Health and professional boards, the Commission conducts regular inspections of para-professional
training institutions to assess and improve their performance. When a training institute falls short of standards
or performance expectations, the Commission recommends sanctions to the National Habilitation Committee,
led by the Ministry of Higher Education. While this new quality control process should contribute to the quality of
pre-service training, the Commission has no authority to enforce sanctions of non-performing private
institutions. Rating: Satisfactory.

PA4 required the mandatory use of the human resource management system, AUGURE, and the nomenclature
of positions validated by the Ministry in charge of civil service for the management of all civil servants. This
action was seen as critical for enabling the more efficient management and distribution of human
resources. AUGURE was introduced by GoM in 2017 as a unique HRM system. However, system
weaknesses caused ministries still to maintain parallel HR systems or databases. PA4's reform is especially
critical for the health and education sectors, which employ almost 70 percent of the public workforce, and
whose poor HR planning and systems have resulted in the understaffing of health facilities and schools and
inequitable distribution of personnel. Moreover, increases in the number of contract workers, volunteers,
community teachers, and community health workers, in response to growing demand, have not been
incorporated in systems, further complicating HR management. However, in retrospect, the mandatory use of a
single HRM system may have been overly ambitious, given that AUGURE was not functional at the outset of
the DPO and required considerable system strengthening and associated capacity building before it could be
relied upon by all intended users (all institutions and ministries, decentralized territorial collectivities, and public
institutions and bodies [Program Document, p. 27]) as an effective tool for improved HRM and distribution, and
before its mandatory use would unequivocally lead to achievement of Objective/Pillar 1. Rating: Moderately
Unsatisfactory.

Objective 2: Improving availability and predictability of financial resources in the social sectors




                                                                                                        Page 7 of 28
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Human Capital DPO (P168697)



Pillar 2: More transparent and predictable investments in human capital

The PAs had direct causal links with the objectives and were relevant to the country’s context and priorities and
to the CPF (FY2023-2027), especially the objective of increasing access to social services and addressing
weak governance, which undermines the adequate financing and provision of services.

While assessed to be highly cost-effective, GoM’s SSN programs only reached about 5 percent of the extreme
poor in the country, far below the 15 percent target set for 2023 in the National Strategy for Social Protection
and even further below the average of 28 percent for the region. At 0.16 percent of gross domestic product
(GDP) in 2019, GoM expenditures on social protection were extremely low. GoM health expenditures in 2017
made up only 4.4 percent of all GoM spending. PA5, the allocation of domestic resources for social safety net
programs, was highly relevant to the achievement of the PDO, as it promoted budget allocations for SSN
programs, with a commitment over a period of three years, and represented a significant increase in domestic
funding for the social protection sector – a sector that had relied almost exclusively on donor funding. The
mobilization and commitment of domestic funding for social protection became all the more critical in the wake
of COVID. Rating: Highly Satisfactory.

In addition to underfunding of the sector, a key constraint in the health sector was the very centralized
orientation of expenditures. Only 4.7 percent of the health budget was executed at the district level in 2017, of
which 55 percent was intended for primary health facilities/CSBs, or less than US$1000 per CSB per year. PA6,
the establishment of rules for managing budget allocations for CSBs, including the direct transfer of CSB
allocations and their effective use, aimed to ensure quicker and easier access to CSBs’ allocations, addressing
the chronic lack of funding of essential inputs for primary health care (water, electricity, and medical
supplies). The intended transfer of CSB budgets from the district to commune level, specifically through a
dedicated bank sub-account executed by the commune, was plausibly expected to facilitate transparency of
CSB budgets and CSBs’ direct access to these funds. Moreover, CSB-dedicated sub-accounts could be used
to channel other funds (subsidies, local funds) from the communes destined for health activities. This reform
supported GoM’s decentralization agenda and, if proven to be successful, had the potential for duplication in
other sectors. Rating: Highly Satisfactory.

An important constraint to public and legislative oversight to improve the responsiveness and accountability of
expenditure was the ministries’ lack of timely information and data on budget allocations and expenditures and
a lack of public access to quality data on budget execution. This had led to low budget execution rates, which,
in turn, negatively impacted planned programs and investments in human capital. PA7 established rules and
principles of access to and use of data in a form compliant with open data principles, with a view to improving
transparency in budget execution. Improved access to timely budget execution reports with quality, exploitable
data was expected to improve significantly ministries’ capacities to plan and monitor budget performance and
improve overall decision-making, and, in the long run, to increase accountability and effective public
participation in the budget process. Rating: Highly Satisfactory.

Madagascar’s social sector spending as a share of GDP was considerably lower than the average for Sub-
Saharan Africa, severely compromising the coverage and quality of social services delivery. PA8’s
establishment of a framework for periodic evaluation of the efficacy of tax and custom exemptions and other
preferential tax regimes was an attempt to increase fiscal revenues and rationalize tax exemptions. It aimed to
address the need to strengthen domestic revenue mobilization in order to generate greater domestic resources
for social spending. To this end, a baseline review of the pertinence and efficacy of long-standing tax
abatements and preferential tax regimes, along with periodic updates, were deemed necessary. A shortcoming
in the results chain is the assumption that increased fiscal revenues would mean incremental investments in


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Human Capital DPO (P168697)



 social sectors. The results chain did not reflect the real risk that GoM might have other priorities for the
 utilization of additional resources generated. Moreover, it is not clear that just setting up an evaluation
 framework would result in meaningful movement towards achievement of PDO2. There is no requirement
 embedded in the PA for use of the framework or logic for how its use would lead to increased revenues for
 social spending. Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory.

 Objective 3: Improving legal protections for women and children

 Pillar 3: Stronger legal frameworks for the protection of women and children

 GBV is common in Madagascar, with 30 percent of Malagasy women reporting that they have suffered from
 some kind of violence. Most cases, however, were not prosecuted, or even reported. Child marriage (girls
 married before the age of 18), a form of GBV, was still rampant at 40 percent in 2019. The impacts of child
 marriage on education, health, poverty, and violence have been well documented. PA9, the enactment of the
 GBV law, was highly relevant to the achievement of PDO/Pillar 3. The 2020 Gender-Based Violence Law
 provides stronger protection for women and girls by: specifying new offenses (domestic violence, including
 marital rape, and sexual harassment); introducing mandatory reporting; and providing new penal procedures,
 which put an end to impunity of offenders. The 2020 Law is a fundamental reform, raising awareness, changing
 social norms, and ending a culture of silence and acceptance of violence, critical for supporting the human
 capital development agenda given the negative consequences of GBV for individuals, households, and society
 at large. Over and above the attention to child exploitation in the GBV Law, activities supporting Objective 3
 also aimed to support implementation of Madagascar’s National Strategy on Child Marriage and pave the way
 for adoption of a National Child Protection Policy, particularly through sensitization campaigns to promote
 communities’ signatures of a pledge to combat child marriage. These pledges were envisaged to facilitate an
 indicative trigger for DPO2, before that follow-on operation was dropped: the adoption of a National Policy on
 Gender Equality and Child Protection. Rating: Highly Satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

The operation used nine results indicators (RIs) to measure the achievement of results of the nine PAs
supporting the three objectives/pillars. The team modified five of the nine original indicators to better
capture results in light of data limitations at closing, updated baselines, the need for further specification of
the indicator, and/or efforts to better capture the intent of PA. With a few exceptions, itemized below, the
indicator definitions, baselines, and availability of data were generally clear and credible, mostly
measurable, and grounded in coherent results chains laid out under each objective.




                                                                                                        Page 9 of 28
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Human Capital DPO (P168697)



Table 2: Results Indicators (RIs) by Objective and Prior Actions (PAs) – baseline and
target values; status and achievement
                                           Base-
                                    RI              Target            Actual as RI
                                                             Actual
                      Associated                                                   Achieve-
                                           line
Results Indicator                   Rele-           (Mar              % of         ment
                                                             (Dec
                      PAs
                                           (2018-            2021)
                                    vance           2021)             Target       Rating
                                           2019)
Objective 1: Support the Government of Madagascar’s investment in human capital, through
improving human resources in health and education

Pillar 1: Better qualified, distributed, performing human resources in education health
sectors
RI1: % teachers                                         At least
registered in AUGURE                                    35%
classified as per                             Not
positions laid out in                         available          No data
Teacher Performance PA1:                                         available -
Standards                Establishment
                         of National
Alternative indicator Teacher          MS                                            N
proposed for the         Career Policy
ICR: % teachers          & Skills                                          21%
registered in MEN MIS Requirements
                                              21%
that are qualified as                                   At least
                                                                 24%       Not
per Teacher                                             35%
                                              (2019)                       achieved
Performance
Standards
                         PA2:
                         Establishment                                     0%
RI2: # teachers
                         of quality
recruited and contracts                                                    Not
                         control
awarded according to                          800                          achieved
                         measures for                   Over
new recruitment                        S                         800                 N
                         community                      10,000
procedures/                                   (2018)
                         teacher
                         recruitment                                       Not
Issuance of contracts
                         (pilot new                                        conducted
                         procedures)
                         PA3:
                         Establishment                                     0%
RI3: % paramedical       of Inspection
graduates from private and Quality            64%                          Not
                                                        At least
institutions passing the Control       MS                        64%       achieved N
                                                        80%
public service           Commission           (2018)
entrance exam            for health                                        Not
                         training                                          conducted
                         institutes


                                                                                           Page 10 of 28
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Human Capital DPO (P168697)



                                           0                            0
RI4: % schools and
CSBs meeting sectoral                      (2019)                       Not
HR standards,                                                           achieved
                                                    50%     No data
according to AUGURE                                         available
                      PA 4:
RI4 changed to:                                             (Mar
                      Mandatory
                      use of HRM                            2021)
RI4.1: % CSBs that
                      system
meet health sector HR            MS
                      AUGURE for           18%
standards (2
                      health &                                          19%
providers/CSB1; 3 for                               50%     24%                    N
                      education            (2019)
CSB2)                                                                   Not
                      personnel
                                                                        achieved
RI4.2: % schools that
meet ed sectoral HR                                 80%     73%                    M
                                           60%                          65%
standard (1 teacher/40
pupils)                                      (2018-                      Partially
                                             2019)                       achieved
Overall achievement rating for PDO 1: Unsatisfactory
Objective 2: Support the Government of Madagascar’s investment in human capital, through
improving availability and predictability of financial resources in the social sectors

Pillar 2: More transparent and predictable investments in human capital
RI5.1: Total minimum PA5:               S  0       Over     $5 million 100%     H
amount disbursed         Allocation of                      disbursed
annually to FID budget domestic            (2019) $5        (2021) for Achieved
line for                 resources for             million 3 priority
                         (i) SSNs                           SSNs
       priority SSNs & (MEF agreed
       MPSPPF           to allocate 6
         budget line for billion Ariary
         social          to FID in 2020                                         H
         protection      RPI budget
                         line and 18       $2.56
         policy
                                           million At least
         management billion ($5m)
                         for each 2021,            $2.56    $2.56
         M&E from
                         2022,             (2019)  million million for
         domestic public
         financing.      2023 for                           MPSPPF
                         additional                         maint’d,
                         30,000 hh;                         disbursed 100%
                         and (ii)                           in 2021
                                                                       Achieved
                         MPSPPW
                         validation of
                         SSN manual
                         for
                         coordination,

                                                                                           Page 11 of 28
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Human Capital DPO (P168697)



                          use of all SSN
                          funds)
RI5.2: # households                                     Over                 160 %
                                               0               48,073
covered by the priority   PA5: (see                     30,000
                                           S                                              H
SSNs from domestic        above)                                             Target
                                               (2019)
public financing                                                             surpassed
RI6: % budget law
                      PA6: Direct
allocations to CSB                             0
                      transfer of                                            71%
disbursed by                                            At least 60%                      S
                      funds (CSB
communes for health                            (2019)   85%
                      allocations) to                                        Achieved
facilities
                      health
                      facilities (PM
Alternative indicator                 MS
                      rules for
proposed for the
                      management                                             117%
ICR: % of budget law
                      of budget                0        At least
allocations to CSBs                                                          Target
                      allocations by                    85%      99.5%                 H
mandated by MoH and                                                          surpassed
                      Min H to                 (2019)
transferred to
                      CSBs)
communes

RI7: % budget
expenditures made in
the social sectors                             34.7%
according to their      PA7:
programmatic            Improved               (2018)
                        transparency                    At least No data
classification
                        in budget                       35%      available
Alternative indicator execution (PM
proposed for the        rules on       MU                                                 N
ICR: % of budget        access, use of
executed in the social budget data,
sectors according to compliant w/
                                                        35%      19%
programmatic            open data              24%
                                                                             Regression
classification (budget principles)                                           from
executed by SS                                 (2019)
                                                                             baseline
ministries/total budget
executed)                                                                    Not
                                                                             achieved
RI8: Reduction of thePA8: MEF        MU        23%      At most No data      -            N
amount of tax        establishment                      15%     available
exemptions as a      of framework              (2018)
proportion of overallfor evaluation
fiscal revenues      of efficacy of
                     tax and                            15%      27.5%
Reformulated         customs                   23%
indicator: Amount of exemptions to
tax exemptions as    increase fiscal           (2018)

                                                                                                Page 12 of 28
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Human Capital DPO (P168697)



proportion of overall   revenues and                                       Regression
fiscal revenues         rationalize tax                                    from
                        exemptions                                         baseline

                                                                           Not
                                                                           achieved
Overall achievement rating for PDO 2: Moderately Satisfactory
Objective 3: support the Government of Madagascar’s investment in human capital, through
improving legal protections for women and children

Pillar 3: Stronger legal frameworks for the protection of women and children
                        PA9:
                        Prevention
                        and
RI9: # communities prosecution of                                    159%
                                            0
(fokontany) that signed acts of GBV                  Over
                                      MS                    1,592              H
the pledge to combat and protection                  1,000           Target
                                            (2019)
child marriage          of victims of                                surpassed
                        GBV
                        (Parliament
                        enacted law)
Overall achievement rating for PDO 3: Highly Satisfactory




Objective 1: Improving human resources in health and education

Pillar 1: Better qualified, distributed, performing human resources in education health sectors

RI 1 (percent of teachers registered in AUGURE classified as per positions laid out in Teacher
Performance Standards) was relevant for measuring the impact of PA1 (establishment of National
Teacher Career Policy and Skills Requirements) on progress toward achievement of PDO1. Because the
version of AUGURE available at the time of project closing was not set to classify teachers as per
positions laid out in Teacher Performance Standards, the indicator was adjusted to measure the percent
of teachers registered in MEN MIS who are qualified, as per Teacher Performance Standards. While a
baseline was not established for the original indicator, a new baseline was established in 2019 for the
adjusted indicator. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory

RI 2 (number of teachers recruited and contracts awarded according to new recruitment
procedures/issuance of contracts) was relevant for measuring the impact of PA2 (establishment of quality
control measures for community teacher recruitment) on progress toward achievement of PDO 1, and it
was measurable. A baseline for this unchanged indicator was established in 2018. Rating: Satisfactory

RI 3 (percent of paramedical graduates from private institutions passing the public service entrance exam)
was somewhat relevant for measuring the impact of PA 3 (establishment of Inspection and Quality Control
Commission for health training institutes) on progress toward achievement of PDO1, and

                                                                                                Page 13 of 28
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Human Capital DPO (P168697)



measurable. However, given that many other factors could also contribute to the share of graduates
passing the entrance exam, it may not have been sufficiently linked to PA3. A baseline for this unchanged
indicator was established in 2018. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory

The original articulation of RI 4 (percent of schools and CSBs meeting sectoral human resources
standards, according to AUGURE), while relevant for assessing the impact of PA4 (mandatory use of
AUGURE for health and education personnel), was not sufficiently specific to distinguish and measure the
different standards for the staffing of schools and CSBs. Moreover, it was based on the assumption that
AUGURE provided detailed data on personnel by facility, whereas AUGURE only provided aggregate
data at the district level. The indicator was consequently split to reflect the staffing standards of each
sector to measure RI 4.1 (percent of CSBs that meet health sector human resource standards: 2
providers for CSB1; 3 providers for CSB2) and RI 4.2 (percent of schools that meet education sector
human resource standards: 1 teacher/40 pupils). The original composite indicator had a baseline of 0 and
a target of 50 percent. After the split, the baselines were updated to 18 percent (for RI 4.1) and 60 percent
(for RI 4.2), the latter triggering an increase in the target for RI 4.2 from 50 percent to 80
percent. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory

Objective 2: Improving availability and predictability of financial resources in the social sectors

Pillar 2: More transparent and predictable investments in human capital

RI 5.1, as originally stated (total minimum amount disbursed annually to the Social Investment Fund for
Development (FID) budget line for priority SSNs and MPSPPF budget line for social protection policy
management, monitoring and evaluation from domestic public financing), was relevant for measuring the
impact of PA5 (allocation of domestic resources for social safety nets program) toward achievement of
PDO2. For proper measurement it was split into two sub-indicators: RI 5.1a (total minimum amount
disbursed to the Social Investment Fund for Development (FID) budget line for priority social safety nets
from domestic public financing) and RI 5.1b (total minimum amount disbursed to the Ministry of
Population, Social Protection and Promotion of Women [MPSPPF] budget line for social protection policy
management M&E from domestic public financing). Baselines and targets were set for each sub-
indicator. RI 5.2 (number of households covered by the priority SSNs from domestic public financing) was
relevant for measuring the impact of PA5, specific, and measurable. Rating: Satisfactory

While an adequate measure of the impact of PA6 on PDO2/Pillar 2, RI 6 (percent of budget law
allocations to CSB disbursed by communes for health facilities) could not be measured because there
was no monitoring system in place to track disbursements from communes to CSBs. An alternative
indicator was identified and used for the ICR (percent of budget law allocations to CSBs mandated by the
MoH and transferred to the communes). This did serve as a somewhat adequate measure of PA6’s
contribution to the achievement of PDO2, providing information on availability of these resources at the
commune level, but it fell short of confirming their availability to frontline services. Baseline and targets
did not change. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory

As noted in the ICR (para. 39), RI 7 (percent of budget expenditures made in the social sectors according
to their programmatic classification) did not adequately capture the aim of PA7. While reforms under PA7
aimed to ensure better access to budget and expenditure data, RI 7 instead monitored expenditures in the
social sectors, with a view to having the share of expenditures in these sectors increase. Moreover, there
was no published data on budget expenditures to assess achievement of the targets for RI 7. As data on
budget commitment was available, an alternative indicator was selected to reflect commitment versus


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 28
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Human Capital DPO (P168697)



               payment and also include more specificity (percent of budget executed in the social sectors [health, social
               protection, and education] according to programmatic classification [Budget executed for MinSAN, MEN,
               MPPSPF, MESUPRES, METP/Total budget executed]). The baseline was updated, but the 35 percent
               target remained the same. Even the revised RI 7 was not an adequate measure of PA7, since it, too,
               monitored social sector expenditure rather than improved access to budget and expenditure data
               (improved transparency). Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory

               RI 8, as originally articulated (reduction of the amount of tax exemptions as a proportion of overall fiscal
               revenues), was not clearly defined and did not have a data source. Its reformulation, to track an increase
               in the amount of tax exemptions as a proportion of overall fiscal revenues, provided an adequate and
               specific measure of progress toward the achievement of PDO2. However, as noted in Section 3.b of this
               ICRR (Relevance of Prior Actions) and in the ICR (para. 36), PA8 (establishment by MEF of a framework
               for evaluation of efficacy of tax and customs exemptions) may not necessarily contribute to
               PDO2 achievement, if any increases in revenues achieved are not used to increase the availability of
               financial resources for the social sectors. RI 8 is therefore not an adequate measure of PA8's contribution
               toward achievement of PDO2. Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory

               Objective 3: Improving legal protections for women and children

               Pillar 3: Stronger legal frameworks for the protection of women and children

               RI 9 (number of communities [fokontany] that signed the pledge to combat child marriage) did not provide
               a full measure of the aim of reforms under PA9 (to strengthen the legal framework to better protect
               children and advance gender equality through enactment of the Gender-Based Violence Law). It did not
               track the passage of the GBV Law. However, it did reflect GoM actions to strengthen the legal framework
               for child protection: the carrying out of sensitization campaigns and advocacy to encourage communities
               to sign a pledge to combat child marriage. These activities were expected to facilitate the implementation
               of a related trigger for DPO2: adoption of the National Policy and Gender Equality and Child
               Protection. While RI 9 provided a good measure of GoM activities to combat child marriage, which were
               expected to contribute to PDO3, it was insufficient for tracking the contribution of the PA (adoption of the
               GBV Law) to PDO3 (frameworks and actions to facilitate the implementation of the Law and how it
               strengthens protection of women and girls). An additional indicator would have enhanced relevance of
               measures assessing the contribution of PA9 to PDO3. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory



   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                Support the Government of Madagascar's investment in human capital through improving human resources
                in health and education
                Pillar 1: Better qualified, distributed, performing human resources in education and health sectors

                                                                                                                  Page 15 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Human Capital DPO (P168697)




Rationale
Three of the four RI targets had Negligible achievement (achieving less than 25 percent of the target), while
the fourth split indicator had Negligible achievement of the first sub-target and Modest achievement of the
second sub-target.

Since data was not available for the original RI 1 (proportion of teachers registered in AUGURE classified as
per positions laid out in Teacher Performance Standards), an alternative RI 1 was used. From a baseline of
21 percent, by the end of 2021, 24 percent of the teachers registered in the MEN information system were
qualified as per approved Teacher Performance Standards, falling short of the target of 35 percent (21
percent achieved). New teacher standards require a two-year training sanctioned by a certificate for the
qualification of teachers. MEN was unable to roll out the mass training of community teachers due to the
impacts of COVID (restrictions on activities and its effects on the economy) and also to the insufficient
number of mentors/coaches available. Mass training was thus replaced with small-batch training of teachers
provided by 28 regional training centers, prioritizing teachers with a Certificate of Aptitude for Teaching or a
Certificate of Professional Aptitude. This two-year training program is also available to in-service teachers
through an online platform, Distance Training for Primary Teachers, financed under the Bank-financed
Education Support Project (P160442).

RI 2, the recruitment of 10,000 new civil servants (teachers) from among community-contracted teachers
according to new recruitment procedures, established under PA 2/issuance of contracts, was not
achieved. The expansion of the minimum quality control filter, which included a content-knowledge test for
the recruitment of new community teachers, was not implemented. In the context of the economic impact of
COVID-19 and a cabinet reshuffle, the focus shifted to enhancing the management of existing teachers
(equitable deployment, capacity building, and motivating existing teachers through a test to enter civil
service). Merit-based recruitment of primary school teachers remains a priority for GoM. A law was
promulgated in December 2022 to establish recruitment of teachers through a national examination. In 2021,
MEN initiated recruitment of 1,075 qualified teachers through direct competition. However, by end-2021, GoM
had not recruited any new teachers according to the new recruitment procedures.

PA 3 established an Inspection and Quality Control Commission on Health Training, with a mandate to
accredit and audit private health training institutes to ensure better-quality pre-service training for all health
professionals. However, RI 3 (at least 80 percent of paramedical graduates from private institutions passing
the public service entrance exam) was not achieved, as no public service entrance exams for paramedical
graduates had been conducted. COVID-19 restrictions and financial constraints delayed audits by an
independent firm. While inspection visits have been conducted since 2021, private institutes were asked to
contribute to operational costs due to budget constraints, which may have compromised the independence of
inspections. MoH has not organized any public service entrance examination since 2018, as the number of
budgeted positions was deemed to be insufficient to justify holding a national examination. Nevertheless,
MoH has been conducting competitive recruitment of the health workforce based on application file selection
from the pool of graduates from qualified private training institutions. Moreover, the task team noted, in its
December 5, 2023 email to IEG, that there was also a backlog of contractual staff hired by projects, who were
promised to be recruited into the public service after two years of contractual service.

PA 4 mandated the exclusive use of AUGURE by all government ministries to allow systematic counting and
rational distribution of human resources, particularly in the education and health sectors. All government
ministries adopted AUGURE to register their workforce, but data inconsistencies on the number of state
employees remained across the various databases of line ministries and ministries responsible for finance
and public service. The original version of AUGURE was limited to district-level aggregation and needs to be

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Human Capital DPO (P168697)



disaggregated to the service delivery level, including schools and primary health care centers. AUGURE was
not fully functional at the closing of the program, and MoH and MEN data systems therefore provided the data
source for the ICR. The task team, in its December 5, 2023 email to IEG, noted that the reform and
upgrading of AUGURE as a unique platform for HR management for all ministries was to start with the
education and health sectors as they represent a large share of the public workforce. A unique HRM platform
was considered critical for increasing transparency and improving management. A census of education and
health sector personnel was thus planned for 2020 to collect and certify individual data, but was ultimately
delayed due to COVID-19. It is currently ongoing. RI 4.1 was negligibly achieved: from a 2019 baseline of 18
percent, 24 percent of CSBs met health sector staffing standards, falling short of the target of 50 percent
(19 percent achieved). RI 4.2 was modestly achieved: from a 2018-2019 baseline of 60 percent, 73 percent
of schools met education staffing standards, falling short of the target of 80 percent (65 percent
achieved).



Rating

Unsatisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Support Government of Madagascar's investment in human capital through improving availability and
predictability of financial resources in the social sectors
Pillar 2: More transparent and predictable investments in human capital

Rationale
The reforms under PA5 supported the expansion of coverage of the three priority SSN programs in
Madagascar through the mobilization of domestic resources. Specifically, GoM committed to: allocate MGA 6
billion to FID in its 2020 budget line and MGA 18 billion (US$5 million equivalent) for each 2021, 2022, and
2023 to cover an additional 30,000 households with support from three priority SSN programs; and allocate
MGA 12 billion (US$2.56 million equivalent) for MPSPPF in 2021, maintaining the 2019 baseline of US$2.56
million, for social protection policy management, monitoring and evaluation. RI 5.1a was fully
achieved. From a 2019 baseline of 0, MGA 6 billion was disbursed to FID in 2020 for the three priority SSN
programs, and MGA 18 billion (US$5 million) was disbursed in 2021 (100 percent achieved). RI 5.1b was
also fully achieved: MPSPPF’s allocated budget of US$2.56 million was fully disbursed in 2021, maintaining
the 2019 baseline amount of US$2.56 million (100 percent achieved). RI 5.2 was highly achieved, with
SSN coverage of an additional 48,073 households, surpassing the target of 30,000 additional households
(160 percent achieved). This financing was all the more critical and beneficial for the population in the wake
of the COVID-19 pandemic and its economic impact on poor and vulnerable households. Overall,
achievement, as measured by RI 5, is high (with all sub-targets being fully met or exceeded). Note: exchange
rates and US$ equivalents reflect those reported in the ICR.

PA 6 adopted regulations enabling the creation of sub-accounts at the commune level to provide direct and
regular financing to CSBs for frontline health services, which would be executed by co-decision by the
communes and heads of CSBs. This reform aimed to ensure more regular availability of financing for basic
operating costs of CSBs and autonomy of decision for their use. RI 6, as originally formulated (percent of
budget law allocations to CSBs disbursed by communes for health facilities), was revised (percent of budget
law allocations to CSBs mandated by MoH and transferred to communes) because the original RI could not

                                                                                               Page 17 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Human Capital DPO (P168697)



be measured in the absence of a monitoring system tracking disbursements from communes to CSBs. Both
the original and revised formulations set a target of 85 percent. A procedures manual for the management of
these funds set two conditions to be met prior to transfer of funds to CSBs: (i) integration of CSB work plans
into the communes' program budgets, validated by local authorities; and (ii) opening of CSB subaccounts. In
March 2021, during the Bank’s preparation mission for the Human Capital DPO Phase 2 (P171460), it was
estimated that 60 percent of these funds were disbursed to the CSBs, substantially achieving the original RI
6 target of 85 percent (71 percent achieved). Moreover, the budget allocation to CSBs increased threefold
between 2020 and 2022 (from MGA 6.4 billion to MGA 19.4 billion), boosting the levels of actual
disbursements to CSBs. A MoH report showed that in 2021 99.5 percent of the budget law allocations were
mandated by MoH and transferred from MoH to the communes, exceeding the revised RI 6 target 85
percent (117 percent achieved). The ICR (para 53) notes that strong financial flow to CSBs is one of the
legacies of this DPO, particularly critical during the COVID-19 pandemic to ensure continuity of services. In a
follow-up email to IEG, dated February 5, 2024, the Region noted that “Most recently, the Ministry of Finance
recommended that the CSB subaccounts (established through the DPO) be used as the mechanism to
channel allowances to doctors, as it is their most efficient financing vehicle in health.” Overall, achievement
as measured by RI 6 is high, given the high achievement of the revised RI 6 target, the tripling of the budget
allocation to CSBs between 2020 and 2022, and the recognition by MoF of the utility of CSB subaccounts as
an efficient financing vehicle for the sector.

PA 7 established rules and principles to allow the public to access and use data related to government
budgets and expenditures through the Treasury’s Open Data Portal. Reform elements included (i) the
adoption of a standardized format for monthly disclosure of budget execution dashboards to administrative
and financial directors in line ministries; and (ii) the publication of budget execution reports, accompanied by
access to the budget execution dashboard for just-in-time analysis by the line ministries. After significant
delays, MEF released on its portal the first public dashboards with public spending data for 2019 and 2020 at
ministry and program levels. The ICR (para. 55) states that, “While this was a significant step forward in terms
of transparency, important gaps remained in terms of data coverage and accessibility…” (Treasury payment-
based data inaccessible to the public or to sector ministries, and persistent delays in the production and
publication of quarterly budget execution reports). Revised RI 7 (percent of budget executed in the social
sectors according to programmatic classification – budget executed by social sector ministries as a share of
total budget executed) was negligibly achieved. The 19 percent share at the end of the program fell far
short of the 35 percent target, and even reveals a decline from the 2019 baseline level of 24
percent. Overall, achievement, as assessed by the release of the first public dashboards with public spending
data for 2019 and 2020 but with significant gaps remaining, is modest. The negligible achievement of revised
RI 7 is discounted since it is not an adequate measure of PA 7.

The key reform under PA 8 was the establishment of the framework for periodic evaluation of the efficacy of
tax and customs exemptions and other preferential tax regimes with a view to reducing them. RI 8 (reduction
in tax exemptions as a proportion of overall fiscal revenues) was negligibly achieved. From a 2018 baseline
of 23 percent, tax exemptions as a share of overall fiscal revenues actually increased to 27.5 percent, far
from achieving the target of 15 percent. MEF’s tax expenditure assessment report was published in the annex
of the budget law for 2021. Measures were taken to reduce fiscal advantages, including for free zones and for
insurance. However, the poor economic environment induced by the COVID-19 pandemic did not allow MEF
to reduce the tax exemptions because most of them were social measures. Tax revenues fell, while spending
increased significantly in the face of the COVID crisis. As a result, the budget deficit deteriorated from 1.4
percent in 2019 to 6.3 percent in 2020.



                                                                                                 Page 18 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Human Capital DPO (P168697)



Overall, the achievement of Objective 2 is assessed as Moderately Satisfactory, based on the high
achievements of RI 5 and RI 6, and the negligible achievement of RI 7. The negligible achievement of RI 7
and the negligible achievement of RI 8 are given less weight than the other two RI ratings because RI 7 and
RI 8 were not adequate measures of Objective 2 achievement. Moreover, beyond providing significant and
much needed increases in the allocations of GoM budgets to frontline health services, the transfer of CSB
allocations to communes under RI 6, based on a procedures manual for the management of these funds at
the commune level and supporting local-level decision-making, represented a notable improvement in
transparency.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Support the Government of Madagascar's investment in human capital through improving legal protections for
women and children
Pillar 3: Stronger legal frameworks for the protection of women and children

Rationale
The main reforms under PA9 were the enactment of a national law on GBV and the development of an
operational manual for the implementation of coordinated community outreach campaigns, including a model
pledge to be signed by communities to combat child marriage. The GBV Law was enacted in 2020, followed
by steps to ensure its implementation: an application decree that defines measures for the prevention and
management of GBV cases; text and institutions established with Ministry of Justice for the penal chain; a
Standards Operating Procedures manual; creation of six integrated GBV centers; and a national GBV
platform to coordinate actors. Human resources strengthening is still needed on these fronts. Given the high
rate of child marriage (40 percent of girls marrying before the reaching the age of 18 years), the GBV Law
does provide some protection to girls who are married and also includes some language protecting children
against exploitation and harmful traditional practices. The DPO also envisaged additional activities to end
child marriages. Community outreach campaigns conducted across the country, especially in the Southern
region, sought to obtain community pledges to end child marriages (including a pledge to keep girls in
school). These efforts culminated in the high achievement of RI 9: a total of 1,592 communities signed the
pledge to combat child marriage, surpassing the target of over 1,000. These activities were intended to
build national consensus that would facilitate the adoption of the National Policy on Gender and Equality and
Child Protection, which was an indicative trigger for DPO2 before it was dropped. In its December 5, 2023
email to IEG, the task team noted that MPPSP developed a National Policy on Gender and Equality in 2021,
even though DPO2 was dropped.



Rating

Highly Satisfactory



                                                                                               Page 19 of 28
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Human Capital DPO (P168697)



OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Achievement of Objective 1 is rated as Unsatisfactory. Of the four RIs tracked under this objective, three were
negligibly achieved. The fourth RI was modestly achieved. Achievement of Objective 2 is rated
as Moderately Satisfactory. Of the four RIs tracked under this objective, two (RI 5 and RI 6) were highly
achieved, one (RI 7) was negligibly achieved, and one (RI 8) was negligibly achieved. RI 5 and RI 6 were
weighted more heavily as they not only provided significantly increased and much needed resources to frontline
social services, they also improved the transparency of social services budgets and their management. And they
were appropriate measures of Objective 2 efficacy. Achievement of Objective 3 is rated as Highly
Satisfactory, with the single RI rated as highly achieved. While this RI did not capture all of PA9’s contribution to
Objective 3, the ICR provides additional strong documentation of the high achievement of this objective.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory


      6. Outcome

      Rationale

      Relevance of PAs was Satisfactory, and Efficacy was Moderately Satisfactory. The Outcome rating for the
      operation is, therefore, Moderately Satisfactory.


      a. Rating

      Moderately Satisfactory

      7. Risk to Development Outcome

      GoM commitment is critical for sustaining the DPO outcomes. Under PA5, a budget line was
      established under MEF and funds were disbursed to FID in 2020 and 2021 for the three priority SSN
      programs, resulting in the expansion of coverage of these programs by over 40,000 households. The impact
      of COVID-19 would have been worse, especially on vulnerable families, in the absence of this
      financing. Given that this financing is domestic, GoM will need to continue financing FID and MPSPPF to
      sustain these gains.

      Likewise, adequate GoM funding is also critical to sustain the gains achieved under PAs1-4 to
      improve qualifications, distribution, and performance of human resources in education and
      health. The national teaching career and teacher skills requirements are being used for recruitment and to
      classify positions of teachers in AUGURE. The costs of this ongoing work and of the work of the Inspection
      and Control Commission for Health Training Institutes, responsible for accreditation and auditing of private


                                                                                                         Page 20 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Human Capital DPO (P168697)



health training institutes to ensure better quality pre-service training for all health professionals, need to be
covered to continue and sustain these reforms.

While the mandatory use of AUGURE by all government ministries is one of the
reported achievements of the reforms under the DPO, the success and sustainability of this reform
depends on continued upgrading of this system to ensure that it meets the needs of users and fulfills
its function to rationalize human resources distribution. Significant improvements in the system’s
functions and capabilities are urgently needed if it is to become a comprehensive system for HRM. Current
limitations have already forced ministries to run parallel systems. An ongoing census of health personnel,
supported by other Bank-financed projects, should contribute to such improvements. To strengthen and
sustain outcomes, GoM needs to: (i) accelerate the rollout of the updated version of AUGURE to address
new functional and technical specifications, defined in consultation with sectoral ministries, and (ii) allocate
resources for its continuous upgrading to ensure that it meets the needs of users and eliminates the need for
alternative platforms for HRM.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


This operation was informed by numerous lessons from past DPOs in Madagascar, which have
supported improvements in fiscal management, allocative efficiency, fiscal space, and
decentralization. Lessons learned and incorporated into this DPO include the following.

      The political economy environment presents risks. This operation thus worked with high-level
       stakeholders across the government to help build cohesion to implement reforms. This reform
       program was built around a multi-agent leadership approach, working closely with policy influencers
       in and outside of the government across education, health, decentralization, social protection, child
       protection, and women’s empowerment.
      Criticality and selectivity should drive policy reforms supported. Given the limited institutional
       capacity for carrying out reforms, priorities needed to be focused. This program’s relatively narrow
       scope enabled greater depth on a few instrumental areas surrounding improving teachers, health
       professionals, spending, transparency, and protection of women and children.
      The policy agenda should be integrated with the investment program, as well as
       with analytical/advisory work. This operation was highly complementary to ongoing investment
       operations supporting decentralization, improved nutrition services, enhanced education, and
       strengthened SSNs (itemized in Table 5 of the Program Document). This has enhanced the
       understanding of development constraints and built up the relationships with government
       counterparts. Specifically, the program built on a robust analytical program that precisely estimated
       the impact of, for example, SSNs and nutrition services on human capital accumulation.
      There is strong client demand for partners to work together to support a common set of
       reforms. This approach increased the overall impact of the reform. This operation dovetailed with
       European Union (EU) support to Madagascar, harmonizing areas of support and ensuring
       coherence at each stage. This includes the EU’s establishment of a complementary budget support

                                                                                                        Page 21 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Human Capital DPO (P168697)



       project for 2020 and 2021 for EUR 20 million (EUR 10 million each year), which was designed to
       disburse against an aligned results framework.

The design of the DPO was underpinned by strong analytical work behind the PAs, much of which
stemmed from analytics and activities around existing WBG investment operations in the health, education,
and social protection sectors, as well as technical work undertaken by other partners. The Basic Education
Project financed technical assistance that accompanied the policy reforms supported through this
operation. The SSN priority programs featured in the National Strategy on Social Protection have been
financially supported by the World Bank and benefited from extensive technical assistance. The health
financing and human resources actions were informed by investment experiences financed by the EU, the
French Agency for Development (AFD), and others. Table 4 of the Program Document (p.
35) systematically itemizes the analytical underpinnings for each of the nine policy areas supported by a
prior action. Each one is substantiated with findings from multiple sources, which are cited.

Overall, the DPO had a reasonably clear results chain, but the choice of some PAs and the
monitoring and evaluation framework could have been stronger. Two PAs (PA4 and PA8) were
somewhat weak elements in the results framework, as these actions did not provide unequivocally strong
links to the intended outcomes (see Section 3). The definitions and sources of some RIs were not clear in
their original formulations (e.g., RIs on tax exemption and budget transparency). The monitoring of RIs
relied heavily on administrative data from line ministries (HRM platform, AUGURE, to monitor HR staffing
allocation and distribution; data from the FM information system; data from the health and education
information systems). It was hard to obtain data on some of the RIs due to the lack of monitoring
systems. Other challenges included low institutional capacity and inaccuracy of data. Some RIs could have
been better framed to link them more closely to the PAs, although most of them did, especially as
amended, measure progress towards the PDOs.

The Bank accurately assessed the overall risk of the operation to be substantial. The main areas of
concern that could have jeopardized the achievement of the PDO were political and governance risks,
technical design and stakeholder risks, fiduciary and safeguards weaknesses, and GoM’s institutional
capacity to implement the reforms fully. For these main risks identified at appraisal, sufficient mitigation
measures were proposed including: (i) a close policy dialogue with GoM and the identification of
government champions to maintain political consensus around the reform agenda, including through
sector-specific communication strategies; (ii) extensive consultations with experts, policy influencers, and
key stakeholders across sectors, including civil society, to ensure reform coalitions are strengthened and
maintained; (iii) implementation support through provision of technical assistance, embracing an approach
of gradual scale-up, and the availability of straightforward operational manuals; (iv) drawing on a poverty
and social analysis, ensuring that equity considerations were given due consideration behind transparent
procedures for recruiting health and education human resources; and (v) continued dialogue on
implementation of the GBV Law, including community outreach and involvement of relevant stakeholders
and partners working on justice system reforms. The Program Document (paras. 118 – 127) provides more
detail on the thorough assessment of a broad range of risks and the identification of appropriate risk
mitigation measures for each identified risk.

The DPO operation was developed around a solid dialogue that brought together key internal and
external stakeholders across sectors. Task forces coordinated by GoM were put in place, and
consultations with Malagasy associations, non-governmental organizations, teachers’ unions, and other
civil society representatives helped inform the policy directions. The Bank project team also coordinated
well with development partners involved in the task force and with the EU. The two institutions (Bank and

                                                                                                   Page 22 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Human Capital DPO (P168697)



EU) worked closely to harmonize areas of support and ensure coherence at each stage, particularly on
PAs related to human resources, public financial management, and budget execution reforms. This
collaborative effort led to the development of a unified policy matrix for the two institutions’ respective
budget support operations. The agreement was that IDA would support the PAs under this DPO, and the
EU’s budget support operation would support the associated RIs.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Progress on PAs for DPO1 was monitored during the preparation of the planned DPO2 and through
supervision of other projects by sector specialists. No implementation status and results (ISR) report was
required since the approval of the second phase of the planned programmatic series was scheduled within 12
months after the approval of DPO1. Indeed, the first mission for the preparation of DPO2 was in October 2020,
during which progress on DPO1 was discussed, as evidenced by the post-mission aide-memoires written by the
task team. Since the operation was approved almost at the same time the country went into a COVID-19
lockdown, all missions and supervision were conducted virtually, which added significant challenges for the
Bank team. Still, whenever possible, supervision was conducted by sector specialists through their existing
projects. Indeed, since the DPO was complemented by IPFs, supervision for those IPFs provided opportunities
to monitor the progress of policy reforms. Overall, the Bank team was effective in supervising this DPO.

The Bank was proactive in working around the constraints and impacts of COVID-19. Right after the
DPO was approved in March 2020, the pandemic lockdowns (in March and July 2020) curtailed business as
usual, and its impacts on the economy and household poverty caused GoM to shift its attention to these
urgencies. Nevertheless, the Bank continued its support and dialogue through virtual supervisions and
meetings. Indeed, as noted in the following Section 9 (“Other Impacts”), the DPO proved to be an effective
contribution to GoM’s COVID response.

The risk mitigation measures identified during preparation were carried out and were effective in: further
building ownership and understanding of reforms; supplementing and strengthening capacities; and mobilizing
and coordinating collaboration across sectors, stakeholders, and development partners.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

                                                                                                    Page 23 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Human Capital DPO (P168697)




The Bank's performance during project preparation was satisfactory, except for one shortcoming. While, for
the most part, the results framework was supportive of the three PDOs and the RIs (as amended) provided
reasonable measures of PDO achievement, two PAs (PA4 and PA8) were not optimal in establishing strong
links with the PDOs they supported. M&E design included some indicators that, initially and in some cases at
closure, were not well defined, not sufficiently specific, not measurable because of lack of available quality
data, and/or not the best measures of the corresponding PAs' contributions to the PDO. The Bank team did
manage to correct some of these shortcomings (using different data sources, clarifying/modifying the
indicators) to provide sufficient evidence of efficacy.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The DPO contributed considerably to mitigating the economic impact of COVID-19 on the poor. COVID
triggered a recession that was about three times more severe than in the rest of Sub-Saharan Africa. As a
result, 1.5 million people fell below the international poverty line of US$2.15/day (using 2017 PPP) between
2020 and 2021, bringing the poverty rate to an all-time high of 81 percent in 2021. Without the support of this
DPO and other interventions, the situation could have been much worse. PA5 supported the mobilization of
US$5 million in domestic resources to complement donor funding for SSN programs and the development of a
manual that defined vulnerable populations to be targeted and targeting mechanisms. With this support, over
40,000 additional poor and vulnerable households were covered by the SSNs from domestic public financing.

The DPO helped strengthen GBV prevention and response. GBV increased with the COVID-19 lockdown
measures, as women could not escape abusive partners. Moreover, the rise in poverty among women and girls
made them more economically dependent on abusive partners. In July 2020, about half of female respondents
to a survey on COVID-19 and GBV reported that they had experienced GBV during the lockdown, up from a pre-
pandemic level of 30 percent. The enactment of the 2020 GBV Law introduced mandatory reporting, ended
impunity, and provided minimum services for GBV victims at the community level. Increased awareness of GBV
has resulted in an increased number of cases reported and brought to justice. In 2021, the first year after the law
was introduced, 289 GBV cases were reported through these new structures. In 2022, 37,289 cases were
reported.



b. Environmental

The climate and disaster risk of the operation was considered moderate at appraisal due to strong risk
management capacity demonstrated in previous operations. DPO-supported policy actions and reforms were
associated with positive environmental impacts. First, PAs1-4 contributed to strengthening the role of health and
education service providers in adaptation to such risks. For example, MENETP has advanced several climate
change initiatives, including the piloting of disaster risk management clubs in schools. Second, PA5 contributed to


                                                                                                    Page 24 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Human Capital DPO (P168697)



increasing the efficiency and flow of resources to SSNs for victims of climate-related disasters. For instance, two of
the SSNs (TMDH and ACTP) use geographic targeting to select the most vulnerable communities, also often the
most at risk for climate-related events. Third, by strengthening the policy and legal foundation, PA9 has ensured
that women and children can participate in and benefit from adaptation efforts. For instance, the well-documented
substantial economic costs of GBV contribute to the acute disadvantages that women face in adapting to climate
change impacts.



c. Gender

The reforms supported by this DPO created a positive institutional impact. The 2020 GBV Law, the National
Strategy on Child Marriage, and the policies on Gender Equality and Child Protection (PA9) led to the creation of
structures for GBV prevention and response, including a new police division in charge of GBV crimes and six
centers for integrated GBV case management. A GBV platform is responsible for: coordinating efforts and
investments by different ministries and partners, establishing clear lines of responsibility and minimizing
duplication. A strengthened information system has facilitated MPPSPF access to timely data on GBV. PA5
supported the mobilization of domestic financing for priority SSN programs, through establishment of a budget line
for FID and disbursement of domestic funds to finance priority SSN programs, as well as the preparation of a
manual for the coordination and use of all funds allocated to SSN activities. This has increased the amount of
financing streamlined through budget lines for priority SSNs and efficiency in reaching coverage, reducing
administrative costs, and benefiting from economies of scale, as households were incorporated into a single
registry of beneficiaries.



d. Other

(none)




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

Quality of evidence. The ICR drew on the evidence available on the various indicators, provided through the
data sources reporting on these indicators. It was candid in assessing the quality of the data provided and it
also used adjusted indicators and sources to compensate for the lack of measurability, lack of clarity, and/or
lack of data on some of the original indicators. These caveats and adjustments provided sufficient evidence to
assess efficacy.

Quality of analysis. The ICR was systematic in reviewing/interpreting evidence to assess efficacy. It reviewed
findings and data, assessing them in light of the results frameworks for each of the three objectives, highlighting
RIs that were not good measures of the PAs’ contributions to achievement of objectives, and drawing on other
evidence and information to link evidence to interventions and outcomes. In its December 5, 2023 email to
IEG, the task team noted that DPO2 was dropped because of: (i) delays in the reforms; (ii) the challenges of a

                                                                                                     Page 25 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Human Capital DPO (P168697)



virtual preparation of the DPO (with missions still virtual in December 2021); and (iii) the failure to meet the
deadline for finalizing the second phase (end-March 2022 Board Presentation). It would have added to the
richness of the analysis had the ICR addressed the repercussions of the decision to drop DPO2.

Quality of lessons. The ICR provided salient, practical lessons drawn directly from the experience of this DPO
that would be extremely useful to Bank teams and countries attempting to design and implement a human
capital development DPO in an FCV context. The detail underlying these lessons was concrete and specific,
providing important insight into these lessons.

Outcome orientation. The ICR was clear in analyzing reasons underlying the poor outcomes under Objective
1 and provided insights and lessons to improve impact in future operations.

Consistency with guidelines and conciseness. The ICR was consistent with guidelines and concisely
written.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
 Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreement/Comments
                                  Moderately
 Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
                                                                                   Bank performance during
                                                                                   preparation was satisfactory,
                                                                                   except for shortcomings in
                                                                                   design of the results framework
                                                                                   and M&E, specifically in the
 Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                   choice of some PAs (PA4 and
                                                                                   PA8) and in the choice of RIs,
                                                                                   some of which were not
                                                                                   sufficiently specific or
                                                                                   measurable.
 Relevance of Results
                                  ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
 Indicators
 Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons, drawn from the ICR, are slightly reworded by IEG:

A DPO focused on human capital development can be effective in raising the importance of this element
of development through in-depth policy dialogue and policy analysis, and in addressing key constraints

                                                                                                       Page 26 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Human Capital DPO (P168697)



to human capital development that social sectors cannot effectively address on their own. The reforms
under this operation placed the importance of human capital at the center of policy dialogue with the new
government, especially with the MEF. While previous budget support operations worked to improve fiscal space
management, budget efficiency, and fiscal space expansion, this was the first programmatic and multi-sectoral
DPO aiming to address systemic bottlenecks related to human capital development. The DPO succeeded in
bringing together the government and stakeholders around policy challenges of health and learning outcomes to
mobilize resources for social sectors, complementing IPFs.

Transparent and well-coordinated partnerships between the Bank and other donors, using a unique
policy matrix, can create synergies and ensure the complementarity of budget support. Under this
operation, the Bank’s partnership with the EU ensured their effective collaboration, based on a shared vision,
aligned interests, and a stronger focus on social sector reforms. The two institutions held several joint missions
and crafted a unified matrix for their respective budget support operations. The DPO also benefited from EU
technical support on civil service reform, specifically on strengthening AUGURE. The EU also provided
implementation support for the reform including technical assistance for two regions. This experience has led to
a continued collaboration between the two institutions, expanded to health financing, public financial
management, and human resources policy areas.

Strong and effective cross-sectoral collaboration supporting a coherent human capital development
reform program for sustainable impact depends on the leadership of an experienced and skilled multi-
sectoral task team. This operation supported nine reforms in health, education, and social protection, as well
as cross-cutting reforms in governance, public financial management, and gender, which were mutually
reinforcing and complementary. Finding the balance between sector-specific reforms and cross-sectoral reforms
was made possible by a multisectoral World Bank Human Development task team with a shared vision to
improve human capital and the capacity to lead the policy dialogue across sectors. The leadership of a TTL with
a human development vision is critical for engaging different teams to work towards one human capital
development program.

The complementarity of a human capital DPO to other Bank operations is crucial for supporting
advances in human capital development. A strong portfolio of project support to health, nutrition, and social
protection has supported and accompanied the sectoral reforms under the DPO. Ongoing operations supporting
decentralization, governance, and service delivery have also created synergies with the DPO reforms of
revenue mobilization and transparency (in mobilization and management of human and financial
resources). However, challenges in other areas can negatively affect a DPO. In this case, delays with the
workforce census under a health project impacted the roll-out of the new version of AUGURE, and delays in
preparing the Pandemic Preparedness and Basic Services Resilience Project affected the implementation of the
monitoring system and accompanying measures for the reform on local transfers of CSB allocations.

When choosing indicators and targets for a DPO, careful consideration of their relevance and
measurability can avoid challenges to the rigorous assessment of efficacy. Difficulties encountered in
tracking some of the RIs for this DPO were rooted in their inadequate definition and unreliable data sources,
including the sole reliance on data from ministries that lack capacity to collect and monitor the required data. In
such a context, a stronger M&E framework could be put in place when preparing and implementing a DPO and,
as is required for IPF preparation, it would be useful to include an annex with definitions and data sources for
each indicator.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

                                                                                                     Page 27 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Human Capital DPO (P168697)




Yes
ASSESSMENT_TABLE
Please explain
This is one of the Bank's first DPOs focused on human capital development, implemented in a very
challenging context. It was innovative and strategically focused on cross-cutting bottlenecks to human capital
development that sector-specific IPF operations would not be in a position to address on their own. This
unique experience should offer insights and lessons as the Bank increasingly focuses on human development
as a critical and overarching goal. Moreover, it would be interesting to learn lessons behind the decision to
drop the follow-on DPO2 and to track the quality of the dialogue and further progress on these cross-cutting
reforms post-DPO1.




                                                                                                  Page 28 of 28
