     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia - WAPR (P167826)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023733

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P167826                                  Somalia - WAPR

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Somalia                                  Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D4970                                28-Feb-2023                                         29,522,160.61

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 01-Jul-2019                              28-Feb-2023

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          42,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           31,530,581.60                                              0.00

 Actual                                       29,526,183.29                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan         Peter Nigel Freeman         Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to both the International Development Association (IDA) Financing Agreement (p.6) dated October
   8, 2019, and the Project Appraisal Document (p.15) dated June 4, 2019, the objective of the Water for Agro-
   Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (WAPR) was “to develop water and agricultural services among
   agro-pastoralist communities in dry-land areas of Somalia.”




                                                                                                Page 1 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia - WAPR (P167826)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project consisted of four components as defined in the Financing Agreement (pp.6-7) and the Project
   Appraisal Document (pp.15-20). It was designed to scale up activities piloted in Puntland and Somaliland
   under the previous Water for Agropastoral Livelihoods Pilot Project (WALP – P152024) and start new pilots
   in the states of Galmudug and South West while continuing with capacity development support.

   A. Support the Development of Multiple Use Water Sources (Appraisal cost: US$15.0 million; revised
   cost at the project restructuring: US$12.0 million; actual cost: US$12.0 million)

   This component consisted of two subcomponents aimed at financing investments in key water management
   infrastructure for harvesting, storing, and delivering water for people, livestock, and agriculture in dry-lands
   of Somalia:

   A.1. Construction of New Community Water Points. This component was to finance the construction of
   small sand and subsurface dams in dry riverbeds, surface water storage infrastructure (such as berkads-
   water basin to store surface water between 3 and 12 cubic meters—and haffir dams—earth dams at runoff
   concentrating flow path without clear stream bed), area infiltration interventions (such as semicircular bunds
   or soil bunds), and rock catchments. If these options were not available, this subcomponent was to finance
   the construction of boreholes for groundwater extraction.

   A.2. Rehabilitation of Community Water Points. This subcomponent was to finance the rehabilitation of
   existing water infrastructure and boreholes. The subcomponent was also to finance the construction of zero-
   emission standpipes or shallow wells with hand or solar pumps and watering troughs for livestock. To
   ensure the availability of water supply during droughts, selected project sites could include multiple
   interventions. The Wadi Evaluation Tool, which was to be used for the diversification of water resources,
   extensive ground truthing, and groundwater assessment to be implemented under this subcomponent, was
   expected to lead to an increase in the supply of water and mitigate the risk of droughts and climate change.

   B. Institutional and Capacity Development. (Appraisal cost: US$6.0 million; revised cost at the project
   restructuring: US$5.0 million; actual cost: US$5.0 million)

   This component was to finance activities for the development of knowledge systems and institutions to
   support more integrated and sustainable agriculture and water services in the ministries, agencies, and
   project states. The component consisted of two subcomponents:

   B.1. National and State Institutional Capacity Building. This component was to finance the following
   technical assistance activities: (a) Development of construction standards, rangeland management
   guidelines, key feasibility studies for preparing project interventions, engineering surveys, and hydrological
   assessments for project areas; (b) provision of improved extension services to farmers and pastoralists,

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 25
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Somalia - WAPR (P167826)



management models, and cost-recovery mechanisms;(c) collection of better data to improve knowledge of
hydrogeology and groundwater exploration; and (d) support to a technical assistance agency that would
assist national and state government agencies in selecting, training, and monitoring nonstate actors for local
project implementation.

B.2. Community Development and Demand Mobilization. This subcomponent was to finance a holistic
community engagement to support the project activities through a continuous dialogue on the development
needs of the community, the resources they have, their priorities to manage those resources, and how to
ensure equitable access and sustainability.

C. Supporting Sustainable Land Management and Livelihoods Development Around Water Points.
(Appraisal cost: US$9.5 million; revised cost at the project restructuring: US$8.0 million; actual cost: US$8.0
million)

This component aimed at creating and strengthening productive livelihoods among target communities in
the project area. It consisted of two subcomponents:

C.1. Integrated Landscape Management. This component was to finance the following activities: (a)
Cash-for-work community-led soil and water conservation measures such as terracing of irrigable land
degraded or endangered by erosion, planting trees and other vegetation in selected upland areas,
enhancing rangeland management to introduce rotational grazing and stocking rate limits, and supporting
improved management and sustainable use of existing forest and vegetation resources; and (b) promotion
of the uptake of alternative energy solutions through awareness building, demonstrations, and financing.

C.2. Agriculture and Livestock Support. This subcomponent was to finance the following activities: (a)
Development of demonstration plots (community gardens and fruit tree groves); (b) distribution of improved
seeds and other inputs; (c) introduction of high-efficiency micro-irrigation systems and soil micro-nutrient
assessment; and (d) provision of training to communities to increase the production of more nutritious food
and the use of climate-smart farming techniques. These activities were to be implemented using the water
resources developed under the first component and community development plans developed under the
second component.

D. Project Management, M&E, Knowledge Management, and Learning. (Appraisal cost: US$9.0 million;
revised cost at the project restructuring: US$7.0 million; actual cost: US$7.0 million)

D.1. Project Management. For an efficient implementation of the project, this subcomponent was to
finance the following: (a) The incremental operating costs for managing the project; (b) the cost of
procurement and hiring of financial management specialists; and (c) outreach and communications on the
government’s role and leadership in the project to the broader Somali community.

D.2. M&E, Knowledge Management, and Learning. This subcomponent was to hire a qualified and
experienced international firm to provide quality enhancement and implementation support to the project
through support to the Somali authorities in financial management, procurement, monitoring, and
supervision of the project. This subcomponent was also to support the enhancement of the existing web-
based Management Information System and the incorporation of new modern technologies such as geo-
tagging of site investments, collection of field data with tablets/smartphones, and application of geospatial
imaging for quantifying before and after comparisons for specific indicators, and technical work such as
flood mapping.


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Somalia - WAPR (P167826)



  D.3. Contingent Emergency Response. This component was to finance immediate and rapid response to
  an eligible crisis, if needed, such as natural disasters, severe economic crises, or other crises and
  emergencies in the country. A formal declaration of a national emergency by the government and a formal
  request by the Ministry of Finance to the World Bank were required to trigger this Immediate Response
  Mechanism.

  Revised Components

  The project could not implement activities in Somaliland because of the delay in the effectiveness of the
  portion of the Grant for Somaliland amounting to US$7.5 million. As a result of a deal brokered by the World
  Bank, the Federal Government of Somalia and Somaliland signed the subsidiary agreement on July 2022,
  as a disbursement condition rather than at effectiveness. As there was insufficient time left to implement the
  project activities in Somaliland before project closing, the project was restructured in November 2022 to
  cancel most of those activities such as the construction of 30 new water points, rehabilitation of 10 water
  points, establishment of community management systems, and provision of agricultural services to the
  farmers. At the project restructuring, seven existing water points in the other three states were added to the
  project scope for rehabilitation. The cancelled activities in Somaliland were transferred to the follow-on
  Somalia Water for Rural Resilience Project.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project cost was originally estimated at US$42.0 million including US$2.5 million for price
  and physical contingencies. At the project restructuring in November 2022, the estimated project cost was
  revised down to US$32.0 million because of the cancellation of most of the activities in Somaliland and the
  amount corresponding to physical and price contingencies. The project closed on February 28, 2023 with
  an actual cost of US$29.53 million. The project team confirmed that the difference between the revised and
  actual project costs was because of the changes in the exchange rates.

  Financing: At appraisal, the IDA grant amount was estimated at US$42.0 million fully financing the
  estimated project cost including physical and price contingencies. An amount equal to US$7.5 million was
  cancelled because of the cancellation of the majority of the project activities in Somaliland at the first
  restructuring, and US$2.5 million because of the cancellation of the price and physical contingency item.
  Therefore, The IDA grant amount was revised down to US$32.0 million. By project closing in February
  2023, the project had disbursed US$29.53 million. All project funds were accounted for at the time of project
  evaluation.

  Borrower’s contribution: At appraisal, no borrower’s contribution was estimated, and none materialized at
  project closing.

  Project Restructuring (November 4, 2022): The project was structured four months before the project
  closing date to cancel US$10.0 million of the grant for the activities that could not be implemented in
  Somaliland because of delayed grant effectiveness (see Revised Components above for the activities
  cancelled). Because of the cancellation of these activities, target values of some intermediate results
  indicators were revised down such as the number of new water points constructed from 75 to 45, number of
  water points rehabilitated from 25 to 22, and the number of community management systems established
  from 75 to 45.


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia - WAPR (P167826)



   Dates: The project was approved on July 1, 2019. The IDA Financing Agreement was signed on October 8,
   2019, and the US$28.0 million portion of the grant became effective on December 13, 2019 following the
   signing of the subsidiary grant agreements between the Federal Government of Somalia and the states of
   Puntland, Galmudug, and Southwest. The remaining US$14.0 million of the grant could only become
   available for disbursement on July 1, 2022, because of a significant delay in the signing of the subsidiary
   grant agreement between the Federal Government of Somalia and Somaliland (Please see the Revised
   Components paragraph above for the explanation of this delay). The Mid-Term Review was conducted in
   November 2021. The project closed on its original closing date of February 28, 2023.

   Reasons not to undertake a split assessment of the project’s performance: At the project
   restructuring, the project’s scope was substantially scaled down because of the cancellation of activities in
   Somaliland and a grant of US$7.5 million was cancelled because of the delay in the effectiveness of grant
   for Somaliland. The cancellation of the grant amount was commensurate with the contraction of the project
   scope and did not affect adversely affect the outcomes expected from the project’s intervention in the other
   three states. Therefore, this review will not undertake a split assessment of the project’s outcome and will
   assess the performance based on the revised targets.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objective was highly aligned with the World Bank’s current strategy as defined in the Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) for Somalia, FY19-FY22 (at the time of this review, the World Bank, together
with the Federal Government of Somalia, was in the process of preparing the next CPF for Somalia). The
project sought to address the development problems of insufficient availability of water, because of climatic
shocks, in drylands of Somalia for domestic use, livestock, and crop cultivation and insufficient knowledge
of crop cultivation and livestock production suitable to these drylands. These created a major obstacle to
the achievement of the full potential of crop farming and livestock production and forced nomadic
households to move across regions and into neighboring countries resulting in conflicts. The 2018 World
Bank Group’s Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) identifies this as one of the two drivers of fragility,
conflict, and violence (FCV) in the country—vulnerability to climatic shocks, predominantly recurrent
drought, famine, and floods, which eroded livelihoods, drove unsustainable exploitation of natural resources
that were already degrading rapidly, and caused extreme food insecurity and population displacement. The
project was to address these problems through the construction and rehabilitation of water points in the
drylands, improvement of land and pasture management, and training and provision of equipment in crop
farming and livestock production. The project also sought to address the development problem of
insufficient government capacity in service delivery and low levels of community participation in
development planning. The project was to address these weaknesses through the implementation of the
project by the central and state-level governments supported by capacity building technical assistance
(unlike other donors’ projects that were implemented by the United Nations’ agencies or non-governmental
organizations) and continued engagement and knowledge sharing with the local communities. These
activities were expected to address the second FCV driver identified in the SCD—constrained and limited
capacity of the government in service delivery systems to restore and supply public services, such as water
services and agricultural services, which in turn lead to citizens’ lack of trust in state institutions (PAD, pp.7-
8 and ICR, p.5). The project objectives directly correspond to the Focus Area 2 of the CPF, i.e., “Restoring
Economic Resilience and Opportunities” and support the achievement of Objective 2.4. Increase access to

                                                                                                        Page 5 of 25
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Somalia - WAPR (P167826)



water for rural resilience and productivity. They also correspond to the Focus Area 1, i.e., “Strengthening
Institutions to Deliver Services” and support the achievement of Objective 1.1. Strengthen public finance
accountability and institutional development.

The project objectives were highly relevant to the country context but output-oriented. Although the
government capacity and fragility issues posed as high risks for the achievement of the project objectives,
the level they were pitched were appropriate for the development status in the country. The country is still
emerging from a three-decade long conflict and vulnerability of the rural communities in drylands is still an
important driver of FCV. The project objectives were relevant to support the development in Somalia by
addressing the root causes of fragility and aligned with the economic development objectives of the
Somalia National Development Plan (SNDP) for 2020-2024 to “revive Somalia’s livestock and agriculture
sectors through investments in water harvesting and storage infrastructure, access to credit and extension
services, and promotion of climate-smart agriculture” (ICR, p.14). The objectives were also aligned with the
social development objectives of the SNDP to develop human capital through provision of clean provision of
water to households, strengthen public service delivery, and develop capacities and modalities for
consultation and engagement with local communities, private sector, and civil society stakeholders (ICR,
p.14). However, the project objectives were output-oriented rather than outcome-oriented. The Project
Appraisal Document clearly identifies various immediate outcomes expected from the project’s intervention,
but these outcomes are not included in the formulation of the project objectives. The project objective to
develop water and agricultural services among agro-pastoralist communities in dryland areas of Somalia is
closer to the output level in the results chain. The formulation of the project objective does not clearly define
what development outcomes are expected from the project’s intervention.

The World Bank funded the Water for Agropastoral Livelihoods Pilot Project (WALP - P152024) between
2015 and 2018 as the first engagement in rural infrastructure sector in Somalia in more than two decades.
WALP’s objective was more challenging but complex: To improve the pastoral and agro-pastoral
communities’ access to, and management of, small-scale water sources and to enhance the capacity of the
government to implement small-scale water interventions in targeted arid lands of Somaliland and Puntland.
The Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (WAPR - the project under this review) was
the second rural infrastructure project the World Bank funded in Somalia and aimed at scaling up access to
water in Somaliland and Puntland covered under WALP and expand the intervention to two more states—
Galmudug and South West. Therefore, these two projects are closely linked to each other, which is followed
by a third project, i.e., Somalia Water for Rural Resilience Project approved in December 2022. However,
the project objective of the WAPR is less challenging although it is the second project in the World Bank’s
engagement in rural infrastructure in Somalia, which benefited extensively from the lessons learned during
the implementation of the first engagement under WALP.

While the formulation of the project objectives was output-oriented and less challenging compared to the
objective of the earlier engagement in the rural infrastructure sector, the outcomes expected from the
project’s intervention were clearly identified in the project documents that would have been expected to
contribute to the addressing of the two fragility drivers identified in the CPF and support the objectives in the
SNDP. Considering the FCV status of the country, overall relevance of the project objectives is rated High.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


                                                                                                      Page 6 of 25
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Somalia - WAPR (P167826)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To develop water services among agro-pastoralist communities in dryland areas of Somalia.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change for Objective 1

               The project inputs (IDA grant and technical assistance) were to be used to finance the construction of water
               harvesting and delivery infrastructure that were identified in coordination with the communities in the drylands
               of Somalia and capacity building at the federal and state government and community levels to operate and
               maintain these water systems. The project outputs were to consist of various water harvesting infrastructure
               (such as sand dams, subsurface dams in dry riverbeds, surface water pan dams, and boreholes for
               underground water extraction) and water delivery infrastructure constructed under the project through the use
               of Wadi Evaluation Tool developed under the previous WALP Project. These outputs were expected to lead
               to the expected outcomes of increased and sustained availability of water to be consumed by local agro-
               pastoral communities for drinking and sanitation, watering their livestock, and irrigating land for crop farming.
               The outcomes expected from the training of the federal and local government officials, continuous
               engagement with the local agro-pastoral communities, and implementation of awareness activities were
               increased ownership and adequate day-to-day operation and maintenance of the water infrastructure built
               under the project by local communities supported by the federal and local governments to ensure the
               sustainability of project results beyond project closing. However, the project did not address the more
               technical and complex maintenance of the water systems built under the project; the state governments do
               not have a framework to support the operation and maintenance of the infrastructure and a system to monitor
               water quality (although the quality of water was expected to be high because of the absence of any
               environment polluting industrial activity in the project areas and the natural filtration of the water through the
               sand structures to be built under the project, a water quality monitoring system is essential to ensure the
               quality of water for human and livestock consumption and irrigation). Additionally, the project’s theory of
               change did not include the establishment of a financing mechanism to cover the cost of the operation and
               maintenance of the water systems should the amount of water user fees fall short of covering those costs
               (this shortcoming is addressed in the follow-on WRR Project through subsidies). Overall, the causal links from
               project activities and outputs to the expected outcomes were direct and valid, and the achievement of the
               project objective could be attributed to the project’s intervention, but there were weaknesses in the theory of
               change in ensuring the sustainable operation and maintenance of the water systems and monitoring of the
               quality of water that are expected to be addressed under the follow-on project.

               Outputs

                     Improved community water points constructed under the project: The achievement was 34 new
                      water harvesting structures built under the project against the revised target of 45. The original target
                      was 75 including the water points to be built in Somaliland that were cancelled at the project
                      restructuring (see Revised Components in section 2.d Components). The 34 new water harvesting
                      structures consisted of the following: a) eight haffir dams in Galmudug; b) seven haffir dams and one

                                                                                                                   Page 7 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Somalia - WAPR (P167826)



       sand dam in South West; and c) eight haffir dams, seven sand dams, and three subsurface sand
       dams in Puntland. Eleven water sources in Puntland could not be developed because of cost
       escalations caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine disrupting the global
       supply chains (ICR, p.28).
      Improved community water points rehabilitated under the project: The project rehabilitated 15
       water structures (three boreholes in Galmudug; one haffir dam and three boreholes in South West;
       and eight boreholes in Puntland) against the revised target of 22. The original target was 25. The
       rehabilitation activities included the repair of non-functioning components, expansion of water storage
       capacity, and construction of additional water kiosks and livestock troughs. All boreholes rehabilitated
       under the project were fitted with solar pumping systems. Some boreholes were also fitted with diesel-
       fired generators with solar pumping systems to ensure continuous operation of the boreholes.
      Number of community managements systems established (i.e., community committees): By
       project closing, 54 community communities had been established and operational against the revised
       target of 45. The original target was 75. These communities included water management, village,
       farmer, women, youth, social, and pastoralist development committees across three states consisting
       of 769 females and 1,178 males. The project supported the establishment of these committees
       through trainings in project planning and implementation monitoring, and operation and maintenance
       of the project outputs after project closing.

Outcomes

      Number of people provided with access to improved water sources under the project: As a
       result of the water systems built under the project, 362,731 people gained access to water in the
       drylands of three states—84,700 people in Galmudug, 155,503 people in Puntland, and 122,528
       people in South West. The original target was 250,000 people, which was not revised despite the
       cancellation of project activities in Somaliland. Although the project completed fewer water supply
       sources than planned, the project brought water to more people than originally targeted because of
       the advanced site selection approach using the Wadi Evaluation Tool and truthing of selected water
       sources by the communities through an elaborate community consultation process led by the states’
       project implementation units (ICR, p.16).
      Percentage of project beneficiaries satisfied with project investments: The target was 60 percent
       of the beneficiaries being satisfied with the project investments. The surveys conducted with sampled
       beneficiaries from different project sites showed that 68 percent of the respondents were satisfied with
       the project investments. The following satisfaction dimensions were included in the survey covering
       both water and agriculture activities completed under the project: Increased water quantity during the
       dry season, increased water quality during the wet season, reduced time spent to fetch water, the
       ability of the state government to provide water for human consumption and domestic uses, the ability
       of the state government to support the provision of water for livestock and agricultural purposes,
       agricultural inputs distributed (seeds and tools) livestock treatment services provided by mobile
       veterinary clinics, and rangeland rehabilitation. This indicator does not report satisfaction levels for
       water and agricultural services separately. Therefore, this indicator shows the overall satisfaction of
       the beneficiaries with the project’s intervention.
      According to the findings of the surveys conducted at project closing, a total of 1,551,304 animals and
       845 farms had gained access to water through the water systems constructed under the project.

The project fell short of developing the number of water sources it targeted because of the disruptions in the
global supply chains caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine that resulted in

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Somalia - WAPR (P167826)



higher construction costs. However, the project successfully developed or rehabilitated 49 water sources that
provided access to water for about 363,000 people (higher than the target of 250,000) in the drylands of the
three project states. This was achieved through the utilization of the geospatial Wadi Evaluation Tool in
identifying the most feasible water sources to develop in close cooperation and coordination with the local
communities. It is estimated that the 49 water resources developed under the project can supply 1.60 million
cubic meters of water during the dry season, which is significantly more than the 0.78 million cubic meters of
water needed by the beneficiaries (including irrigation and livestock watering) during the entire dry season
(ICR, p.51).

According to the information provided by the World Bank project team during a meeting on January 18, 2024,
some agro-pastoral communities settled around the water sources developed under the project because of
the sustained availability of water during the dry season. The majority of the agro-pastoral communities find it
easier to sustain their traditional way of nomadic life because of the availability of water sources developed
under the project that help them plan their seasonal migration routes in the drylands. It is expected that the
availability of water during the dry season will prevent those agro-pastoral communities travel to distant areas
within Somalia or cross borders into neighboring countries in search of water. As discussed in the following
section, the increased availability of water significantly contributed to livestock production and crop farming in
the drylands.

The project also significantly contributed to the institutional capacity strengthening in Somalia at the federal
and local government and community levels. The communities were involved in the planning and construction
of the water systems supported by the federal and local government authorities. The implementation of the
project by the local governments resulted in the establishment of a total of three project implementation units
in three states and one at the federal government level. The project implementation units employed 69
members of staff and were supported by the project-hired consultants. These project implementation units will
continue to develop new water sources in cooperation with the local communities under the follow-on WRR
Project.

The establishment of the community committees was highly effective in ensuring the involvement of the agro-
pastoral communities in the development of the Community Investment Plans outlining their water and
agricultural priorities to be financed by the project. These committees closely worked with the states’ project
implementation units. The strong involvement of the communities in the decision making process related to
their own development path resulted in their higher ownership of the water systems, which manifested itself in
the efficient day-to-day operation of these systems and sustained availability of water. Although it is hard to
measure, the close cooperation and coordination between the communities and federal and local state
authorities must have contributed to increasing trust between the citizens and the government.

While there were weaknesses in the project’s theory of change to ensure larger maintenance of the water
systems both technically and financially and the project could not implement its activities in Somaliland
because of the deteriorating political relations between the Federal Government of Somalia and Somaliland,
the project was nevertheless substantially successful in developing water resources in the drylands and
strengthening institutional capacity for the sustained provision of water for the agro-pastoral communities in
the drylands. This should also help address the fragility drivers in Somalia (i.e., population displacement and
weak government authority) contributing to the stabilization of the country. Overall, the project’s efficacy in
achieving the project objective to develop water services among agro-pastoralist communities in dryland
areas of Somalia is rated Substantial.



                                                                                                    Page 9 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Somalia - WAPR (P167826)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To develop agricultural services among agro-pastoralist communities in dryland areas of Somalia.

Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 2

The theory of change for Objective 2 was built on the premise that the project would develop water sources in
the drylands of the project states that would contribute to the development of agricultural services. The project
inputs (IDA funds and technical assistance) were then to be used to train the farmers in the vicinity of the
water sources in improved agricultural technologies for crop farming and livestock production at the fields
schools and demonstration farms to be developed under the project. The project was also to finance the
construction or rehabilitation of veterinary clinics to provide veterinary services and the distribution of seeds
and agricultural equipment, while providing training to animal health workers in the three states. The project
outputs would be the availability of agricultural services to the farmers in the project areas. The outcomes
expected from the project outputs would be the number of people benefiting from these services and adopting
improved technologies. The long-term outcomes would be increased food and livestock production that would
generate additional household income and improve the households’ resilience to better withstand climate
shocks. As the Objective 2 was output-oriented (i.e., development of agricultural services), the results
framework did not include indicators measuring the outcomes expected as a result of the development of
agricultural services such as improved food and livestock production or improvement in the socio-economic
welfare of the agro-pastoralist communities in the project areas. The theory of change for Objective 2 did not
include interventions that would ensure the sustainability of the agricultural services after project closing,
which was to be covered by the follow-on project.

Overall, while there were weaknesses in the theory of change for Objective 2 in the sustainability of project
outcomes after project closing and the outcomes expected from the project outputs were not adequately
captured by the results framework, the causal links in the results chain from project activities and outputs to
the expected outcomes (which are closer to the output level) were direct and valid, and the achievement of
Objective 2 could be attributed to the project’s intervention.

Outputs

The project’s results framework included only one intermediate results indicator titled “Farmers/client reached
with agricultural services.” As that indicator captures the access aspect of agricultural services, it is included
in the Outcomes section below.

The project achieved the following outputs that were not captured by the results framework but reported in the
ICR (pp.17-18 and 45-46):

      Veterinary clinics - constructed: The project constructed six new satellite veterinary clinics including
       laboratories in Puntland.


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 25
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Somalia - WAPR (P167826)




    Veterinary clinics – rehabilitated: The project financed the upgrading or rehabilitation of seven
       veterinary clinics, which included physical structure improvements and purchase of laboratory
       equipment and 64,000 clinic items, including veterinary drugs.
      Veterinary clinics – mobile: The project purchased fully equipped mobile veterinary clinics (two in
       Galmudug, two in Puntland, and one in South West).
      Treatment and vaccination of livestock: The project financed the treatment and vaccination of a
       total of 1,378,305 goats, sheep, and camels for deworming and various infections through the use of
       mobile veterinary clinics (34,514 in Galmudug, 1,319,599 in Puntland, and 24,192 in South West).
      Establishment of farmer field schools: The project financed the construction of 50 farmer field
       schools (10 in Galmudug, 30 in Puntland, 10 in South West) to provide training on improved farming
       technologies for agro-pastoralists.
      Setting up of demonstration farms/centers: To disseminate knowledge on improved agricultural
       practices to farmers, the project set up nine demonstration centers (four in Galmudug, four in
       Puntland, and one in South West).
      Distribution of farming tools and equipment and seeds: The project distributed farming tools and
       equipment (such as hoes and machetes for farm preparation) and drought-tolerant seeds variety to
       farmers in the three states.
      Trainings: The project financed trainings sessions for community animal health workers in three
       states. These workers are expected to provide the same training to farmers. The ICR did not provide
       the number of workers trained at these trainings.
      Restoration of communal rangelands: The beneficiary communities in the project states identified,
       through a community-led participatory process, 23 degraded communal rangelands (883 hectares)
       that required restoration. The project provided funds to these communities through cash-for-work
       program for restoration works including gullies and bunds to enhance infiltration and reduce soil
       erosion and planting of trees.

Outcomes

    Farmers/clients reached with agricultural services: The project aimed at reaching at 80 percent of
     the 150,000 farmers in the project areas with agricultural services to equip them with the skills and
     knowledge, so that they could leverage the increased amount of water in crop farming and livestock
     production. The achievement was 78 percent corresponding to 117,575 framers (17,664 in Galmudug,
     63,941 in Puntland, and 36,420 in South West). Of the total number of people who benefited from
     agricultural services, 90,913 people used the mobile veterinary clinics and livestock husbandry
     advisory services, 21,919 people attended trainings, and 4,733 people received farming inputs (seeds
     and equipment). The agricultural services included good livestock husbandry practices, techniques for
     land preparation using conservation agriculture approach and planting of dryland variety of crops,
     drought-tolerant crop or seed varieties, different soil and water conservation measures at on-farm and
     catchment levels, approaches to better crop harvesting and storage, and pest control. With the
     support of the project-hired specialized consultants, expert staff from the ministries of agriculture,
     livestock, and environment of the federal government and states provided these services and trainings
     to farmers at the farmer field schools and demonstration farms set up under the project (see the
     entries below).
    Number of farmers/clients adopting improved technology: This indicator measures the number of
     project beneficiaries who benefited from the increased availability of water and practiced different
     technologies introduced by the project to engage in more crop farming and livestock production


                                                                                             Page 11 of 25
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Somalia - WAPR (P167826)



                                   activities. The achievement was 85,015 farmers adopting improved technology against the original
                                   target of 110,000. The main factor in the adoption of improved technologies was the availability of
                                   water because of the project’s intervention. Each beneficiary adopted a different set of technologies
                                   introduced under the project. At 47 percent adoption rate, early land preparation, correct spacing,
                                   early planting, and timely and proper weeding were the main technologies adopted by the
                                   beneficiaries. These were followed by improved seed varieties and crop rotation technologies at 46
                                   percent adoption rate. The remaining five technologies and their adoption rates were as the following:
                                   Drought-tolerant crops (44 percent), soil conservation (41 percent), field pest control (39 percent),
                                   gulley reclamation (38 percent), and bio pesticide (32 percent).
                                  For the results of the beneficiary survey, please see Outcomes under Objective 1.

                            Benefiting from the availability of water resources, the project successfully developed agricultural services for
                            agro-pastoralist communities through the construction or rehabilitation of veterinary clinics and laboratories,
                            provision of extensive training in agricultural technologies suitable for drylands, establishment of
                            demonstration farms and field schools, and distribution of seeds and agricultural equipment. A high number of
                            livestock were vaccinated against diseases or treated at the permanent or mobile veterinary clinics. The
                            project activities resulted in a significant number of farmers adopting improved technologies in agriculture and
                            livestock husbandry, but the number was lower than the target (85,015 against the target of 110,000).

                            The findings of the survey conducted at project closing indicate that there is a high demand for agricultural
                            services by the agro-pastoral communities. However, the project did not sufficiently address the absence of
                            financial mechanisms and a system for continuous technical support and capacity building to ensure the
                            sustainability of agricultural services after project closing. The follow-on project will address this shortcoming
                            both in water and agricultural services through the establishment of a subsidy system and the possible
                            introduction of local customary laws for the management of these services. Therefore, when assessed from a
                            multi-phase intervention in developing water and agricultural services in the drylands of Somalia, the project
                            under review was successful in achieving the outcomes expected from the project’s intervention, which will be
                            further developed under the follow-on project.

                            While there were weaknesses in the theory of change in ensuring the sustainability of the project’s outcomes
                            and the achievement of number of people adopting improved technologies was lower than the target, the
                            project was successful in providing a high initial funding to improve the veterinary services, introduce
                            improved agricultural technologies, and build institutional capacity, which will be further supported under the
                            follow-on project. Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective to develop agricultural
                            services among agro-pastoralist communities in dryland areas of Somalia is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale


                                                                                                                               Page 12 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Somalia - WAPR (P167826)



  While the number of water resources developed under the project fell short of the target, the project was
  successful in increasing the availability of water through water harvesting structures and boreholes and
  bringing water to a higher number of people than originally targeted. The project was also successful in
  developing agricultural services in the project areas through trainings and provision of veterinary services and
  distribution of seeds and agricultural equipment. Although not covered by the project objective, the close
  coordination between the federal and state government authorities and the agro-pastoral communities in the
  development and implementation of the project supported by extensive training contributed to the
  development of trust amongst stakeholders. Therefore, the project directly contributed to the efforts in
  addressing the two fragility drivers in the country—population displacement because of insufficient water
  resources and weak government authority.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis

A cost-benefit analysis was conducted at appraisal to assess the economic viability of the project’s intervention
in developing water sources and improving the livelihoods of the agro-pastoral communities in Somalia’s
drylands. Quantifiable economic benefits included in the analysis consisted of the following: a) avoiding
payments for water from expensive tanker services; b) economic value of improved access to water for livestock
and agriculture; c) time savings from fetching water; d) reduction in school absenteeism; e) direct and indirect
health benefits because of access to cleaner water; f) reduction in health care costs because of the reduction in
waterborne illnesses; and g) avoiding the loss of livestock deaths and livestock quality because of lack of access
to water during dry seasons. Some other economic benefits that could not be quantified because of a lack of
reliable data were excluded from the cost-benefit analysis such as economic benefits related to a stronger
enabling environment for economic development and overall systemic improvement with regards to equity,
efficiency, and shared prosperity, and those related to the other project activities in community facilitation,
citizen’s engagement, local development, technical and vocational skills, and improved project management.
The total cost of the project was included in the analysis as costs together with the operation and maintenance
cost of the water systems for 15 years. The cost of greenhouse gas emissions was also included in the analysis.
However, the analysis did not include economic benefits that could accrue from improved livestock health
because of the availability of improved veterinary services, implementation of improved agricultural
technologies, increased agricultural productivity because of the use of dryland suitable seeds and equipment.
Similarly, the analysis did not include the cost of sustaining agricultural services beyond project closing.
Therefore, the cost-benefit analysis was restricted mostly on the impact of increased availability of water on
humans, livestock production, and crop farming but captured a wide range of economic benefits from health
improvement and reduction in school absenteeism to the economic value of access to water on livestock
production and crop farming. The calculations resulted in an Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 135
percent and a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$144.26 million at a discount rate of 15 percent. These high
values are because of the significant economic impact of the availability of clean water during dry seasons on




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Somalia - WAPR (P167826)



daily lives of agro-pastoral communities, livestock production, and crop farming, absence of which was a major
development and conflict issue in Somalia.

At project closing, the same methodology was used to conduct a cost-benefit analysis. There were no major
changes in the economic benefits included in the analysis, but only the cost of water sources developed under
the project (28.81 percent of the total actual project cost) was included in the analysis rather than the total
project cost as was done at appraisal. The lifetime of the water systems was also taken as 30 years differing
from 15 years included in the cost-benefit analysis at appraisal. Therefore, the cost-benefit analysis conducted
at project closing was not fully comparable to the analysis conducted at appraisal because of differing
investment costs and longer lifetime of the water systems. With these assumptions, the calculations resulted in a
significantly higher post-project EIRR of 279 percent. The ICR does not report a post-project NPV. The higher
number of project beneficiaries (362,731 against the target of 250,000) was another reason for a higher EIRR.
The ICR (p.22) reports that if the beneficiary number is taken as 250,000, the EIRR drops to 146 percent, still
slightly higher than the appraisal EIRR.

Operational and Administrative Efficiency

The project implementation significantly benefited from extensive preparatory studies for design discussions that
included “macro-level characterization of water resource challenges, spatial analysis of the potential for wadi
harvesting using the Wadi Evaluation Tool in the project areas, and studies on the suitability of different
harvesting technologies” (ICR, p.25). The incremental implementation strategy adopted at appraisal to mitigate
the implementation related risks was critical in achieving effectiveness quickly and completing the project
activities in Galmudug, Puntland, and South West by the original project closing date, while the grant
effectiveness for the activities in Somaliland was significantly delayed because of political issues. However, the
project faced initial implementation delays because of lack of experience of the project implementation unit staff
in World Bank-financed projects; the preparation of safeguards documents resulted in a three-month project
implementation delay, but these delays did not adversely affect the achievement of the project outputs and
outcomes. The commitment of the federal and local governments to the implementation of the project was high.
The turnover of the project implementation unit staff was minimal. The national project coordinator’s leadership
was essential in successfully completion of the project (ICR, p.27). The project was designed to facilitate the full
involvement of the project beneficiary agro-pastoral communities in the design and implementation of the
project, which was successful in both achieving the project outcomes and building institutional capacity at the
community level. During the first half of the project implementation, there were frequent noncompliance issues
with the environmental and social management plans (ESMP) at project sites because of the insufficient
knowledge of the local contractors about the World Bank’s safeguards requirements. These resulted in frequent
implementation delays at certain project sites but were addressed through the implementation of the ESMP
template in the form of a checklist.

While there were some methodological differences in the cost-benefit analyses conducted at appraisal and
project closing and some minor shortcomings in the operational and administrative efficiency of the project that
led to project implementation delays, the project completed its activities and achieved the expected outcomes by
the original project closing date benefiting a higher number of people than originally targeted. The cancellation of
the activities in Somaliland was a significant shortcoming in fully achieving the project outcomes, but the
reasons that led to the cancellation of these activities were beyond the control of the project. Overall, the
project’s efficiency in achieving the project objective to develop water and agricultural services among agro-
pastoralist communities in dry-land areas of Somalia is rated Substantial.




                                                                                                      Page 14 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Somalia - WAPR (P167826)



Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       100.00
 Appraisal                                                  135.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       28.81
 ICR Estimate                                               279.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project objective was highly relevant to the World Bank strategy and country context that aimed at
addressing the development problem of the lack of water for the agro-pastoralist communities in the drylands of
Somalia. While the project could develop fewer water sources because of the cancellation of project activities in
Somaliland and the cost escalation caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and the war in Ukraine (disrupting
global supply chains), the project was successful in providing a higher number of people with access to water
and a substantial number with access to agricultural services. Therefore, the efficacy of the project in achieving
the project objective is rated Substantial. The project’s efficiency in achieving the project objective is also rated
Substantial while there were some minor shortcomings in the operational and administrative efficiency and
differences in the methodology of the cost-benefit analyses at appraisal and project closing. Overall, the project
outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical: As discussed under the efficacy section above, the project supported the capacity development
of the community committees in simple day-to-day operation of the water systems built under the project.
However, currently there is no established system for regular and emergency maintenance of these water
systems should there be a need for major (for example reconstruction of sand dams) or complex
maintenance (for example repair of solar pumps). The World Bank will continue supporting the operation and
maintenance of the existing water systems under the follow-on Project, but the absence of an established
system for regular and emergency maintenance of the water systems that would ensure the availability of
quality of water supply stands out as a high risk for the sustainability of the project outcomes.



                                                                                                      Page 15 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Somalia - WAPR (P167826)



Financial: Fees collected from the water users cover the cost of the operation of water systems. According
to the findings of the survey conducted at the end of project closing, several communities had to rely on state
government subsidies to operate the water systems because the collection of end user fees did not fully
cover the costs. This is not a sustainable financing mechanism as the state governments might have
sufficient funds to allocate to the communities for the operation of the water systems. Similarly, the
agricultural services developed under the project may not be sustained in the absence of sufficient funds
from the federal and state governments. The follow-on project will continue to support the water and
agricultural services through subsidies, but insufficient funds to support these services stand out as high risk
for the sustainability of the project outcomes in the long-term.

Fragility: Somalia is an FCV status country. The project was implemented under high security measures. A
worsening of the security situation could force agro-pastoral communities abandon their settlements around
the water sources developed under the project or prevent them accessing these sites. This could lead to
insufficient operation and maintenance of the water systems and cessation of agricultural services developed
under the project. Although there are positives signs that the federal and state governments are in the
process of building institutional capacity in governing the country and the states, the possibility of a
worsening security situation is still high.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The development of water sources and agricultural services in the drylands of Somalia was of high
  strategic importance for Somalia as it directly addressed one of the fragility drivers in the country—
  displacement of population because of the lack of water. The project was designed based on findings of
  the Somalia Resilient Multiple Use Water Services ASA and the experience gained and lessons learned
  in the pilot WALP Project to scale up and expand the geographical reach of water delivery and
  agricultural services in the drylands. The design of the water harvesting structures was appropriate to the
  geography and climate in the project areas; the project used proven technologies in water harvesting.
  The focus on expanding veterinary services through the use of mobile veterinary clinics was significantly
  appropriate to reach the agro-pastoral communities with a semi-nomadic life in the remote areas of
  drylands. The project activities were to directly address the poverty and social development issues in the
  agro-pastoral communities through the development of clean water resources and direct support to
  improve livestock production and crop farming. Environmental and fiduciary aspects of the project were
  sufficiently assessed justifying the viability of the project. Because of the extensive preparatory study
  (using remote sensing technology and community-led ground truthing) for design discussions with the
  authorities and the agro-pastoral communities increased the project implementation readiness prior to
  effectiveness.

  Prioritizing the needs of the agro-pastoral communities and ensuring their full involvement in the
  preparation of the development plans were effective in successful implementation of the project. The
  project was to be implemented through the project implementation units set up under the state
  governments (not through United Nation agencies or non-governmental organizations) was highly
  effective in developing institutional capacity and strengthening trust between the state governments and
  citizens. Risks were sufficiently identified, and mitigation measures were in place; the incremental
  implementation approach adopted in project design was critical in completing the project activities in

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia - WAPR (P167826)



  three states while the effectiveness of the grant for Somaliland had been significantly delayed because of
  political reasons. The project components financed activities that were to directly lead to the achievement
  of the project objective, and the project implementation units were adequately staffed but their lack of
  experience in implementing a World Bank-financed project were to be addressed through the World Bank
  trainings and support from the project-hired consultants. However, the M&E design had moderate
  shortcomings in adequately capturing the project outputs and outcomes, especially related to the
  development of the agricultural services (see 9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization below). The
  project design also lacked a concrete plan for the sustainability of the water and agricultural services after
  project closing; the follow-on Project will address this shortcoming.

  Overall, the World Bank satisfactorily identified, facilitated project preparation, and appraised the project;
  the quality at entry is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank project team carried out eight implementation support missions between early 2020 and
 project closing in February 2023 mostly virtually because of the COVID-19 travel restrictions. When in-
 person missions were held, the meetings with government counterparts were held at the Mogadishu
 International Airport because of security concerns. Mission dates had to be rescheduled frequently
 because of the same reason. Despite these challenges, the project team’s focus on the development
 impact of the project was satisfactory. The supervision inputs and processes were adequate. The monthly
 project management team meetings held with the federal and local government project implementation
 units were highly effective in helping the World Bank project team proactively identify the project
 implementation bottlenecks and address them through trainings given to the project implementation staff
 and facilitating the support of the project-hired consultants. The Implementation Status and Results
 Reports and Aide Memoires candidly reported the project performance. The project team conducted the
 Midterm Review (MTR) of the project in November 2021 as planned. The discussions held during the MTR
 led to some effective decisions to improve the project implementation. For example, the decision to hire a
 Quality Enhancement and Implementation Support (QEIS) firm, despite some challenges in procurement,
 was critical in improving the supervision of project implementation and M&E data collection and verification
 through the development and use of the Management Information System and a beneficiary survey
 conducted at project closing. The MTR also resulted in the decisions to disaggregate some indicators
 according to gender to capture the project’s impact on gender and introduce the recruitment of female
 Junior Professional Officers and interns at the federal and state project implementation units. At the MTR, it
 was also agreed to restructure the project, but the restructuring was delayed because of the expectation
 that an agreement could have been reached between the Federal Government of Somalia and Somaliland
 to sign the subsidiary agreement so that the implementation of the activities in Somaliland could have
 started. The World Bank project team played an important brokering role in the dialogue and the eventual
 signing of a subsidiary agreement between the Federal Government of Somalia and Somaliland. However,
 because there was insufficient time left to implement the activities in Somaliland before the project closing
 in February 2023, the project was restructured in November 2022 to cancel most of the activities to be
 implemented in Somaliland. Those cancelled activities will be implemented under the follow-on project.


                                                                                                      Page 17 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia - WAPR (P167826)



 The project team’s supervision of fiduciary and safeguard aspects of the project were adequate. The non-
 compliance issues with the ESMPs at the project sites were addressed through the implementation of the
 ESMPs as a checklist by the project implementation units and contractors. The World Bank project team
 identified some weaknesses in the internal controls and addressed them through the implementation of an
 action plan (see section 10.b. Fiduciary Compliance). Based on the successful achievement of the project
 results, the project team prepared the follow-on project to continue with the further scaling up of water and
 agricultural services in the drylands and establish mechanism to ensure their sustainability beyond the end
 of the World Bank support.

 Overall, the quality of the World Bank project team’s supervision of the project implementation to achieve
 the project objectives was Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project objective was clearly defined but output-oriented. Although the outcomes expected from the
 project’s intervention were identified in the project documents, they were not included in the formulation of
 the project objective. The theory of change explaining the causal chains from project activities and outputs
 to the expected outcomes and the achievement of the project objective was robust, but it was partially
 reflected in the results framework. While the indicators in the results framework sufficiently encompassed
 the results in increasing the availability of water in the project areas, the other indicators were insufficient to
 capture the outputs and outcomes related to the development of agricultural services. Most of the outputs
 in agricultural services were reported in the project documents but only the number of people benefiting
 from these services and adopting improved technologies in agriculture were captured by the results
 framework. Despite these shortcomings, the indicators in the results framework were specific, measurable,
 achievable, relevant, and time bound. Targets for each indicator were identified. The M&E implementation
 arrangements were clearly defined; the project implementation unit at the federal government level was to
 have an M&E coordinator and the project implementation units in each state M&E officers who would be
 responsible for effective M&E and reporting. M&E data collection was to include geo-tagging of project
 investments and geospatial imaging to make a before and after the project comparison. The project was to
 hire a Quality Enhancement and Implementation Support (QEIS) firm “to support the baseline surveys,
 verify project outputs, develop a web-based Management Information System (MIS) to enable real-time
 data loading and monitoring and support the endline survey” (ICR, p.30). The survey to be conducted after
 project closing was to provide more data about the impact of the project on the socio-economic welfare of
 the project beneficiary agro-pastoral communities.




                                                                                                        Page 18 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia - WAPR (P167826)



b. M&E Implementation
  The project hired a QEIS firm in August 2021 after a significant delay. This resulted in the delayed
  completion of the baseline surveys in May 2022. The ICR (p.29) reports that as the project
  implementation units in each state and submitted quarterly and annual M&E reports that included data on
  initial project conditions and progress towards achieving the project results, the delay in the completion of
  the baseline surveys did not adversely affect the assessment of the project’s progress. The M&E reports
  were submitted regularly but with occasional delays and quality issues at the early stages of project
  implementation. Following the trainings provided by the World Bank project team to the M&E officers at
  the project implementation units, the quality of M&E reporting improved. The MIS was established as
  planned and was critical for real-time data recording and measuring the indicators in the results
  framework (The MIS can be reached at the link given below). Starting from September 2021, The QEIS
  firm verified project results quarterly using the data from 25 percent of the project sites. The attention of
  the federal and local state project implementation units and the QEIS firm was sufficient in the effective
  implementation of M&E. However, the shortcomings in the results framework in adequately capturing the
  project outcomes were not addressed during project implementation. This shortcoming was significantly
  compensated by the detailed data gathered through the project end beneficiary survey. The Ministry of
  Planning, Investment and Economic Development at the federal government level conducted the survey
  with the assistance of the QEIS firm. The project beneficiaries of agropastoral communities were
  significantly involved in designing the development plans; hence, they significantly contributed to the
  defining of the indicators’ targets and assessing their achievement. The M&E functions and processes
  are highly likely to be sustained because of the implementation of the follow-on project and the availability
  of the MIS.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E findings were sufficiently communicated to the project stakeholders including the Federal
  Government of Somalia, the governments of the three states, the World Bank, and the project
  beneficiary agro-pastoralist communities. The M&E findings did not lead to a significant shift in the
  implementation direction of the project but informed the extent of the single project restructuring to
  ensure the effectiveness of the in achieving the project objectives and cancellation of the unused funds.
  The M&E data gathered through the results framework and the project end survey were sufficiently used
  to provide evidence of the achievement of project outcomes rather than simply reporting the application
  of inputs or the achievement of outputs. The success of the project evidenced by the M&E findings was
  critical in informing subsequent interventions.

  Overall, while there were some moderate shortcomings in the results framework in adequately capturing
  the project outcomes, which were not addressed during project implementation, the project’s M&E
  system as designed and implemented, including the project end beneficiary survey, was sufficient to
  assess the achievement of the project objectives and test the links in the results chain. The M&E quality,
  therefore, is rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial



                                                                                                    Page 19 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia - WAPR (P167826)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the project was classified as Category B under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and
   triggered the Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09), Physical Cultural Resources
   (OP/BP 4.11), Involuntary Resettlement (4.12), Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37), and Projects on International
   Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) safeguard policies.

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): At appraisal, the project was classified as Category B because
   of site-specific, temporary, and reversible environmental and social impacts of the project activities such as
   the following: (a) landscape degradation; (b) loss of flora and fauna due to land clearance; (c) inefficient
   waste management during the water infrastructure construction; (d) water pollution and contamination at
   haffir dams; (e) noise, dust, and vibration from construction and maintenance; (f) inadequate occupational
   health and safety practices; and (g) social conflicts between preexisting and new land users. The project
   prepared an Environmental and Social Impact Framework (ESIF) at appraisal and disclosed it in Somalia
   and on the World Bank’s InfoShop on January 15, 2019, after extensive consultations with the local agro-
   pastoral communities. Initially, there were delays in the preparation of the safeguards policies including
   Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) because of insufficient experience of the project
   implementation unit staff in World Bank-financed projects. During the early implementation phase of the
   project activities, some civil works frequently stopped because of non-compliance with the ESMPs
   (specifically with the health and safety measures and implementation of grievance redress procedure),
   which was later addressed through the use of the ESMP templates in the form of a checklist. This proved to
   be an effective solution to ensure the project’s compliance with the safeguard policies. There were no other
   noncompliance issues during project implementation.

   Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04). The project triggered this safeguard policy because the project’s
   intervention was expected to result in altering the seasonal streams. The development of the water sources
   did not result in a major alteration of seasonal streams. The project was compliant with this safeguard
   policy.

   Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09). The project triggered this safeguard policy because agricultural
   intensification was to occur as a result of the project’s intervention. The project resulted in the restoration of
   rangelands and development of crop farms. The project was compliant with the requirements of the Pest
   management safeguard policy.

   Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): At appraisal, there was no known archaeological or sacred
   sites in the project areas, but the project triggered this safeguard policy to prevent any accidental loss or
   damage to cultural sites that could be found by chance during construction. Project activities did not affect
   any physical cultural resource.

   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): Although the project activities were not expected to result in any
   involuntary displacement of people, the project triggered this safeguard policy as a precautionary measure
   because the subprojects to be financed by the project had not been identified at appraisal. A Resettlement
   Policy Framework was prepared and disclosed in Somalia and the World Bank’s InfoShop on January 15,
   2019. The project activities did not require any resettlement of land acquisition. However, some
   communities donated land for demonstration farms and construction of water points following the conclusion
   of memorandums of understanding.


                                                                                                       Page 20 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Somalia - WAPR (P167826)



  Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37). The project triggered this safeguard policy because the project was to
  finance the construction of small dams. All the sand dams constructed under the project satisfied this
  safeguard policy.

  Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). The project triggered this safeguard policy because it
  involved the construction of small-scale and sub-surface dams and surface water harvesting infrastructures.
  However, the Africa Regional Vice President approved an exception for the notification of the riparian states
  on February 15, 2019 because it was determined that the water harvesting infrastructure to be constructed
  under the project would not affect the flows of rivers Juba and Shebele (the project did not cover these
  international waterways) and all the tributaries proposed for the construction of small-scale dams run
  exclusively within Somalia, the lowest downstream riparian in the region.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  The project implementation units were adequately staffed with qualified and experienced financial
  management specialists. A team from the Accountant General’s office supported the project
  implementation units in financial managements. Project’s interim financial reports acceptable to the World
  Bank were submitted regularly and on time. The external audit reports were unqualified and submitted on
  time except the one for 2021, which was submitted one month late because of the delay in recruiting of an
  external technical assistance to the Office of the Auditor General. However, the World Bank project team
  identified some internal control shortcomings such as weak controls in project operating costs and
  advances to staff, absence of internal audit oversight, and delays in processing payments to vendors (ICR,
  p.31). These shortcomings were addressed through an action plan by project closing. There were no
  known issues of corruption or misuse of funds associated with the project. All project funds were
  accounted for at project closing.

  Procurement

  Procurement was implemented in accordance with the World Bank’s procurement policies and procedures
  in a decentralized model by the project implementation unit in each three states. The World Bank project
  team supported the preparation of a Procurement Risk Assessment and Management System, a
  Procurement Strategy for Development, and a Procurement Plan for the first 18 months of the project
  implementation. However, because of a lack of experience of the project implementation units in
  procurement in accordance with the World Bank policies and procedures, there were delays in the
  procurement of some contracts. For example, because of the long process for the procurement of a quality
  enhancement and implementation support firm, the baseline surveys could only be carried out in May
  2022. Following the mid-term review, the project implementation units’ procurement performance improved
  as a result of the training of the staff by the World Bank project team. The prior review of all contracts at
  the federal and state government levels contributed to the implementation of procurement in accordance
  with the World Bank policies and procedures.




                                                                                                  Page 21 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia - WAPR (P167826)



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   Somalia did not have structured schemes for salary and per diem payments and incentives to government
   officials. During project implementation, staff of the project implementation units (government staff)
   contested the differences in allowances and salaries paid to them and the consultants externally hired by
   the project. This led to the development of new national salary and allowance structures for the federal and
   state government staff. This development is expected to contribute to the institutional strengthening in the
   country.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

This review has drawn five lessons based on the information in the ICR.

A multi-phased approach starting with advisory services and analytics (ASA) followed by a
pilot project and a scale-up project can gradually and significantly increase the development
impact and implementation efficiency of interventions in an FCV context. Somalia is an FCV
status country. The security situation and weak governance are major barriers to project
implementation. Initially, the World Bank engaged with Somalia through an ASA (Resilient Multiple
Use Water Services) assessing the feasibility of water source development in rural areas. A pilot
project (Water for Agropastoral Livelihoods Pilot Project) was designed based on the findings of the
ASA and implemented in Somaliland and Puntland. Based on the success of the pilot project and
the experience gained during its implementation, the Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and
Resilience Project was designed and implemented to scale up the development of water systems
and agricultural services and expands the size of the intervention territory. The ASA laid the
foundation and principles of the follow-on investments. The two investment projects gradually
increased the development impact to a larger community. The projects’ development of impact was
significant as evidenced through the findings of the beneficiary survey conducted after the closing of
the WAPRP. A third investment project is currently being implemented to further scale up the



                                                                                                   Page 22 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somalia - WAPR (P167826)



development impact by reaching to more agro-pastoral communities and supporting the
establishment of mechanism for the sustainability of the development outcomes.

High community engagement at the project design and implementation phases can increase
the likelihood of the successful completion of the project activities. The project developed
modalities for consultation and engagement with local agro-pastoral communities starting from the
project design phase. The community committees established under the project were critical in the
preparation of the community development plans. The communities were also involved in the
selection of the water source development sites. The involvement of the agro-pastoral communities
in project preparation and implementation increased their ownership of the project. The project
activities were successfully completed within the original project implementation timeframe with the
full support of the local agro-pastoral communities. The communities are responsible for the day-to-
day operation and simple maintenance of the water systems. The project was a good example of the
positive impact of community engagement on the successful implementation and completion of the
project activities.

Project implementation through federal and local governments can be highly effective in
supporting the development of institutional capacity in governance in FCV countries. The
common method of project implementation in Somalia has been through the United Nations
agencies or non-governmental organizations. This project was implemented by the federal and
state governments. Project implementation units were established at the federal government and
each of the three states involved in the projects. The government employees worked at these project
implementation units were trained in various aspects of project preparation and implementation and
assumed full responsibility of the project. The relevant ministries also benefited from the trainings
and other capacity development activities provided by the project. The interaction of the government
officials with the local agro-pastoral communities contributed to the development of trust between
the government and citizens. The experience gained during the implementation of the project will be
retained by the government employees and will be further strengthened through the implementation
of follow on Somalia Water for Rural Resilience Project.

An incremental implementation strategy can be critical in mitigating the delayed
effectiveness risk in projects to be implemented in different local jurisdictions
simultaneously. The project was to be implemented in four different states. One of the conditions of
project effectiveness was the signing of the subsidiary grant agreement between the federal
government and each of the four project implementation states. Under the incremental
implementation strategy, it was decided to start project implementation in the states that fulfilled the
effectiveness conditions rather than waiting for all four states to fulfill the effectiveness conditions.
This proved to be a highly effective approach in ensuring the start of the project activities in three
states although the signing of the subsidiary agreement between the federal government and
Somalia significantly delayed the project effectiveness for Somaliland because of political reasons.
The activities to be implemented in Somaliland were eventually transferred to the follow-on project.

The use of remote sensing data and spatial overlay of different thematic data layers in
identifying the potential sites for water resource development can be highly instrumental in
increasing the development impact of a project. The project utilized the Wadi Evaluation Tool
(WET), an innovative approach developed under the pilot WALP for the selection of the most
suitable sites for water resource development. The WET is based on “spatial analysis of available
remote sensing data and spatial overlay of up to 30 different thematic data layers” (ICR footnote 15

                                                                                                     Page 23 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Somalia - WAPR (P167826)



on p.10). The data are used to create a map showing potential water development sites within a
defined region of interest. The map is used to rank the water development sites according to their
water harvesting potential. The project developed fewer water sites than planned, but the use WET
ensured that the sites with the highest water harvesting potential were developed. These water sites
reached to a higher number of project beneficiaries than targeted. The number of livestock
benefiting from water harvested in those sites was also significantly higher than originally estimated.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  The project constitutes the scaling-up phase of an earlier pilot intervention in the development of water and
  agricultural services in the drylands of Somalia. Both projects had successful results and a third project with
  the same objectives is currently under implementation. The project series is extremely important in improving
  the daily socio-economic lives of the agro-pastoral communities living in the drylands of Somalia. The projects
  also contribute to institutional capacity development at the federal and state government levels. Therefore,
  they contribute to the addressing of the fragility drivers in Somalia—population displacement because of lack
  of water and weak government capacity. An assessment following the completion of the third project in the
  series would provide invaluable data about the success factors or shortcomings of the projects and the
  sustainability of the projects’ outcomes following the end of the World Bank support.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is candid and provides a detailed overview of the project. The report is focused on what occurred as a
consequence of the project. It provides an accurate and substantiated set of observations supported by
evidence from the project end survey and the project’s results framework to the extent possible given the
latter’s weaknesses; the ICR together with its annexes provides an adequate evidence base to support the
achievement of the project’s outcomes. The photographs provided in Annex 8 were significantly helpful in
understanding the development impact of the project. There is a logical linking and integration of the various
parts of the report. Its narrative is sufficiently evaluative. The report mostly follows and adequately responds to
the Bank guidance and its Appendix L, Preparation of ICR in FCV Setting for IPF Operations both regard to
ratings (specifically Outcome and M&E Quality ratings) and the performance narrative. However, the main
report was longer than the length suggested in the Bank guidance, although some sections could have
benefited from a more evaluative discussion such as the sections on Efficiency, Environmental, Social and
Fiduciary Compliance, and Bank Performance. The entries in the “Lessons and Recommendations” are based
on specific experiences of the project and would be useful in informing subsequent similar interventions, but
they are mostly in the form of findings rather than lessons.

While there were some moderate shortcomings in the ICR's responding to the Bank guidance and in the
formulation of the lessons learned, the overall quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



                                                                                                     Page 24 of 25
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Somalia - WAPR (P167826)




a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                    Page 25 of 25
