     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WS: Pac Reg Connect Phase III: Samoa (P128904)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023774

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P128904                                   WS: Pac Reg Connect Phase III: Samoa

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Samoa                                     Digital Development


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D0630,TF-A2332                        31-Jul-2020                                         13,275,396.83

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Jun-2015                               31-Dec-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          16,000,000.00                                     1,500,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           14,556,313.67                                       868,060.80

 Actual                                       13,275,396.83                                       868,060.80




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan               Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and in
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 7): is:

   " To reduce the cost and increase the availability of Internet services in Samoa ".




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WS: Pac Reg Connect Phase III: Samoa (P128904)



   The project restructuring paper of August 16, 2016 added another objective. The PDOs as stated in the
   restructuring paper are:

   PDO 1: To reduce the cost of internet services.

   PDO 2: To increase the availability of internet services.

   PDO 3: Facilitate the development of initial foundations for digital government, including digital Identification
   (ID).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  16-Aug-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   This project in Samoa was the third phase of the Bank-financed Pacific Regional Connectivity Program
   Series of Projects (SOP). The first phase financed the Tonga-Fiji cable system. The second supported the
   East Micronesia Cable System. This project had three components (PAD, pages 8 - 9).

   1. Samoa - Fiji cable. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$47.64 million. The actual cost was
   US$32.70 million. There were three sub-components.

   (a) Submarine Cable System. This sub-component planned to finance installation of a submarine cable
   system connecting Samoa (Upolu and Savai'i) with Fiji (Suva). Activities included undertaking a marine
   survey, and financing for the cable manufacture and deployment.

   (b) Landing stations and ancillary equipment. This sub-component planned to finance the costs of
   constructing landing stations and ancillary facilities in Upolu and Savaii and onshore equipment.

   (c) Additional costs. This sub-component planned to finance a 15-year indefeasible rights of use (including
   acquiring long-term landing services in Fiji and capacity) and the operational costs of establishing the
   Samoa Submarine Cable Company (SSCC).

   2. ICT Regulatory Technical Assistance. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$1.44 million. The actual
   cost was US$0.91 million. This component planned to finance activities aimed to enhance the regulator's
   capacity. Activities in this sub-component: (i) developing regulation for the Information and Communication



                                                                                                       Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    WS: Pac Reg Connect Phase III: Samoa (P128904)



  Technology (ICT) sector (with a focus on wholesale markets); (ii) reviewing and updating the legal
  regulatory framework; and (iii) conducting a nationwide beneficiary survey of the sector.

  3. Project implementation and administration. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$0.86 million. The
  actual cost was US$1.26 million. This sub-component planned to provide capacity building support to the
  Ministry of Finance (MoF): Activities in this sub-component; (i) assistance for designing and operationalizing
  Public-Private-Partnership (PPP) arrangements; (ii) costs of project coordination, fiduciary management,
  reporting, audits, communications and outreach and monitoring and evaluation.

  The following component was added with the project restructuring on August 16, 2016 (discussed below).

  4. National Digital Identification (NDID). The estimated cost at appraisal was US$4.10 million. The actual
  cost was US$1.04 million. Activities in this component; (a) activities aimed to provide a legal and regulatory
  enabling environment; (b) advisory assistance for a Samoa Digital Government Platform; and (c)
  establishing the NDID system and upgrading the Civil Registration (CR) system. Activities in this component
  were to be implemented in phases: The first phase supported enactment of NDID legislation. The second
  aimed at procuring the NDID and Civil Registration (CR) systems; The third aimed to support mass
  enrollment and the final phase aimed to link the NDID and CR systems.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$49.94 million. The actual cost was US$35.62 million.

  Project financing. The financing was US$17.50 million (US$16.00 from the International Development
  Association (IDA) and US$1.50 million from the Australia's Department for Foreign Affairs and Trade
  (DFAT)). The amount disbursed was US$13.27 million (US$12.40 million from IDA and US$0.86million from
  DFAT). US$1.97 million of financing was cancelled in view of cancellation of component four activities
  (discussed below).

  Co-financing of US$18.50 million from the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and US$8.18 million from the
  Samoan Submarine Cable Company (SSCC) were expected at appraisal. The actual contribution from ADB
  was US$13.35 million and US$8.09 million from SSCC. US$1.50 million from the Australian Department of
  Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) Trust Fund was expected at appraisal. The actual contribution from DFAT
  was US$0.86 million.

  Recipient contribution. The appraisal estimate was US$5.76 million. Their actual contribution was much
  less than planned at US$0.90 million.

  Dates. The project was approved on June 19, 2015, became effective on September 4, 2015 and was
  scheduled to close on July 31, 2020. However, the project closed two and half years behind schedule on
  December 31, 2022.

  Other changes. There were four Level 2 restructurings.

  The Bank supported the following changes through the first restructuring on August 16, 2019 (that is,
  four years after project start-up and only a year before the original closing date).



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WS: Pac Reg Connect Phase III: Samoa (P128904)



         The Project incurred savings of US$4,38 million. At Government request, the Bank agreed the
          Government to utilize the savings for supporting the initial foundations of digital government.
         A new PDO was added "facilitate the development of initial foundations for digital government,
          including digital identification". The project scope was expanded. The results framework was revised
          and new targets were incorporated.
         New legal covenants associated with component four activities were added.
         The closing date for the Bank financing for the Project was extended by 23 months from July 31,
          2020 to June 30, 2022, for completing the ongoing activities.

   Funds were reallocated between disbursement categories through the second restructuring on January
   22, 2020.

   The closing date of the DFAT grant was extended from July 31, 2020 to June 30, 2022 through the third
   restructuring on June 4, 2020.

   The main changes made through the fourth restructuring on October 26, 2022.

         There were significant delays in implementing component four activities, due to factors such as: (i)
          delays in developing the legal framework (a Financial Agreement withdrawal condition); (ii) travel
          restrictions triggered by the COVID - 19 pandemic meant that technical assistance activities had to
          be carried out remotely which was suboptimal, given the complex feature of the digital government
          platform; (iii) key decisions were put on hold following the April 2021 election; and (iv) the untimely
          demise of the Government statistician and Chief Executive Officer of the Samoa Bureau of Statistics
          in November 2021. Two months before project closing, the Government informed the Bank that
          passage of NDID legislation (a Financing Agreement withdrawal precondition) was unlikely before
          closing. Therefore, the scope of component four activities was reduced drastically (with phases two
          to four of this component cancelled).
         The closing date was extended by six months to December 31, 2022 for completing the limited
          scope of component four activities.
         US$1.97 million of Bank financing was cancelled.

   Split rating. An additional PDO and a new component was added with the first project restructuring.
   However, the scope of this component was drastically reduced with the fourth project restructuring.
   Therefore, this review is based on a split rating of objectives due to the significant reduction of the scope,
   when 70% of the Bank financing was disbursed with the first project restructuring and the balance
   thereafter.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Samoa is a small island country in the Pacific Ocean with nine islands. Samoa's
population is spread across of its two main islands (with Upolu accounting for over 75% of its population
and the remainder in Savai'). Like many island states, Samoa faced challenges of isolation from major


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 19
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       WS: Pac Reg Connect Phase III: Samoa (P128904)



markets and limited economic opportunities. The objectives of improving competitiveness and service
delivery were important to the Government's strategy.

Sector context. Samoa was one of the first regional countries to liberalize its Information and
Communication Technology (ICT) sector. It enacted the Telecommunications Act in 2005, privatized its
state-owned telecommunications company and established an independent regulator in 2006. Sector
liberalization promoted competition and led to price reductions that allowed more people to access
telephony services. At appraisal, about 73% of the population had access to 3G networks, and households
with mobile phones increased from 34% in 2006 to 96% in 2011.

Despite the reforms, internet access in Samoa lagged substantially. Although connected globally through
the primary subsea international link, American Samoa Hawaii Cable System (ASH), the cable did not have
sufficient bandwidth to meet the growing demand for higher bandwidth. Although prices of
telecommunications services had fallen, affordability was a concern as prices were high relative to the
income levels of the population. The Government and the three main operators in Samoa agreed
unanimously in favor of a new long-term cable solution option connecting Samoa with Fiji. The option
offered a connection to an established cable system and attractive bandwidth pricing. The government and
the private sector agreed in principle on adopting a Public-Private-Partnership (PPP) framework for the new
system.

Regional strategy. The PDOs were well-aligned to the regional strategy outlined in - the Framework for
Action on ICT for Development in the Pacific. This regional strategy, endorsed by ministers and regional
agencies in 2010 - articulated the need for leveraging ICT for development, governance and sustainable
livelihoods.

Bank country and regional strategy. The PDOs were consistent with the Bank Strategy for Development
of Samoa (SDS) for 2012-2016 and the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) at appraisal. The SDS and the
CPF underscored the need for supporting inclusive growth through high-quality services. The PDO was
aligned with the Bank's Regional Partnership Framework (RPF) for 2017 - 2021 (extended to 2023) through
the Performance and Learning Review. The Bank's regional Country Diagnostic (Pacific Islands -
Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) Update: Growth and Resilience) of 2023 included a priority "to
improve digital connectivity and services in private and public sectors". The PDOs were consistent with the
SCD's four focus areas: (i) exploiting economic opportunities, (ii) enhancing employment opportunities, (iii)
protecting incomes and livelihoods through laying the foundations of digital infrastructure, and (iv)
strengthening growth through infrastructure investments.

Previous Bank experience. When this Project was being prepared, the Bank had a Samoa Development
Policy Operation (DPO) and investment projects in transport and agriculture. This project was the third
phase of the Bank-financed Pacific Regional Connectivity Program SOPs with multi-donor funding. The
project components were similar to those of the other phases of the project. The Project was pitched at an
appropriate level, and its scope was expanded substantially with the savings realized during
implementation. The overall relevance of the objective is rated as High.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


                                                                                                      Page 5 of 19
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  WS: Pac Reg Connect Phase III: Samoa (P128904)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               PDO 1: To reduce the cost of internet services.

               Rationale
               Theory of change. The causal links between inputs, outputs and outcomes were logical. The outputs of
               activities such as installing a cable system linking Samoa to Fiji, constructing landing stations, and prepaying
               for buying capacity on Southern cross cable and landing services in Fiji, together with institutional reforms
               aimed at providing an enabling environment for private sector participation. The outputs of these activities
               were likely to help in increasing international bandwidth capacity and encouraging private sector participation
               in Samoa. These outputs were likely to aid in realizing the desired outcomes of lowering cost of internet
               services. The intended outcomes were monitorable.

               Outputs.

               The following outputs were completed as targeted.

                     1,385 kilometers (km) of fiber optic network were built, exceeding the target of 1,300 km. The Tui
                        Samoa submarine cable was installed. The landing station was operational in February 2018, two
                        years before the scheduled closing date, with 8.8% savings (US$4,392 of IDA funds). The high data
                        capacity from the cable helped facilitate downstream competition, with operators extending coverage
                        of their networks. The domestic cable segment cable to Suva'i and Upolu was installed as targeted.
                       The Samoa Submarine Cable Company (SSCC) was established as targeted to supply capacity to
                        telecommunications and Internet service providers under agreed telecommunication contracts and at
                        standardized prices. The providers contributed to the share capital of the Samoa Submarine Cable
                        Company (SSCC) and were represented on its Board.
                       The Special Purpose Vehicle for cable construction was established. The staff of the Office of the
                        Regulator (OoTR) were trained (no targets for this indicator).
                       Cost modelling exercise was developed as targeted for the regulator to determine wholesale and retail
                        prices.
                       The PPP arrangement resulted in a 50:50 share of SSCC between three state-owned enterprises and
                        three internet private sector internet service providers. US$8,097,426 of private capital was mobilized,
                        achieving the target of US$8,000,000. The ICR (para 41) noted that the amount of private capital
                        would be even higher if allowance is made for the downstream investments in telecom networks
                        triggered by Tui Samoa.
                       A regulatory business plan was developed for OoTR as targeted to identify the technical, economic,
                        and legal issues, capacity needs, and resources over the next three years.
                       The monthly peak data rate (speed of data download from Tui Samoa cable to all service providers in
                        Samoa) decreased from 4 Megabits per second (Mbps) to 10,800 Mbps, far exceeding the target of
                        7Mbps. This increase was due to a combination of factors including, Tui Samoa's fiber-optic


                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   WS: Pac Reg Connect Phase III: Samoa (P128904)



       technology, ongoing investments by telecom operators, and increased demand for data in the wake of
       the COVID-19 lockdowns.
      A consumer survey of business, government and wholesale works was completed as targeted and
       published on the OoTR website. The OoTR used the results of the survey to formulate programs for
       encouraging the use of the Internet in villages as targeted. A program of targeted training courses and
       learning events for the OoTR staff was held under the project (no targets were specified for this
       indicator).
      A Management Information System (MIS) was procured for OoTR. However, this system was lost in
       an office fire in April 2020. As OoTR neither had back-up copies of the software nor insurance against
       losses, this was not a sustainable outcome.

Outcomes.

The outputs described above were expected to reduce the cost of internet services to households and
businesses.

      According to the data volume published on the operator’s websites that were verified by the regulator,
       the retail price of Internet services to households decreased from US$43.00 at the baseline to
       US$0.58 when the project closed, exceeding the target of US$19.00.
      According to the data volume published on the operator’s websites that were verified by the regulator,
       the retail price of Internet services to businesses decreased from US$630.00 to US$15.40, far
       exceeding the target of US$100.00.
      The wholesale Internet bandwidth price (S/Megabits per second (Mbps)//month) decreased from
       US$1,500 at the baseline to US$72.00 Gigabits per second per month, exceeding the target of
       US$400.00 Mbps/month.

The activities helped in reducing the wholesale Internet bandwidth price. While it is difficult to ascertain the
extent to which the fall in prices could be attributed to the project alone (given that there were other external
factors at work, such as ongoing investments in the sector), it is plausible that the fall in wholesale prices did
contribute towards the reducing of retail price of Internet services. Therefore, the efficacy of this PDO is rated
as Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The PDO was not revised.

Revised Rationale
Outputs.

The outputs described above were relevant to this objective.



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   WS: Pac Reg Connect Phase III: Samoa (P128904)



Outcomes.

The outputs described above were expected to reduce the cost of internet services to households and
businesses.

      The retail price of Internet services to households decreased from US$43.00 at the baseline to
       US$0.58 when the project closed, exceeding the target of US$5.00.
      The retail price of Internet services to businesses decreased from US$630.00 to US$15.40, far
       exceeding the revised target of US$30.00.
      The wholesale Internet bandwidth price (S/Megabits per second (Mbps)//month) decreased from
       US$1,500 at the baseline to US$72.00 Gigabits per second per month, exceeding the target of
       US$400.00 Mbps/month.

While it is difficult to ascertain the extent to which the fall in prices could be attributed to the project alone
(given that there were other external factors at work such as ongoing investments in the sector), it is plausible
that the fall in wholesale prices, did help in the reducing the retail price of Internet services. Therefore,
efficacy of this PDO is rated as Substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO 2: To increase the availability of internet services.

Rationale
Theory of change. The causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were as described
above. Installing a new cable system, constructing landing stations, prepayment for buying capacity on
Southern Cross Cable and institutional reforms aimed at providing an enabling environment for private sector
development, were expected to help in the desired outcome of increasing availability of Internet services in
Samoa. The intended outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs.

The outputs described above were also relevant to this objective.

Outcomes.

The outputs described above were expected to increase the availability of Internet services in Samoa.

      The access to Internet services (number of subscribers per 100 people) increased from 27 at the
       baseline in January 2015 to 55 as targeted.




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   WS: Pac Reg Connect Phase III: Samoa (P128904)




      According to the data from telecom operators, 110,500 people (including individuals, businesses,
       government agencies using mobile or landline services) benefitted from improved access to Internet
       services, exceeding the target: 96,000. 60,000 of the beneficiaries were females (target 48,000).
      The consumer survey indicated that 65,000 of the beneficiaries felt that the project investments
       reflected their needs, exceeding the target of 36,000. The survey results however indicated that
       telecom operators felt that SSCC's pricing of the domestic cable to Savai'i was not competitive and
       hence they opted to use microwave backhaul.

Given that the targets were realized, project activities contributed to the desired outcome of increasing the
availability of Internet services in Samoa. Efficacy of this PDO is rated as substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The PDO was not revised.

Revised Rationale
Outputs.

The outputs described above were also relevant to this objective.

Outcomes.

The outputs described above were expected to increase the availability of Internet services in Samoa.

      The access to Internet services (number of subscribers per 100 people) increased from 27 at the
       baseline in January 2015 to 55 as targeted.
      According to the data from telecom operators, 110,500 people (including individuals, businesses,
       government agencies using mobile or landline services) benefitted from improved access to Internet
       services, exceeding the target: 96,000. 60,000 of the beneficiaries were females, exceeding the target
       of 48,000.
      The consumer survey indicated that 65,000 of the beneficiaries felt that the project investments
       reflected their needs, exceeding the target of 36,000). The survey results however indicated that
       telecom operators felt that SSCC's pricing of the domestic cable to Savai'i was not competitive and
       hence they opted to use microwave backhaul.

Given that the targets were realized, project activities contributed to the desired outcome of increasing the
availability of Internet services in Samoa. Efficacy of this PDO is rated as substantial.



Revised Rating

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   WS: Pac Reg Connect Phase III: Samoa (P128904)



Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
PDO 3: Facilitate the development of initial foundations for digital government, including ID.

Rationale
Theory of change. The PDO aimed to develop in laying the foundations for digital government. The causal
links between the project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. The outputs of activities such as
enacting legislation on updating the national digital bill, training the Office of the Regulator (OoTR) MoF staff,
and creating citizen awareness of digital Identification, were likely to help in laying the foundations of digital
government. Assuming that the Government approves and enacts the national digital bill (a withdrawal
condition for the Bank financing for activities in this component), these activities were likely to help in realizing
the desired outcome.

Outputs.

      A National Identification Unit (NDID) was established by the Samoa Bureau of Statistics (SBS), with a
       strategic plan as targeted.
      An options paper on Samoa Digital Government Platform was produced. The ICR (para 30) notes that
       this paper did not however receive consideration due to the changes in administration and
       government priorities.
      There were delays in enacting the legislation on NDID and the eventually the government did not
       enact NDID legislation.

The following activities were not completed as targeted.

      The NDID and data protection and privacy law were not enacted as per the original target.
      The NDID system was not integrated with new Civil Registration (CR) system as targeted.

Outcomes.

The outputs of the activities were expected to help in "laying the initial foundations for digital government".
However, the outcomes were contingent on the condition that the Government enacts NDID legislation (which
was also a withdrawal condition). Since the law was not enacted, the desired outcome was unachievable.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The objective was not revised, However the scope of the activities was reduced drastically with the fourth
project restructuring.

                                                                                                      Page 10 of 19
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 WS: Pac Reg Connect Phase III: Samoa (P128904)




                              Revised Rationale
                              Outputs.

                                    A National Identification Unit (NDID) was established by the Samoa Bureau of Statistics (SBS), with a
                                     strategic plan as per the revised target.
                                    An options paper on Samoa Digital Government Platform was produced as targeted. The ICR (para
                                     30) notes that this paper did not however receive consideration due to the changes in administration
                                     and government priorities.
                                    There were delays in enacting the legislation on NDID and the eventually the legislation was not
                                     enacted. As a result, the following activities were not completed as targeted.

                              Outcomes.

                              The outputs of the activities were expected to help in "laying the initial foundations for digital government".
                              However, the outcomes were contingent on the condition that the Government enacts NDID legislation (which
                              was also a withdrawal condition for the Bank financing for this component). As the law was not enacted, the
                              outcome was unachievable.



                              Revised Rating
                              Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Of the three PDOs, there is evidence that the project substantially contributed to reducing the cost of internet
                            services and increasing the availability of internet services in Samoa. However, the Government did not
                            approve and enact the national digital law (a precondition for withdrawing Bank financing for activities in this
                            component). Hence most of the activities were dropped. The project, hence, made no progress on laying on
                            the PDO of laying the foundations for digital government. So the overall efficacy is substantial with moderate
                            shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Post restructuring, there is evidence that the project substantially contributed to reducing the cost of internet
                            services and increasing the availability of internet services in Samoa. However, for the third objective even

                                                                                                                                Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      WS: Pac Reg Connect Phase III: Samoa (P128904)



  though most activities were dropped, the PDO was the same, and the Government did not approve and enact
  the national digital law (a precondition for withdrawing Bank financing for activities in this component). The
  project, hence, made no progress on laying on the PDO of laying the foundations for digital government. So
  the overall efficacy remains substantial with moderate shortcomings.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic analysis. An economic analysis was conducted activities of associated with component one
activities (Samoa-Fiji Cable). These activities accounted for 72% of actual cost. The analytical underpinnings of
the analysis were based on the 2007 World Bank study "The effect of broadband deployment on output and
employment". This study concluded that broadband penetration in Samoa (both fixed and mobile Internet) would
rise from 18% to 53% within ten years due to the submarine cable and that a 10% increase in broadband
penetration correlated with a 1.38% increase in Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in developing countries.

Economic analysis at appraisal. The net economic impact was estimated at US$201.00 million. The ex-
ante Economic Rate of Return (ERR) was 33%. The Project was cost-effective as benefits were expected to be
reaped for the next twenty-five years at 10% discount rate. The ex-ante analysis could not be replicated due to
the lack of data provided by the borrower and lack of documentation of the task team on the original modelling
exercise (ICR, para 35).

Economic analysis at closure. The ex-post analysis estimated the maximum economic impact on GDP to be
around 3.86% between 2015 and 2022. This analysis calculated the aggregate consumer surplus of mobile
connectivity. The consumer surplus was about US$8,638 between 2015 - 2022. Although small at the per capital
level, the estimate signified positive consumer welfare impacts.

About 20 months elapsed from the Project Concept Note to Board Approval at a cost of US$308,887.91 (around
40% of the total cost of supervision) at 34 staff weeks. The ICR (para 33) notes that this cost was lower than the
cost compared to the cost and staff-weeks of the first phase of the connectivity program (46 weeks and a cost of
US$958,718.66. About 8.8 savings were realized from implementing component one activities. This saving was
utilized for scaling-up project activities. The Project pooled in resources from another project, namely the
Centralized Technical Services Support Unit (CTSSU) for implementing component three activities. CTSSU,
established as part of the Bank's transport project in 2018, was housed in the Ministry of Finance and this unit
provided high-level guidance and hands-on support on project implementation in the areas of fiduciary
management and safeguards.

Administrative and operational issues during implementation. Implementation was hampered by frequent
staff turnover at the office of the regulator. This contributed to lost productivity, loss of valuable knowledge and
increased training costs for component one activities. There were significant delays in implementing component
four activities. Eventually, most activities in this component could not be implemented due to a combination of
factors (explained in section two).



                                                                                                      Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      WS: Pac Reg Connect Phase III: Samoa (P128904)



Overall efficiency is rated as substantial, in view of the shortcomings during implementation.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      72.00
 Appraisal                                                  33.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the Government and Bank strategies is High. Efficiency is rated as substantial. Of
the three PDOs, the project significantly contributed to reducing the prices of Internet services and increasing
the availability of Internet services. The efficacy of the first two PDOs is rated as substantial, both before and
after the first project restructuring. However, the Project's achievements in laying the foundation for digital
identification were rated as negligible both before and after restructuring. Thus, overall efficacy was substantial,
with moderate shortcomings both before and after restructuring. The share of disbursements was 70% before
restructuring and 30% after restructuring. Given that the PDO remained the same as moderately satisfactory
both before and after restructuring based on the split evaluation approach, the overall outcome is rated as
moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Social risk. There is moderate risk to the sustainability of development outcomes. The project activities
aimed to reduce the Internet prices and increase access to internet services. While the project activities did
contribute to realizing the objectives of reducing Internet prices and increasing access to Internet services,
affordability of services still remains a key challenge in remote parts of Samoa. According to the ICR (Annex
Seven, page 53), the cost of one Giga Byte (GB) was 4.96% was above the regional median of 3.78% and
far above the affordability target of two percent of monthly Gross National Income (GNI) per capita set by the
United Nations Broadband Commission for Sustainable Development.


                                                                                                      Page 13 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      WS: Pac Reg Connect Phase III: Samoa (P128904)



Exposure to natural disasters. There is moderate risk to availability of Internet services, due to Samoa's
vulnerability to natural disasters (such as tropical cyclones, tsunamis), and to some extent, earthquakes that
could compromise the physical security of submarine cables and land facilities.

Government commitment. There is risk to the development outcomes pertaining to the activities of
developing the foundation of digital government. including ID. There is substantial risk to the
operationalization of the NDID system from political, governance and institutional capacity perspectives.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank prepared this project based on the lessons from previous Bank-financed ICT projects like the
  Tonga-Fiji Connectivity Project. The key lessons incorporated at design included: (i) the Project allocated
  substantial financing for supporting regulatory interventions, as a constructive relationship between the
  public and private sector was deemed to be important for successful development of telecommunication
  sectors at the national and regional levels; (ii) extensive upfront consultations with private sector
  investors; and (iii) given the limited institutional capacity, the project minimized the number of contracts
  and allocated adequate resources for technical and management support (PAD, pages 10 - 11). The
  design added grant financing covenants and disbursement conditions (such as a capped shareholder
  rate of return, reference interconnection offer and nondiscriminatory open access obligations) for
  safeguarding the interests of consumers.

  The implementation arrangements made at appraisal proved to be appropriate during implementation.
  The arrangements included: (i) The SSCC responsible for component one activities; (ii) The OoTR
  responsible for component two activities; and (iii) The Ministry of Finance (MoF) in charge of component
  three activities and overall project coordination (PAD, para 31).

  The Bank identified several risks at appraisal including, risks with technical design, weak implementation
  capacity, stakeholder risks and risks of PPP arrangements. Several mitigation measures were
  incorporated. With mitigation measures, the project risk was rated as substantial. (PAD, para 36). The
  arrangements made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance were appropriate (Section 10).

  However, there were moderate shortcomings. One, component two activities could have included
  additional supply-side regulatory mechanisms to increase investments in middle and last-mile networks
  that would have helped in addressing Quality of Service and affordability issues raised by end-users.
  Two, the initial project risk assessment did not account for whether insurance of Bank-financed assets
  was sufficient in the event of a hazard. The damage to OoTR's equipment and data assets caused by the
  fire hampered the critical functions of the regulator and diminished its ability to contribute to the PDO. and
  three, there were shortcomings in M&E design (discussed in section 9).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WS: Pac Reg Connect Phase III: Samoa (P128904)




b. Quality of supervision
 Seventeen Implementation Status Results (ISR) reports were filled (implying twice a year
 supervisions). The Bank conducted a joint review mission with the ADB from August 20 to 24, 2018 for the
 Mid-Term Review (MTR) and shared the Aide-memoires and other key data with ADB to ensure that the
 Project complied with the Bank's safeguards requirements. The continuity of leadership was maintained,
 with one change in the Task Team Leader (TTL) during the project. The supervision team aided in
 mobilizing capacity through central support unit, such as the Centralized Technical Services Support Unit
 (CTSSU), that provided hands-on support for the implementing agencies and the Project Management Unit
 (PMU) staff for all Bank-financed projects. This arrangement proved to be effective in addressing fiduciary
 issues. The supervision team aided in safeguards compliance (discussed in section ten).

 There were shortcomings in supervision. One, the timeline for component four activities was overly
 ambitious and did not have a buffer for potential delays involved in enacting legislation and/or other
 unforeseen events. Since many of the component four activities were contingent upon the enactment of the
 legislation , they had to be cancelled during implementation and two, the shortcomings in M&E were not
 rectified during implementation.

 Overall, Bank performance is rated as moderately satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 There were several shortcomings in M&E design. One, some PDO indicators and intermediate results
 indicators such as, "the number of grievances registered", "impact on telecom sector of World Bank
 technical assistance" and perception-based indicators such as "the number of beneficiaries that felt the
 project investments reflected their needs" were clearly not aligned with project activities. Two, indicators
 such as "Access to Internet Services" and "Retail price of Internet Services" were not fully attributable to
 project activities, given the other external factors in the ICT sector. Three, the project could have
 incorporated more relevant indicators for assessing the impact of the internet especially in rural areas and
 for low-income families (such as measuring availability and affordability by income group or region).




b. M&E Implementation


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WS: Pac Reg Connect Phase III: Samoa (P128904)



  The Ministry of Finance (MoF) was in charge of M&E. The Office of the Regulator (OoTR) was in charge
  of data collection (with data to be provided by the telecommunication service providers). The M&E
  framework included a user survey to assess the project's impact on beneficiaries.

  The ICR (para 56) noted that despite the agreement at appraisal, neither did the MoF did not have a M&E
  specialist, nor the OoTR have a formal M&E process. Although the SSCC and telecommunications
  service providers did supply data to OoTR, this was done only during supervision missions when
  requested by the Bank team.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (para 57) notes that there was limited use of results framework indicators outside of the project,
  as there were no formal M&E processes within the implementing agencies.

  Overall M&E is rated as Modest, because of the shortcomings in M&E design, implementation and
  utilization. However, despite the shortcomings in the M&S system, there was sufficient evidence in the
  results framework for a moderately satisfactory rating for Efficacy and Overall Outcome.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   This project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under the World Bank safeguard
   policies. Four safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01);
   Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); and Involuntary Resettlement
   (OP/BP 4.12). (PAD, page vi).

   Environmental Safeguards. The Project was not expected to have major environmental impacts. An
   Environmental and Social Impact Assessment ESIA was prepared at appraisal and an Environment and
   Social Management Plan (ESMP) was publicly disclosed (PAD, para 68). The Project's compliance with
   environmental safeguards was deemed to be satisfactory, with no adverse environmental impacts during
   marine operations or landing (ICR, para 59). There were no issues with the safeguards on Natural Habitats
   and Physical Cultural Resources.

   Involuntary Resettlement. The PAD (para 62) noted that two of the three landing sites were at existing
   facilities. New infrastructure under the project included installing ducts along public roads to connect the
   cable to landing sites and cable stations. A Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared and publicly
   disclosed at appraisal to address involuntary resettlement issues (PAD, para 62). The Project's compliance
   with social safeguards was rated as Satisfactory during implementation (ICR, para 62). The Project's
   Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) received a complaint from a member of the public regarding lack of




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WS: Pac Reg Connect Phase III: Samoa (P128904)



   proper permits and risks of 'toxicity" of the undersea cable. The implementing agency responded to the
   complaint.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. The Bank conducted a financial assessment at appraisal. The Government had
   implemented previous Bank-financed projects, The assessment concluded that the financial management
   arrangements of the implementing agencies were satisfactory (PAD, para 42).

   The financial management was rated as moderately satisfactory (ICR, para 60). There were issues with
   poor contract management and delays in submission of interim financial reports. There was an ineligible
   expenditure of US$53.52 during implementation. This expenditure was to be refunded when the project
   closed. The team clarified that the amount is yet to be refunded to date. The team clarified that the audits
   were unqualified.

   Procurement management. The Bank conducted an assessment of the procurement arrangements at
   appraisal. The assessment concluded that the procurement risk was high due to the possibility of delays
   arising from the different rules of the co-financing partners and the uncertainties relating to the yet-to-be
   established SSCC's arrangements for procuring a new submarine cable system (PAD, para 42).

   The procurement management was rated as moderately satisfactory overall (ICR, para 61). There were
   delays in recruiting a project manager within MoF to oversee project implementation within three months
   after project effectiveness as per the legal covenant. The ICR does not report of any misprocurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were no unintended impacts.



d. Other
   Not applicable.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                                                                  There were moderate
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory    shortcomings both at Quality-at-
                                                                                  Entry and during supervision.

                                                                                                     Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       WS: Pac Reg Connect Phase III: Samoa (P128904)



                                                                               Despite the shortcomings in the
                                                                               M&E system, there was
                                                                               sufficient evidence in the results
Quality of M&E                  Negligible           Modest
                                                                               framework for a moderately
                                                                               satisfactory rating for Efficacy
                                                                               and Overall Outcome.
Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. A Series of Projects can be an efficient and effective approach to carrying out projects in a
region. This approach enabled the Bank team to align the Project to a long-term regional goal and
build partnerships with other development partners. This approach can arguably contribute to cost
savings. For instance, the Bank team updated the financial, economic, and technical analysis of the
previous Bank-financed phases, and this helped in cutting preparation time and cost. Based on the
experiences from other phases of the project, the preparation team also understood the potential
risks of collaborating with the private sector and used grant covenants and disbursement conditions
to ensure open access and nondiscriminatory pricing of new international bandwidth.

2. It would be useful to have insurance coverage for the activities procured under a project.
Although a Management Information System (MIS) was procured under this project, the system was
lost in an office fire in April 2020. As there were no back-up copies of the software or insurance
against losses and failure, this was not a sustainable outcome. This is particularly important,
especially for costly digital infrastructure.

3. A careful consideration of the time required for enacting legislation can help in reducing
delays during implementation. The lesson from this project is that, especially on a pivotal bill such
as the National Digital Identification (NDID) that has far-reaching consequences such as data
protection, privacy, and inclusion, it would be useful to allocate additional time for thorough
deliberation and the drafting process for diverse perspectives to be heard and incorporated into the
drafting of the bill.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear and well-written. The theory of change provided in the text clearly articulates the clear and
logical links between project activities, outputs, and the desired outcomes. The ICR candidly acknowledges the


                                                                                                  Page 18 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WS: Pac Reg Connect Phase III: Samoa (P128904)



shortcomings in monitoring and evaluation. The evidence provided in the text is adequate for assessing project
performance. The information provided in Annex Seven provides useful information to the reader for assessing
project outcomes. The ICR draws reasonably good lessons from the experience of implementing this project.

There was one key shortcoming. Given that the project activities for component four activities were drastically
reduced with the second project restructurings, the ICR should have done a split rating of objectives.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 19
