     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN Sustainable Urban Development Project (P150395)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023793

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P150395                                      TN Sustainable Urban Development Project

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                        Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84880                                   31-Mar-2022                                        352,729,993.47

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Mar-2015                                  31-Mar-2023

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            400,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             352,729,993.47                                               0.00

 Actual                                         352,729,993.47                                               0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero         Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 11),
   the Project Development Objective (PDO) of this Tamil Nadu Sustainable Urban Development Project was "to
   improve urban services delivery in participating Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) in a financially sustainable
   manner and to pilot improved urban management practices in selected cities."

   This review will parse this objective into two:


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN Sustainable Urban Development Project (P150395)



         To improve urban services delivery in participating Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) in a financially
          sustainable manner
         To pilot improved urban management practices in selected cities.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Results Based Grants for Urban Governance: (US$61 million, of which IBRD US$55 million at
   appraisal; IBRD financing reduced to US$54.5 million at restructuring; US$57.41 million, of which IBRD
   US$51.67 million, actual) This component was to finance results-based grants to three ‘Model Cities’ -
   Erode and Vellore municipal corporations, and Hosur municipality. These grants were to be distributed on a
   pilot basis to finance improvements in four urban management areas: (i) empowerment and organizational
   capacity; (ii) spatial development planning; (iii) sustainable finances; and (iv) e-governance and public
   disclosure. In addition, this component was to finance project management support and consultant services
   for the Directorate of Municipal Administration (DMA) to implement this component. At the 2020
   restructuring, US$0.50 million allocated for project management and technical assistance (TA) to DMA was
   reallocated to increase the TA for Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) under Component 2 below.

   2. Investments in Urban Services (US$504 million, of which IBRD US$323 million at appraisal; IBRD
   financing increased to US$516 million at restructuring; US$462.81 million, of which IBRD US$290.51
   million, actual) The Tamil Nadu Urban Infrastructure Financial Services Limited (TNUIFSL) was to
   implement this component. The TNUIFSL is a public limited company of the Government of Tamil Nadu that
   served as a Public-Private Partnership with equity participation from banks and financial institutions
   including the Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India (ICICI) Bank, the Housing Development
   Finance Corporation (HDFC) Limited, and Infrastructure Leasing and Financial Services (IL &FS)
   Limited. This component was to finance: (i) investments in urban services, including water, sewerage,
   municipal solid waste, urban transportation, sewage management, and storm water drainage (SWD), and
   support project management and supervision; (ii) a Credit Rating Enhancement Fund (CREF) to pilot
   instruments such as municipal bonds and other market-based financing instruments that ULBs in Tamil
   Nadu may use to mobilize resources beyond budgetary sources; and (iii) technical assistance (TA) to ULBs,
   the Greater Chennai Corporation (GCC), and the TNUIFSL. The TA for ULBs was to help prepare and
   implement subprojects, including environmental and social (E&S) mitigation actions, public-private
   partnership (PPP) arrangements, and implement credit enhancement measures. The TA to the GCC
   was for urban flood risk mitigation. The TA for TNUIFSL was for institutional development. Four changes
   occurred during implementation. First, in July 2015, after the World Bank approved this loan (see Dates
   below), the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) adopted the 2015 Issue and Listing of Debt
   Securities by Municipalities Regulation. This law stated that only a municipality or a corporate municipal
   entity may issue debt securities or bonds, but not trusts such as the Water and Sanitation Pooled Fund or
   TNUDF, as designed under the CREF. TNUIFSL was unsuccessful in requesting an amendment. The tight
   domestic credit markets at that time also meant that commercial banks loans were unviable. At the project
   midterm review (MTR) and in the 2020 restructuring, CREF was dropped (see Section 4 Efficacy below).
   Second, the US$20 million allocated to CREF was redistributed to urban investments and TA under this

                                                                                                  Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    TN Sustainable Urban Development Project (P150395)



  same component. Third, the government increased its contributions by US$9 million and increased
  the overall allocation for this component from US$504 million to US$516 million (US$9.0 million from the
  government and US$0.5 million from component 1 above and US$3.5 million from component 3 below).
  Fourth, in the 2021 restructuring, a new COVID-19 related response subcomponent was added taking
  US$5.0 million from urban investments to finance oxygen supplies, medical and testing equipment/kits and
  supplies, essential equipment for case management, essential pharmaceuticals, and training and capacity
  building related to COVID19 care.

  3. Urban Sector Technical Assistance (TA) (US$34.0 million, at appraisal of which IBRD was US$21.0
  million; US$13.88 million, actual of which IBRD US$9.55 million) This component was to be implemented by
  DMA and was to finance TA for ULBs: (i) to develop next-generation municipal e-governance and
  geographic information systems (GISs); (ii) training, sector studies, operations and maintenance (O&M),
  and strengthening of public financial management for institutional development and capacity building. This
  component was also to finance project management and DMA’s incremental operating costs. In 2020, the
  project realized savings of US$3.5 million from lower than-anticipated training expenditures and incremental
  operating costs. The amount was reallocated to Component 2 above.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total project cost was US$400.00 million. The loan disbursed US$352.73 million. The
  balance of US$47.27 million was cancelled (ICR, paragraph 56).

  Financing: The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) financed this loan.

  Borrower Contribution: The government committed US$200.00 million in contributions, added US$9.0
  million at restructuring, and disbursed US$182.37 million at closing. The balance of US$26.63 million was
  undisbursed because of the reduced number of project-affected families to be resettled requiring
  assistance.

  Dates: The loan was approved on March 31, 2015 and made effective on August 21, 2015. The Mid Term
  Review (MTR) was conducted on May 6, 2019. The loan was to close originally on March 31, 2022 but was
  extended (see below) by an additional 12 months to close on March 31, 2023. The project was restructured
  three times:

        On June 30, 2020 to reallocate loan savings of US$2 million from Components 1 (results-based
         grants) and 3 (urban sector TA) for priority urban sector TA (component 3), cancel US$18 million for
         CREF (Sub-Component 2) to finance cost over-runs under component 2 and make the
         corresponding changes to the targets in the indicators of the results framework.
              o At the PDO outcome levels:
                      indicator 1: Increased the target number of direct project beneficiaries from 2.0 million
                        to 2.2 million, of which the target of 40 percent female was unchanged.
                      indicator 2: Added the target of 95 percent repayment rate on sub-loans by TNUDF to
                        ULBs.
                      indicator 3: Clarified the target of the cumulative Increase in own source revenues
                        (OSR) over the previous year of ‘Model Cities’ expressed in INR crores. The
                        target cumulative increase in Erode and Vellore of Rs. 31.93 crore each and in Hosur
                        an increase of Rs.15.96 crore over and above the OSR of 2016-17.

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN Sustainable Urban Development Project (P150395)



               o At the output levels:
                       reduced the end target of “participating ULBs with updated GIS maps” from 90 to 30
                         ULBs.
                        increased the end target of “participating ULBs with operational new e-governance
                         systems” from 90 to 135.
                        revised the end target for “Improved ULB empowerment in the ‘Model Cities’”
                           from “Each ULB has adopted a sustainability plan for the technical expert cell’s
                           functions and responsibilities after the Project’s closing date” to “Each ULB has
                           appointed a high-quality Technical Expert Cell.”
                         revised the end target for “Improved ULB citizen engagement in the ‘Model Cities’”
                           from “Each ULB has established an online platform to exchange information with
                           citizens regarding key service delivery parameters” to “Each ULB has implemented all
                           the e-governance modules as identified by the Chennai Metropolitan Area
                           Administration (CMA).”
         On June 9, 2021 to add a new disbursement category for the COVID-19 expenditures and reallocate
          costs among components, with no changes to the results framework. Costs were reallocated
          because (a) funding for urban investment subprojects was increased to cover the increased costs of
          existing subprojects and to add new subprojects to utilize loan savings; (b) the cancellation of the
          CREF subcomponent due to a change in regulation; 2 (c) the addition of the COVID-19 pandemic
          emergency response subcomponent; (d) lowing the target related to GIS mapping given the capacity
          constraint in DMA and ULBs, and increasing the target related to e-governance system to scale up
          impacts; and (e) the increase in project duration to complete construction activities that were
          delayed mainly due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the 2021 state elections, and flooding in Chennai in
          November 2021. The cancellation of the CREF activity does not affect the PDO outcome in a major
          way, as the CREF activity represented only 3.3 percent of the overall project cost, and there were
          other activities under Component 1 and 3 to support increase in ULBs’ revenue collection and hence
          enhance their financial sustainability. Overall, these changes expanded the scope of relevant
          activities (particularly urban investments, COVID-19 response, and e-governance systems), while
          removing an activity that could not be implemented because of national regulatory changes.
         On February 8, 2022 to extend the loan closing date to complete ongoing activities.

   Split Rating: A split rating does not apply because the PDOs remained unchanged, and the project scope
   was scaled up. While the CREF activity and its associated indicator were dropped, other original indicators -
   related to loan repayment and OSRs - sufficiently captured the outcome of ‘improve financial sustainability.’
   In addition, reallocated resources expanded the project’s scope - increased the number of
   target beneficiaries, increased OSR generation, and expanded e-governance systems. According to the
   World Bank Guidance: ICR for Investment Project Financing (IPF) issued on December 9, 2021, para. 60,
   regarding projects with expanded scope: "If the project became overall more ambitious, a split rating is not
   applied […]. The operation can be assessed based on the more ambitious revised outcomes and outcome
   targets.”




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN Sustainable Urban Development Project (P150395)



Context: Tamil Nadu is India's most urbanized state. Its urban population has increased from 24.4 percent
in 1951 to 48.5 percent in 2011. 12 corporations, 124 municipalities, and 528 town panchayats
comprise the state of Tamil Nadu. Panchayat means "assembly" (ayat) of five (panch). Traditionally,
panchayats consisted of respected elders selected by the local community to settle disputes both between
individuals and villages. Chennai, the capital of Tamil Nadu is the sixth most populous city in India with an
estimated population of 4.9 million, in an area of 426 square kilometers after a 2011 expansion. The
Corporation of Chennai merged peri-urban areas consisting of 9 Municipalities, 8 Town Panchayats and 25
Village Panchayats and has an estimated population of 9 million. Service gaps were noted for the
urbanizing areas of Tamil Nadu. Sewerage and storm water drains covered less than 30 percent of the city.
Less than 10 percent of solid waste was treated and disposed. City governments needed to generate
financial resources, create jobs, and improve urban governance. The Government of Tamil Nadu noted in
its Urban Vision 2023 that urban local bodies (ULBs) required an estimated US$42 billion in
investments during 2012–2023 to meet its urban challenges.

Country Plans: The Government of India launched several urban development programs such as the ‘100
Smart Cities’, ‘Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation’ (AMRUT), and ‘Swachh Bharat
(Clean India) Mission’ (SBM). The PDO remained relevant to Vision Tamil Nadu 2023 “to promote and
facilitate the development of inclusive and sustainable cities." This project focused on water supply service
improvement, reuse of wastewater, e-governance, and strengthening of the financial and administrative
capacity of ULBs also closely aligned with the objectives of India’s flagship missions AMRUT 2.0 and SBM
2.0 (2021–2026), as well as the Tamil Nadu Urban Vision 2031 that aims to achieve universal access to
basic infrastructure and services in all ULBs, improve environmental sustainability, and strengthen ULBs’
institutional capacity.

World Bank Country Partnership Framework: At closing, the PDO remained relevant to the WBG India
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY18–22 (ICR, paragraph 21). The PDO contributed to Area I:
Promoting resource-efficient growth. The 2018 Systematic Country Diagnostic noted that efficient cities
contributed to resource-efficient growth for India. The PDO supported making ULBs more responsive to its
constituents by investing in basic services and improving urban governance. The PDO was aligned with the
World Bank’s goals of eliminating poverty and promoting shared prosperity by delivering water supply
services to underserved populations, including low-income people in the cities and peri-urban areas of
Tamil Nadu.

World Bank Experience in the Country and in the Sector: The World Bank has a long engagement in
Tamil Nadu and is the repository of international good practices in urban management. This project was to
demonstrate innovation in three areas: (i) addressing the gaps in urban services, while focusing on
improving environmental sustainability; (ii) setting up a credit enhancement facility to increase ULBs’ access
to the capital market, based on TNUDF’s experience in issuing municipal bonds and similar interventions in
the United States and elsewhere; and (iii) piloting a results-based financing approach with disbursements
as incentives to improve urban governance in selected ULBs. Lessons from other World Bank projects,
such as the Pakistan Punjab Cities Governance Improvement Project. the Chennai City Partnership:
Sustainable Urban Services Program (CCP, P175221) and preparation of the Tamil Nadu Climate Resilient
Urban Development Program (TNCRUDP, P179189).

The PDO was formulated at an outcome level with the financial sustainability dimension. The Theory of
Change (ToC) in the ICR indicated that the improvement of urban service delivery and management
practices was expected to lead to improved living conditions for urban residents, improved environmental



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      TN Sustainable Urban Development Project (P150395)



               sustainability and resource efficiency, and improved transparency and citizen engagement. Both the ToC
               and the project design showed that the project was expected to contribute to these higher-level objectives.

               Overall, the relevance of the PDO is rated High. The PDOs were relevant to both the country plans for
               Tamil Nadu and the Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) as well as the World Bank's partnership framework for the
               country and the sector.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve urban services delivery in participating Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) in a financially sustainable
                             manner.
                             The 30 ULBs include 14 municipal corporations, 15 municipalities, and one town panchayat. Two
                             municipalities, Pallavaram and Pammal, were merged with the Tambaram Municipal Corporation.


                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: No explicit Theory of Change (ToC) was outlined at appraisal. A retrospective TOC was
                             prepared for the ICR. The activities were designed to deliver demand-based infrastructure
                             investments. These infrastructure investments were to improve the urban environment,
                             emphasized 'sustainability' (expressed as no less than 40 percent in value). ULBs were to be selected using
                             the Tamil Nadu Urban Development Fund (TNUDF) framework criteria.

                             Inputs were to be the training and resources to build capacity on public financial management such as the
                             preparation of Own Source Revenue (OSR) implementation plans. These plans were to include the financing
                             of the operations and maintenance (O&M) needs of completed assets, delivering services to ULB residents,
                             restoring water bodies, treating, and reusing wastewater.

                             Outputs were to be the physical measures of the improved urban services such as improved or newly
                             constructed roads, installed energy-efficient streetlights, improved drainage, and new water and sewerage
                             connections. Outputs were also to include a municipal solid waste system in place, constructed stormwater
                             drainage, restored water bodies, and a new Tertiary Treatment Reverse Osmosis (TTRO) plant and
                             conveyance main. ULBs were to determine these investments based on demand. Outputs to
                             show improved financial sustainability of participating ULBs’ were to include OSR implementation plans, an e-
                             governance system - Urban Tree Information System (UTIS) to track revenue collection, and updated GIS
                             maps for property tax assessments. Some targets were determined during implementation since ULBs were
                             expected to prepare these investments as part of the demand-based design.


                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TN Sustainable Urban Development Project (P150395)



Outcomes were to be improved services delivered to gender-segregated direct project beneficiaries.
Outcomes were to also include the increase in ULB resources mobilized from own source revenues (OSR)
and non-budgetary sources. The outputs from the demand-based investment plans that ULBs prepared were
causally linked to these outcomes.

Critical assumptions: The TOC included the following critical assumptions that, if realized, were to enhance
the achievement of the PDO: (i) investments reflected the beneficiary's needs; (ii) ULBs maintained
constructed assets; and (iii) infrastructure services were affordable.

The ToC is clear. The causal link between inputs, outputs, and outcomes is logical. ULB capacity is built,
ULBs generate demand-based investment plans with citizen participation, priority investments are made,
resources are mobilized, and improved services are delivered. The outcomes were causally attributed to the
inputs and outputs of the project.

OUTPUTS:

      30 ULBs (original target was unknown at appraisal, the target of 30 determined at implementation
         according to the email from the Task Team, target achieved) received result-based grants
         to implement reforms in empowerment and organizational capacity, spatial and development
         planning, e-governance, public disclosure and citizen engagement, and OSR planning.
        Completed the first TTRO wastewater treatment plant in Tamil Nadu as targeted. The plant treated
         and supplied 30 mld of used water through 28.50 km conveyance main to 11 industries in the Manali
         area outside Chennai city. The TTRO plant commenced operation in 2019 and started selling recycled
         water to industrial consumers, who reported a 17 percent decrease in manufacturing costs because
         of cheaper water from the TTRO.
        The project facilitated the creation of a Public Finance Management Reform Cell in the Directorate of
         Municipal Administration (DMA) as targeted. The cell provided strategic inputs and technical support
         to ULBs to implement public finance-related reforms in the ULBs. The cell developed financial
         indicators and ranking systems of ULBs and suggested improvements in the accounting records
         submitted by ULBs in UTIS, including sharing the reports with the public. UTIS is a web-based
         workflow application software that integrates 29 modules such as birth and death registration, property
         tax, water charges, trade licenses, building plan management, accounting system, revenue, and
         human resources management (ICR, footnote 11). The project also provided training on public finance
         management to the participating ULBs.
        Urban Sector Technical Assistance (TA): Completed capacity-building activities, including e-
         Governance systems implemented through the ‘Urban Tree Platform’ that is now fully operational in
         135 municipalities in the state. 26 training and capacity building activities were conducted for
         37,819 ULB staff. The critical TA for Chennai flood warning and decision support system was
         delayed because of delayed clearances from the Ministry of Defense. The Geographic Information
         System (GIS) related activity for ULBs required was to be completed during the 12 month an
         extension.
        30 ULBs constructed and upgraded basic infrastructure. The Task Team clarified to IEG that the
         targets for these outputs were determined during implementation when the ULBs enjoined citizen
         participation to formulate demand-based investment plans. The Task Team provided additional
         information for some but not all targets by ULBs to IEG.




                                                                                                  Page 7 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  TN Sustainable Urban Development Project (P150395)



          o Access to improved water supply: The primary source of water used to be stand posts, public
            fountains, and water tankers. Dependency on water tankers decreased from 18.9 percent in
            2015 to 0.8 percent in 2022 (ICR, footnote 6).
                  148,411 households were provided new water connections (baseline was 343,313
                    households, original target was 240,319 households or 70 percent, achieved 62
                    percent not achieving target). The proportion of new or rehabilitated water and sewer
                    connections against aggregate targets among participating ULBs was not achieved
                    because of implementation delays in Nagercoil, which represented 18 percent of the
                    targeted households' water connections. This was reported to have started operation in
                    September 2023. Delays were due to the COVID-19 pandemic, contractors unable to
                    mobilize labor and materials, and the added time for issuing the revised administrative
                    sanction for the cost overruns.
          o Access to improved drainage and reduced flooding:
                  Built 500.4 km of new stormwater drainage systems network, including 438.8 km in
                    Chennai (original target was 290 km, target exceeded),
                  Installed Real-Time Flood Forecast System (RTFFS) for Chennai, as targeted. A GIS
                    data center in GCC hosts spatial data and coordinates with other departments in their
                    use.
          o The following additional outputs were reported though there were no targets.
                  Access to improved water supply: The project installed 1,068.12 km of water supply
                    pipelines (representing an increase of 3.1 times over the baseline of 344.52 km. The
                    project added 79.84 million liters per day (mld) of additional water treatment capacity,
                  Access to improved roads: The project constructed and upgraded 335.88 km of all-
                    season roads and constructed storm water drains with culverts to address delayed
                    improvements in the past 6-10 years, lack of maintenance, and damage from water and
                    sewerage pipes that were laid out along these roads.
                  Access to improved drainage to reduce flooding: 98 kilo liters of water storage capacity
                    was added through the rehabilitation of ponds.
                  Improved safety and visibility: The project installed 17,301 higher luminosity energy-
                    efficient light-emitting diode (LED) streetlights that enhanced the residents’ sense of
                    security, especially for women, the elderly, and children. The installed energy-efficient
                    streetlights generated savings of 45 percent in energy consumption and monthly
                    savings of INR 1.5 crores (US$0.18 million) for GCC.
                  Improved public space through ecological conservation: The project restored 508.74
                    acres of water bodies, including the polluted Periya lake in the Chennai Metropolitan
                    Area.

OUTCOMES:

    The project benefited a total of 2.8 million residents. The original target was 2 million, increased at the
     2020 restructuring to 2.2 million. The revised target was exceeded. 49 percent of the beneficiaries
     were female, exceeding the original, unrevised target of 40 percent.
    The Chennai Real-Time Flood Forecast System (RTFFS) share real-time data and issues alerts to
     various stakeholders based on rainfall predictions three days in advance. The Water Resource
     Department use the data to monitor lake operations and river flows. The Revenue Department use the
     data to aid in flood relief measures. The Police and the Fire Departments use the data for flood relief


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
TN Sustainable Urban Development Project (P150395)



     and rescue. The Education Department use the data to plan school schedules during flooding
     incidents. The public is also provided inundation information.
    After the TTRO started selling recycled water to industries in 2019, the Greater Chennai Corporation’s
     (GCC’s) revenue increased by INR 192 crore (US$23.20 million), representing a surplus of INR 30
     crore (US$3.63 million), thus contributing to the city’s financial sustainability.
    At the end-line survey, 68 percent of the female respondents in Chennai said there was an increased
     sense of safety to commute after sunset owing to the installation of streetlights. The installed energy-
     efficient streetlights also generated savings of 45 percent in energy consumption and monthly savings
     of INR 1.5 crores (US$0.18 million) for the Greater Chennai Corporation (GCC).
    All 30 ULBs serviced their debts from year-on-year revenues, achieving a 100 percent repayment rate
     on TNUDF sub-loans against the original target of 95 percent. This outcome showed an Increased
     capacity for debt servicing.
    Investments benefited the urban poor using data from a sample of ULBs. Water supply investments in
     four ULBs benefited 53,357 urban poor, and road investments in 11 ULBs improved the connectivity of
     more than 30 slums.
    The UTIS improved revenue collection (online and offline options for citizens to pay taxes and service
     charges, a one-stop web portal and mobile interface in place in all 158 ULBs (including 138
     municipalities and 20 city corporations) in Tamil Nadu. This achievement exceeded the original target
     of 90 ULBs and the revised target of 135 ULBs. For evidence, in 2018, property tax collection
     efficiency increased from 36 percent in 2018–19 to 53 percent in 2021–22, leading to an increase of
     63 percent, or INR 29,059 crore (US$3.51 billion) in property tax collection.
    The ULBs' use of the Urban Tree Information System (UTIS) contributed to their financial
     sustainability, evident in the increase of INR 7,728 crore (US$933.90 million) in property tax collection
     achieved in 23 additional ULBs (UTIS was rolled out to 158 ULBs from a target of 135). This
     exceeded the original target of mobilizing an additional INR 492 crore (US$59.46 million). The use of
     the UTIS also increased the interface with citizens. This increase in transparency was evident in
     ULBs preparing their annual accounts within two months after the end of the financial year,
     submitting their accounts on time to the Fifteenth Finance Commission, and accessing grants. The
     is a web-based workflow application software that integrates 29 modules - such as birth and death
     registration, property tax, water charges, trade licenses, building plan management, accounting
     system, revenue management, and human resources management - in all 158 ULBs (including 138
     municipalities and 20 city corporations) in Tamil Nadu. This achievement exceeded the original target
     of 90 ULBs and the revised target of 135 ULBs.
    A total of 622,328 people were provided access to wider and better-quality roads. Target was
     647,532, according to the Task Team. Target was almost achieved. Respondents to the end line
     survey stated that on average, they saved about 30 minutes in travel time due to reduced congestion,
     and experienced improved walking and cycling experience to work, schools, and markets.
    The project provided safe and reliable piped water supply to 774,337 people in 11 ULBs (target was
     1,231,412, target not achieved). The coverage of tap water supply increased from 49 percent before
     the project to 82 percent in 2022. Per capita supply achieved the state target of 135 liters per capita
     per day (lpcd) in the ULBs receiving investment, i.e., more than twice the baseline supply of 50 lpcd in
     2011. About 91 percent of the respondents to the end line survey stated that they were satisfied with
     the quality of water supplied post project, against 35 percent in 2015.
    The project reduced the impact of flooding, benefiting 1.16 million people in the three ULBs where
     stormwater drainage investments were made. The target of 1.16 million was achieved. The project
     also reported on the following, though there were no targets set. In the coastal city of Cuddalore, the


                                                                                                Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TN Sustainable Urban Development Project (P150395)



       storm water drains covered a wider area from 36 to 90 percent, and inundation reduced from 204 to
       12 hours. In Cuddalore, all waters drain from the Gediyam River to the sea. Inflows from all secondary
       drains reduce the carrying capacity of the channel, leading to high water levels in the river and long-
       standing time for flood waters to recede. In Chennai and Thoothukudi, flooding hot spots were
       reduced by 50–70 percent, and the hours of inundation were reduced from 168 hours to less than half
       an hour.

      The project Increased property tax via GIS mapping. This resulted in an additional revenue of INR 65
       crore (US$7.85 million) per year from 14 percent of bills verified. With all the bills verified, GCC’s
       annual tax revenue was expected to increase by about of INR 500 crore (US$60.42 million). A drone
       survey was completed in 14 ULBs. A mobile application for field survey was developed. Digitalization
       of GIS maps and door-to-door survey in these ULBs was not completed because DMA experienced
       delay in appointing a GIS specialist. The indicator ‘Number of participating ULBs with updated GIS
       maps’ did not achieve the original target of 90 or the revised target of 30. A follow-on operation,
       TNCRUDP, was expected to complete these activities. GIS mapping in the target ULBs was not
       expected to have an immediate impact on property tax collection, because revenue staff can only
       conduct field verification of bill variations after the GIS maps are updated. In GCC experience, this
       update may take over a year.
      According to beneficiary surveys and secondary data from real estate portals, infrastructure
       improvements under the project increased property values. This was expected to increase property
       tax collection by the ULBs. On average, rentals in the project areas have increased 12 percent in the
       last five years (the control group reported a 3 percent increase).

The ToC provided the causal attribution of the inputs and outputs that contributed to the outcomes to achieve
the PDO (improved urban services delivery in a financially sustainable manner). The evidence from the end-
line surveys showed beneficiary satisfaction with the improved services delivered. Evidence from the increase
in resource mobilization showed the sustainable way these services were to be supported in the long term.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.
The project exceeded the two outcome indicators - the number of beneficiaries and the increased capacity for
debt servicing. The project achieved six of the eight output targets - solid waste collection coverage, citizen
engagement, and empowerment, stormwater drainage investments in Chennai, the proportion of ULBs
reporting improved service delivery, and e-governance. The output targets related to GIS mapping and new
or rehabilitated water and sewer connections were not achieved because of implementation delays related to
cost overruns and COVID-19 disruptions.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To pilot improved urban management practices in selected cities (i.e., three Model Cities) Erode and Vellore
Corporations and Hosur Municipality

Rationale
                                                                                                Page 10 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TN Sustainable Urban Development Project (P150395)



Theory of Change: A ToC was not prepared at appraisal but was reactively constructed for the ICR. This
objective was designed to provide results-based grants to three pilot cities - Erode and Vellore municipal
corporations and Hosur municipality - to fund investments and urban management practices. These ULBs
were representative of medium-size cities with populations between 200,000 and 500,000 and were either
newly upgraded or expected to be upgraded from municipalities at the time of preparation and was an
opportunity to provide capacity support. Every year, grants were to be released to these cities after they met
the four targets of disbursement linked indicators (DLIs) or Performance Based Conditions (PBCs). These
DLIs served as incentives for the cities to improve in four urban management areas: (i) empowerment and
organization capacity; (ii) spatial and development planning; (iii) sustainable finances; and (iv) e-governance,
public disclosure, and citizen engagement.

Inputs were to include the training and technical assistance to assist the model cities to develop e-
governance systems, upgrade GIS maps for property tax assessments and build capacity to undertake public
private partnerships and improve public financial management. Inputs also included the grants that were
distributed to the three model cities after they met the targets of DLIs.

Outputs were to be an installed e-system to monitor revenue generation, called Urban Tree Information
System, upgraded GIS maps to improve property tax assessments, and OSR improvements plans for
improved resource mobilization.

Outcomes were to be improvements in the financial management of the Model Cities based on the effective
use of the UTIS. The UTIS replaced the manual systems. The Model Cities would provide real-time
information on ownership and conditions of assets to tap into market resources. Other outcomes included
improving solid waste management services, increases in property tax receipts due to improved assessments
assisted by the upgraded GIS mapping; and increases in revenues from non-budgetary sources, such as fees
and permits.

Critical assumptions: The same critical assumptions noted in the Theory of Change under objective 1
applied to this TOC.

The ToC was clear. The outcomes were attributable to the causally linked inputs and outputs. A minor gap
was a lack of indicator associated with the resulting leverage that would have tapped into private sector
participation in delivering services because of the improved financial management of the Model Cities.

OUTPUTS:

      The three model cities received grants of INR 357 crores (US$43.14 million) and achieved a
       disbursement rate of 94 percent of the original target of US$45.9 million, almost achieving the target
       of 100 percent. The Task Team clarified to IEG that the achieved disbursement rate refers to the
       amount of fund disbursed against the revised allocation for the Results Based Grants for Urban
       Governance. The grants were invested in improving service delivery and develop revenue-generating
       amenities such as commercial complexes, community halls, parks, and gyms.
      The Model Cities developed revenue improvement plans and achieved OSR targets for the first four
       years. Before 2020, the ULBs’ revenue staff conducted field verifications and reported the expansion
       of the property tax base, increased property tax collections and non-tax items such as rent from
       markets, community halls, plot regulation charges, and solid waste user charges. Beginning in 2020,



                                                                                                  Page 11 of 21
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               TN Sustainable Urban Development Project (P150395)



                                   the annual targets were not achieved because the state government rolled back the property tax rate
                                   increase in place and lowered tax filing and collection during the COVID-19 pandemic.

                            OUTCOMES:

                                  The ‘Model Cities’ achieved an increase of INR109 crores in OSR over the previous year
                                   after implementing its respective OSR improvement plans (US$13.17 million) in 2021–22 over the
                                   OSR of 2016–17 (exceeding the target of INR79.82 crore). The baseline was INR72 crores in FY13.
                                   The original target was an increase of INR22.5 crores. The original target was exceeded. The
                                   target was revised at restructuring to specify targets for each Model City (i) Erode and Vellore
                                   Corporations were to increase OSRs over the previous year by Rs31.93 crore each in the end of
                                   project over and above the OSR of 2016-17; (ii) Hosur Municipality was to show cumulative increase
                                   of OSR amounting to Rs15.96 crore in the end of Project over and above the OSR of 2016-17
                                  The three Model Cities achieved the targets for the three DLIs related to Improved technical and
                                   managerial capacity for urban management - empowerment and organizational capacity (DLI 1),
                                   spatial and development planning (DLI 2), and e-governance, public disclosure, and citizen
                                   engagement (DLI 4). The cities were the first to implement UTIS. The Model Cities established
                                   Technical Expert Cells and developed Multiyear Capital Investment and Urban Design Improvement
                                   Plans. The cities invested about US$24 million in grants and OSR for 11 sub-projects. The Model
                                   Cities reduced staff vacancies to less than 5 percent of sanctioned posts (exceeding the target of 20
                                   percent); resolved about 80 percent of grievances within the time limit set in their Citizen’s Charters
                                   (target 80 percent); and achieved 90 percent of the Ministry of Urban Development Service Level
                                   Benchmarks Index related to solid waste household collection coverage, achieving the target.
                                  There was a 90 percent average increase on Service Level Benchmarks (SLB) Index for the 'Model
                                   Cities' related to solid waste household collection coverage (baseline was 65 percent, target 90
                                   percent, target achieved).
                                  Repayment rates on sub loans by TNUDF to ULBs (baseline 100 percent, target 95 percent, achieved
                                   100 percent, exceeding the target). This was initially an Intermediate Result Indicator of PAD and was
                                   changed to a PDO indicator in 2020. The e-governance system implemented contributed to an
                                   increase in revenue collection, GIS mapping improved the property tax base, and strengthened the
                                   financial management capacities of the ULBs.

                            The objective of improved urban management practices in the Model Cities was achieved from the causally
                            linked inputs and outputs outlined in the ToC. The use of the UTIS boosted the capacity of the Model Cities to
                            deliver urban services (solid waste management), increase own source revenues (property tax receipts) and
                            non-budgetary revenues (fees and permits) and increase transparency and inclusiveness in planning and
                            management. Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial. Systems were
                            in place to foster improvements in urban management practices in the three model cities.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                                                                                                                            Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TN Sustainable Urban Development Project (P150395)




  OVERALL EFFICACY
  Rationale
  The first objective to 'improve urban services delivery in participating ULBs in a financially sustainable
  manner' was substantially achieved with moderate shortcomings especially on the water supply and sewer
  connections which were not achieved due to implementation delays. The second objective of improved urban
  management practices in the Model Cities was substantially achieved. Overall, the efficacy of the project to
  achieve both objectives is rated Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency: At appraisal, the project adopted a framework approach for project investments under
the second component, Investments in Urban Services. Prior to implementation, municipal subprojects under
this component were subjected to economic analysis. The stormwater drainage (SWD) subproject in the Greater
Chennai Corporation (GCC) was also subject to cost-benefit analysis. The expected benefits were tangible
(direct and indirect) socioeconomic benefits from avoided flood damage; and intangible benefits from
improved environment and living conditions. These intangible benefits were not quantified. The economic rate of
return (ERR) was estimated at 15.5 percent using a 12 percent discount rate. Sensitivity analysis led to a range
in ERRs from 13.48 to 15.3 percent under adverse scenarios.

In closing, the cost-benefit analysis methodology used at appraisal was replicated in the investment subprojects
- the stormwater drainage (SWD), water supply, road improvements, street lighting, and tertiary treatment
reverse osmosis (TTRO). Estimated economic benefits and actual costs at closing showed EIRRs between 15
and 21 percent using the same 12 percent discount rate used at appraisal. The EIRR for SWD at completion
was 16.40 percent, compared to the 15.5 percent at appraisal (ICR, paragraph 43).

Financial Efficiency: At appraisal, the financial appraisal of the subprojects was divided into two: (i) at the
subproject level, water and wastewater subprojects were assumed not financially viable based on subproject
revenues, At the ULB level, all 30 ULBs were assessed in the aggregate to assess whether subprojects were
financially sustainable, and this was measured by borrowing capacity. The overall borrowing capacity of
all ULBs over five years was estimated to be over US$600 million. The financial analysis concluded that this
meant ULBs were able to absorb about US$150 million in sub-loans. In closing, the same method indicated that
in ULBs that implemented water supply subprojects (using data from 21 of 30 participating ULBs), the tariff
collected increased from 32 to 81 percent. This rate indicated that the capacity of these ULBs to meet water
supply operations and maintenance (O&M) costs to be from three sources: (i) its tariff collections, (ii) the share
of the property tax earmarked for water supply, and (iii) from ULB general funds. At the ULB level, the analysis
of 15 of 21 ULBs showed a ratio of less than 1 for total expenditure to total revenue. This meant strong revenue
flows. All 115 ULBs showed a debt service ratio (DSR) of less than 15 percent, showing that debt service could
be met by annual revenues. The World Bank determined an affordability threshold of 5 percent of the average
household income. The average monthly flat fee in the ULBs was less than INR 300 (US$3.63) for water or
about 1–2 percent of the average household income (ICR, paragraph 44).


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TN Sustainable Urban Development Project (P150395)



Administrative and Operational Efficiency: Implementation delays experienced in 2020–2021 resulted in a
12-month extension of the project. These delays came from (i) COVID-19 pandemic restrictions resulted in the
stoppage of works and diversion of ULB staff working on the project, leading to an overall delay of about 9–10
months; (ii) the 2021 elections in the state, the resulting new government, flooding in Chennai in November
2021; (iii) internal government approvals taking much longer than anticipated, while clearances were also
required from multiple line departments for the water supply lines to pass through the railways; and (iv) changes
in design that resulted in cost escalations and required further approvals. Some water supply subprojects had to
change the siting of water storage structures because of protests from the public, inappropriate site
characteristics (such as soil strata), or the presence of railway lines, resulting in delays and cost
escalations. Loan savings were used to complete additional works (roads in ULBs and links in the Chennai
stormwater drains) during the extension. The government disbursed 90 percent of counterpart funds.

Overall, with a reasonable economic rate of return for the investments made under component 2, and the added
activities financed by loan savings completed during the extension, efficiency is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      30.00
 Appraisal                                                  15.50
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      30.00
 ICR Estimate                                               16.40
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objective is rated Substantial. The efficacy of the project to achieve objective 1 is rated
Substantial with moderate shortcomings because some significant output targets were not achieved. The
efficacy of the project to achieve the second objective is rated Substantial. Efficiency is rated Substantial
because of reasonable rates of return at closing. The overall outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


                                                                                                      Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN Sustainable Urban Development Project (P150395)



The following pose risks to development outcome:

      Risk from inadequate financial resources for Operations and Maintenance (O&M) of completed
       infrastructure assets. In this project, ULBs raised water tariffs to cover the O&M and debt servicing
       costs of their water supply systems. Public resistance delayed implementing tariff increases.
       Collection efficiency was suboptimal. To mitigate this risk in the future, ULBs initiated measures such
       as field staff conducting door-to-door campaigns to raise public awareness, increase effort at water
       tariff collections, and collect penalties for late payment. ULBs may consider signing service contracts
       with third parties for O&M of water supply systems with payments linked to meeting service
       standards. ULBs may develop an asset management system with an O&M implementation plan for
       non-revenue generating infrastructure assets.
      Risk from natural hazards and climate change. GIS mapping and the Real Time Flood Forecasting
       System (RTFFS) were introduced to assist ULBs to plan, reduce impact on completed infrastructure
       assets, maintain the reliability of urban services, and respond to disasters resulting from hazards
       brought by flooding, drought, and other environmental risks. Continued use of these systems, with
       commitment to periodic updates, would mitigate this risk.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project and the PDOs were aligned with the government’s national and state priorities. The state
  government committed a considerable amount of contributions. The participating ULBs demonstrated
  their commitment by identifying available government land for infrastructure. The equivalent of 30 percent
  of subproject costs were ready for procurement by the time of Bank approval as required by the national
  government. Implementation arrangements were adequate. The project used agencies that participated
  in earlier World Bank-financed projects and were familiar with World Bank policies and procedures. The
  Bank team designed the project informed by lessons from prior World Bank engagement in the sector in
  Tamil Nadu. These included (i) a state-level urban development agency may reach more ULBs using
  a ‘Municipal Fund’ to facilitate reforms and innovations; (ii) having bid documents for subprojects ready
  for procurement equivalent to 30 percent of project cost by the time of Board approval strengthens a
  readiness to implement; and (iii) sites ready and available for civil works once contracts
  were awarded reduces time and cost overruns. Experience in earlier TNUDF-issued municipal bonds,
  and the US municipal bonds / bond banks experience informed the credit enhancement sub-component
  design. The DLI mechanism of the urban governance component benefited from other Bank project
  experience, e.g., the Pakistan Punjab Cities Governance Improvement Project (PAD, paragraph 19).

  The World Bank task team included operational and technical specialists with experience in urban
  development projects in India. The task team conducted comprehensive institutional assessments of the
  ULBs on urban services, governance, and finance, which informed the technical designs. To improve
  ULBs’ capacity in O&M, Component 1 provided incentives to the Model Cities to prepare Multiyear
  Capital Investment Plans that would include an assessment of the O&M needs of various urban services
  and the identification and mobilization of funding sources. During subproject appraisal, TNUIFSL also
  supported ULBs in assessing the financial sustainability of water supply services and in setting the
  appropriate level of water tariff to meet O&M needs, and the recommended actions such as phased

                                                                                                  Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN Sustainable Urban Development Project (P150395)



  increase of tariffs and expected improvement in collection efficiencies were included as part of
  TNUISFL’s loan/grant conditions for ULBs. The PDO statement was realistic, and the project’s
  interventions supported its achievement. The RF was overall well designed.

  However, there were shortcomings in the risk assessment on procurement capacity, and technical
  capacity in GIS related activities. The broader regulatory environment on municipal finances could have
  been more closely examined prior to the inclusion of the credit enhancement subcomponent in the
  project. Overall, the assessment of Bank performance at entry is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team conducted 12 implementation support missions over the eight-year implementation
 period with technical missions in between. The task team leader and most team members were based in
 New Delhi and regularly interacted with country counterparts. Fiduciary, environmental, and social
 safeguards specialists participated in the missions and conducted additional just-in-time technical
 missions to address weaknesses. The World Bank team consisted of appropriate technical staff to support
 the project. Additional experts were mobilized as needed, including during the MTR in 2019. The Bank
 team used the restructurings to adjust targets and indicators brought by policy changes (e.g., the CERF
 sub-component), cost overruns, delayed procurement, or add activities to use US$32 million in loan
 savings to ensure that the objectives remained achievable. The added activities were considered because
 these did not require land acquisition, resettlement or carried environmental or social safeguards risk.
 Savings came from cancelling the CERF subcomponent, the Hosur sewerage subproject, and exchange
 rate gains. The Bank team helped the government to respond to the fiscal crisis due to the COVID-19
 pandemic.

 Overall, the Bank performance at supervision is rated Satisfactory.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization




                                                                                                     Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN Sustainable Urban Development Project (P150395)



a. M&E Design
 The Theory of Change showed clear causal links between project activities, outputs, and the expected
 outcomes. The PDOs were clearly specified and parsed in two. The intermediate results indicators were
 adequate to capture the contribution of the operation’s components and outputs to achieve PDO-level
 outcomes. These indicators were specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and time bound. Baselines
 and targets were available for all indicators although one outcome indicator was expressed as a value
 rather than a rate of increase. The M&E design and implementation arrangements were institutionally
 embedded in the various implementing entities. TNUIFSL was to develop a management information
 system (MIS) for monitoring physical and financial progress, and ESMF subproject compliance
 (Component 2, ICR, paragraph 60).



b. M&E Implementation
  TNUIFSL implemented the M&E system as designed. Each ULB, the DMA, and TNUIFSL had dedicated
  staff in charge of M&E to monitor and collect data on indicators. TNUIFSL/TNUDF reported on
  indicators in the results framework to assess the physical, procurement, and financial progress in each
  ULB and identify outstanding issues using the two MIS’ systems to integrate investment planning, project
  progress monitoring, contract management, withdrawal applications and payments, capital budgeting,
  and financial management. An independent verification agency (IVA) verified results on the DLIs of the
  Model Cities. TNUIFSL compiled and DMA verified information from ULBs and the IVA. TNUIFSL
  submitted quarterly reports to the World Bank. TNUIFSL, the DMA, and their regional offices
  conducted joint monthly on-site supervision regularly to the participating ULBs.

  The 2020 restructuring revised two outcome indicators - one increased its target, the other specified
  targets per Model City - and a new one added, moved up from output to outcome indicator. One sub-
  component was no longer implementable and was cancelled because of a change in government policy.
  The related output indicator was dropped. Other target values of output indicators were adjusted, and
  COVID-19 related output indicators were added at the 2021 restructuring.

  The beneficiary end-line survey was completed in March 2023. Beneficiaries were consulted during
  project design and implementation. Stakeholders helped identify sites for overhead and underground
  water supply tanks in ULBs where government lands were not available. Public
  consultations identified road stretches and inundated streets in need of improvement. Model Cities
  beneficiaries helped identify areas for urban design improvements financed by the grants received.
  Residents and shopkeepers along the Chennai storm water drain canals moved to new resettlement
  site. GCC reduced the width from the earlier 13 to 10 meters, to avoid existing structures and reduced the
  resettlement impacts from the originally anticipated 330 to 91 families (ICR, paragraph 58). However,
  shortcomings in indicators were not addressed. For example, indicators that would have informed
  regulatory readiness of the sub-component CERF (see Section 8, Bank Performance at Entry above).



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were communicated to various stakeholders, including TNUIFSL, the DMA, and the World
  Bank. M&E reports tracked progress, identified risks, delays in site clearance, and contract
  management. M&E data informed the midterm review and the three restructurings. M&E data provided
  evidence of the outcomes. M&E data served to inform activities that were not completed during this

                                                                                                 Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN Sustainable Urban Development Project (P150395)



  project period to be implemented in the follow-on project, Tamil Nadu Climate Resilient Urban
  Development Program (TNCRUDP, ICR, paragraph 35).

  Overall, the project M&E is rated Substantial. The M&E system as designed and implemented
  was sufficient to assess the achievement of the objectives. The links in the results chain were adequate,
  with moderate weaknesses in a few areas, e.g., outcome indicators (rate, as opposed to value) and
  targets of intermediate results indicators that could have been adjusted during restructuring, e.g., the
  target for GIS mapping could have been recalibrated during the restructurings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards: The project was classified as Environmental Assessment Category A (Full
   Assessment) (PAD, ICR, paragraph 64) and triggered two safeguard policies: Environmental Assessment
   (OP/BP 4.01) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). An Environmental and Social Management
   Framework (ESMF) was approved and disclosed in-country and in the World Bank InfoShop on March
   2015. In 2020, for the COVID-19 pandemic related restructuring, the ESMF was updated and redisclosed
   both in-country and on the World Bank’s external site in September 2022. According to the ICR, the project
   complied with environmental safeguards (ICR, paragraph 65). Safeguard documents, including
   Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and Environmental and Social Management Plans
   (ESMPs), were implemented as designed. Quarterly Progress Reports submitted to the World Bank
   included updates on environmental safeguards management. Independent annual E&S
   audits identified gaps and corresponding corrective measures in safeguards management. The
   project adopted COVID-19 pandemic protocols for works and activities under execution. These included
   sensitizing and training of project staff, contractors, and workers on appropriate measures in relation to the
   COVID-19 pandemic.

   Social Safeguard: The project triggered Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The project complied with
   the social safeguard (ICR, paragraph 66). The Chennai storm water drain subproject involved involuntary
   resettlement of 91 project-affected families (PAFs) in 2017. The project followed its Resettlement Policy
   Framework (RPF). The World Bank approved the comprehensive Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). The
   Tamil Nadu Housing and Urban Development Board (TNHUDB) developed two resettlement sites. The
   GCC resettled the 91 PAFs in those sites. The GCC managed the resettlement process with regular
   consultations with the PAFs and integrate d them with the host communities. However, government
   policy called for title deeds of PAF tenements to be provided after five years of resettlement. With the help
   of the government, GCC, TNHUDB, TNUIFSL, and the World Bank, nine of the ten PAFs resettled in the
   Perumbakkam resettlement site received their title deeds by September 2022. In the Gudapakkam
   resettlement site, 76 of the 81 PAFs received title deeds by June 2023. TNHUDB made available title deeds
   for the remaining PAFs to sign but the legal heirs of the remaining five families have not yet done so
   because of deaths in these families. The World Bank continues to monitor this matter until it is resolved.
   The ULBs and TNUIFSL managed temporary adverse livelihood or economic impacts using the ESMF and
   RPF, and subproject specific ESIAs and ESMPs. The ESMPs were implemented to ensure timely action

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    TN Sustainable Urban Development Project (P150395)



  and compensation for two severe incidents. All incidents were investigated in line with World Bank
  procedures and registered in the Fatality Tracking System of the World Bank. Families of the victims
  received prompt remedial actions and compensations. All incidents were closed except one that occurred in
  January 2023. The contractor offered compensation to the victim’s family, but they sought judicial resolution
  to determine the compensation amount. This process is underway following procedures (ICR, paragraph
  68).

  Each ULB established a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) as planned. PAFs accessed GRM through
  multiple channels including phones, websites, and ULB offices. Under the Chennai storm water drain
  subproject, petitions received were resolved by October 2016. Additional complaints were received in March
  2018 regarding compensation for partially affected structures. These were subsequently settled.
  Compensation was paid. ULBs reported complaints related to the quality of construction and repairs of
  streets. These were made directly to contractors and resolved by them (ICR, paragraph 67). The
  government reported that they updated and will continue to use the ESMF to meet the safeguard
  requirements of other externally financed projects.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management. The project complied with World Bank financial management policies (ICR,
  paragraph 70). ULBs kept up-to-date accounting records, submitted unaudited interim financial and audit
  reports with unqualified (clean) opinions on time before the COVID-19 pandemic. During the last two years
  of implementation, the ULBs experienced some delays in submitting their completed audit reports. In the
  first two years of implementation, administrative sanctions caused delays in releasing funds because the
  DMA lacked qualified staff to oversee financial management of the project. The project relied on the staff of
  another ongoing Bank-financed project, the Tamil Nadu Urban Infrastructure Financial Services Limited
  (TNUIFSL), to manage financial management of the project on a part-time basis.

  Procurement. Most transactions complied with the World Bank procurement policies and procedures
  (ICR, paragraph 69). The project awarded most of the urban investment component contracts early in the
  project. TNUIFSL managed consultancies efficiently. The COVID-19 pandemic disrupted implementation
  and caused delays. Larger national/international construction firms did not participate in the investment
  packages, indicating barriers to entry. Procurement post reviews showed red flags. TNUIFSL and other
  government agencies lacked effective procurement supervision. The risk mitigation measure use of E-
  procurement was delayed. Since most of the TA component contracts were awarded outside of the World
  Bank’s Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) tool the World Bank team could not
  conduct post procurement review. No outstanding procurement issues were reported.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---


                                                                                                  Page 19 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TN Sustainable Urban Development Project (P150395)



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory              .

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following five lessons emerged from the operation (ICR, paragraph 77-81):

      Political commitment, policy reform, and provision of incentives are useful to
       improve the financial sustainability of water services. In this project, water tariff in Tamil
       Nadu was low and not based on consumption. Data from the Supervisory Control and Data
       Acquisition System (SCADA) in Namakkal showed that water consumption level was similar
       between households covered by the 24/7 pilot and households receiving intermittent supply.
       ULBs need incentives to approve bylaws for volumetric billings to raise tariffs and increase
       collection. Metering could be piloted in selected areas where high levels of services and
       high-water consumption are expected. Proper systems could be in place to monitor
       consumers’ usage and address complaints. Data can then be generated to inform ULBs’
       decision-making and counter public misconception on volumetric billing.
      Information, education, and communication activities instill behavioral changes
       to sustain desired levels of services. In this project, residents were encouraged to
       participate in O&M planning of municipal assets. However, there was no comprehensive
       communication strategy for the duration of the project. This could have been used to engage
       local communities, raise awareness, and enhance ownership of project investments.
       Consumers could be provided a reliable schedule of water supply and be educated on
       benefits of volumetric billing to encourage reducing wasting water. Overall, citizen
       participation could be further explored, including mechanisms for people to contribute in
       terms of time and labor.
      The municipal development fund model may facilitate access to private market
       resources. In this project, TNUDF provided loans and grants of over US$3.2 billion in urban
       investments. ULBs registered 100 percent loan repayments. Future projects can support
       TNUDF to resume its pooled municipal bond program to increase ULBs’ access to financial
       markets, with the funds raised giving priority to green projects such as sustainable water
       management, climate change adaptation, and energy efficiency.
      Results-based performance grants help promote urban governance reform in ULBs. In
       this project, the pilot Model Cities component demonstrated the effectiveness of linking fund
       allocation to support improved urban governance and citizen engagement, strengthening
       staffing and technical expertise, mobilization of own resources, and enhancing accountability
       in delivering services to city residents.


                                                                                                  Page 20 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       TN Sustainable Urban Development Project (P150395)



        Institutional strengthening and capacity building of ULBs require sustained support.
         ULBs have benefited from the various TA, training, and capacity support activities under the
         project. However, dedicated funding, staffing, and collaboration with training institutions are
         required to continue developing and delivering structured capacity building programs to
         strengthen institutional capacities of ULBs.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR followed the guidelines and provided a detailed overview of the project. The theory of change helped
to justify the reported ratings. Various parts of the report were mutually reinforcing and the ratings consistent.
The report was results oriented, highlighting, for example, the measures adopted to ensure that the objectives
remained achievable with the dropping of sub-components like CERF and the Hosur sewerage subproject. The
report was candid, acknowledging shortcomings in risk assessments related to capacity of implementing
agencies to undertake GIS related activities and the resulting unmet targets. Lessons were based on the
project experience. The narrative and available evidence supported the ratings. The report is aligned to the
project development objectives presenting data to support the ratings. The analysis of efficacy to achieve the
first objective had minor shortcomings in the completeness of indicators that addressed the development
problems of ULBs.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 21 of 21
