     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Vietnam Road Asset Management Project (P123961)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023795

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P123961                                   Vietnam Road Asset Management Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Viet Nam                                  Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53310,TF-15733                        31-Dec-2020                                        206,463,512.65

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 12-Dec-2013                               31-Dec-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         250,000,000.00                                     1,584,904.25

 Revised Commitment                          230,818,197.58                                     1,337,643.85

 Actual                                      206,463,512.65                                     1,032,819.23




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Andrew Osei Asibey        Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The PDO of the Vietnam Road Asset Improvement Project (VRAMP) was to "improve the efficiency and
   sustainability of the road asset management and maintenance practices performed by the Ministry of
   Transport on national roads in Vietnam” (PAD p.4 and the Financing Agreement p.5).

   The PDO statements in the PAD and the Financing Agreement are identical.



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Vietnam Road Asset Management Project (P123961)



   The ICRR will treat the PDO as one sole objective since efficiency, sustainability, road asset management,
   and maintenance as practices were closely intertwined in this project, and most of the project’s outputs and
   outcomes contribute to the four sub-objectives simultaneously.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had four components:

   Component 1: Road Asset Management System (RAMS) Development (Approval: US$10 million,
   Actual cost: US$7.3 million)
   This component was to finance the development and implementation of a comprehensive Road Asset
   Management System (RAMS). Activities included:

         Establishment of the road asset management framework (RAMF) which included the Road Asset
          Management System (RAMS) and road database framework.
         Data collection for the whole network of national highways to enable planning and financing.

   Component 2: Road Asset Preservation (Approval:US$156.6 million, Actual cost: US$108.14 million)
   This component was to support funding of traditional road asset maintenance and performance-based
   contracts (PBC) to demonstrate more efficient maintenance of selected highways as well as financing
   technical assistance for establishing PBC legal framework; PBC scale up for preservation and periodic
   maintenance with traditional methods; a comparison study; supervision of maintenance and improvement
   works contracts; and finance of the purchase of vehicles.

   Component 3: Road Asset Improvement (Approval: US$133.4 million, Actual cost: US$143.63 million)
   This component was to improve selected activities such as high priority roads; upgrading of bridges;
   supervision of improvement works; and ensuring technical, internal, and financial audits.

   Component 4: Institutional Strengthening Program (Approval: US$1.7 million, Actual Cost: US$1.04)
   This component was to finance targeted activities to develop the capacity of Vietnam's Road agencies to
   undertake better planning, budgeting, constructing, and monitoring of assets. The main activities covered
   improvement in human resource management within the Department of Roads of Vietnam (DRVN);
   improvement in management, transparency, and monitoring of the Road Management Fund (RMF), and
   development of standard drawings for infrastructure facilities.

   Restructuring:
   The project was restructured and scaled up. However, the components and subcomponents were not


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Vietnam Road Asset Management Project (P123961)



   formally altered nor revised during the restructuring. The scaled-up activities were performed under
   Component 2: Road Asset Preservation, and Component 3: Road Asset Improvement.

   The restructuring came as a result of savings of about USD 55.07 million, and approximately USD 31.89
   million was earmarked to carry out additional activities. Some target values in the Results Framework were
   revised upwards to reflect changes in the intermediate results due the additional activities introduced.

   For example, according to the Project Restructuring Paper (Report No: RES43279, 2013), for the PDC
   maintenance implemented under the project, the target value increased from 170 km to 234 km; for km of
   roads maintained under the project with traditional input method the target value increased from 161 km to
   168 km; and for km of roads improved under the project the target value increased from 56 km to 79 km.
   The additional activities were expected to contribute to improved economic benefits for the people in the
   project areas while creating more employment opportunities in the construction industry in the selected
   regions.

   Since the restructuring mostly entailed a scale-up of the intervention and target values were increased, a
   split rating is not necessary.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost
   The project cost at appraisal was US$251 million, and the actual project cost was US$260.11 million.

   Project Financing
   The project was financed by IDA and co-financed by the Australian Agency for International Development
   (AUSAID) with an amount of AU$1.7 million.

   Borrower Contribution
   The borrower contribution was US$50 million at appraisal, restructuring and closing.

   Dates
   The project was approved on January 14, 2014, became effective on April 1, 2014, and scheduled to close
   on December 31, 2020. The project was restructured on December 28, 2020. The closing date of the
   project was extended by 24 months from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2022 to facilitate the
   implementation of the additional activities following the formal restructuring of the project.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context
At the time of the initiation of the Vietnam Road Asset Management Project (VRAMP), Vietnam was
experiencing rapid economic growth. The annual average real domestic growth product (GDP) was 7.4
percent. By 2014, the rapid economic growth enabled the country to lift 40 million Vietnamese out of
poverty. It was estimated that between 1993 and 2014, the proportion of people living in poverty had

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Vietnam Road Asset Management Project (P123961)



declined from 60 percent to 14 percent. This remarkable drop in the level of poverty was attributed to rapid
investment in infrastructure, which was estimated at between 9-10 percent of GDP.

The road transport network represented almost half of the infrastructure investment. At the time of the
project appraisal, Vietnam had built 210,000km of national road network. Of this total, 17,199km comprised
national highways, and 19,450km consisted of provincial roads. Additionally, 131,951km or 63 percent of
the total road network consisted of rural roads. Despite the rapid growth in the road network, 30 percent of
the road network was classified as poor (Project Appraisal Document (PAD): Vietnam Road Asset
Management Project (P123961), p.2 and ICR September 2023, p.5). Regular road maintenance was
necessitated by the recognition that approximately 30 percent of the national road network did not meet
international standards and had been classified as “poor or very poor”. It was noted during project appraisal
that only 50 percent of the road network was paved. The continuous growth of the Vietnamese economy
was contingent upon maintaining the road infrastructure.

Alignment with Government strategy
To enhance its capacity to maintain and expand the national road network, the Government of Vietnam
developed a plan to expand revenue streams for road maintenance by establishing a Road Maintenance
Fund (RMF) and requested World Bank support for the financing of an enhanced Road Asset Management
System (RAMS), which was intended to facilitate regular maintenance and upgrade key roads of strategic
importance (PAD, p.2 and ICR p.6).

The Vietnam Road Asset Management Project (VRAMP) was designed to equip the Ministry of Transport
(MoT) and the Directorate for Roads of Vietnam (DRVN), the main implementing entity with support from
the Project Management Unit-3 (PMU-3), to apply state-of-the-art technology to maintain the extensive
national, provincial, and rural road network. The project objective of providing regular maintenance of the
extensive road network aligned with the Government sectoral strategy. The implementation of activities
and the achievement of related outputs and their application, such as the replenishment of the RMF through
IDA and the establishment of the PBC, supported the GoV’s policy of ensuring periodic maintenance of the
national road network.

Alignment with World Bank strategy
At the time of appraisal, the PDO was consistent with the FY12-FY16 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)
which sought to ‘enhance Vietnam’s competitiveness in the regional and global economy, increase
development sustainability, and broaden access to economic and social opportunity’ (PAD, p.4)
Additionally, the VRAMP was expected to contribute to (a) enhancing competitiveness by promoting a
sustainable approach to road asset management, the advancement of performance-based maintenance
approach that incorporated private sector contracts in road maintenance works, improving road safety
through sustained road maintenance, as well as by reducing travel time, variability of travel time, and
vehicle operating costs through road asset improvements and preservation; (b) increasing fiscal
sustainability by strengthening the strategic planning of the road maintenance fund; and (c) expanding
opportunity by improving infrastructure quality in under-served areas and by building institutional capacity to
promote and manage private participation in road asset management.

The PDO was also well aligned with the World Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy at closure (CPS
FY2018-2022), and specifically with Objective 2 of Focus Area 1, which aimed at ‘promoting private sector
and agribusiness development’ as well as Focus Area 3, which sought to ‘enhance trade competitiveness
and multi-modal transport connectivity and logistics services in Vietnam’.



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 13
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Vietnam Road Asset Management Project (P123961)



               Previous Bank Experience
               Based on the World Bank’s long-standing engagement with the Government of Vietnam (GoV), the GoV
               asked the World Bank for assistance to finance the upgrading of the Road Asset Management System
               (RAMS) to improve the planning of regular maintenance and upgrading of strategically chosen corridors of
               the National Highway (NH) network. The Vietnam Road Asset Management Project (VRAMP) was built on
               lessons learned from the previous World Bank-financed Road Network Improvement Project (RNIP)
               P059663 (US$ 225.26 million), which supported an efficient transport network and preservation of existing
               assets.

               Level of the PDO
               While there is clear alignment between the project’s development objectives and the country- and WB
               strategies, a minor shortcoming here is the lack of clarity in the PDO formulation around what outcomes
               would be achieved through improving the efficiency and sustainability of the road asset management and
               maintenance practices; i.e., in what ways this was expected to improve people’s lives. Focusing on
               “improved efficiency” and “improved sustainability” alone does not help in understanding what development
               results were expected as a consequence of the project. Impact on people’s lives (such as for decreased
               travel time or a decrease in accidents) would have been useful to track.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve efficiency and sustainability of road asset management and maintenance practices

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change:
                             No explicit Theory of Change was written out at appraisal, as that was not a requirement at the time. The ICR
                             reconstructed the Theory of Change. Activities including designing a software database to accommodate
                             changes; dialogue with and technical assistance to the government to develop legal framework for
                             performance based contracts (PBC); rehabilitation of priority national highways using performance based
                             contracts; development and implementation of road maintenance and bridge improvement plans; and
                             capacity building of the road agencies (such as for road asset management, planning, procurement of
                             performance-based contracts, etc.) were expected to lead to outputs such as a database established and
                             RAMS (Road Asset Management System) operationalized; a strengthened PBC legal framework established,
                             including output-based monitoring; established a PBC toolkit for maintenance planning; roads rehabilitated
                             using performance-based contracts; targeted roads and bridges improved; planning and revenue collection
                             capacity improved and targeted staff trained satisfactorily. These outputs were, in turn, expected to lead to
                             the following outcomes: increased use of the database for planning and prioritization, improved financing for
                             road maintenance, improved capacity for road asset management and supervision, and increased capacity to

                                                                                                                             Page 5 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Vietnam Road Asset Management Project (P123961)



manage road infrastructure. These outcomes were expected to lead to the achievement of the project
development objective of improved efficiency and sustainability of road asset management and road
maintenance practices in Vietnam. This objective was expected to contribute to the long-term goal of
improved connectivity for economic activities.

The Theory of Change is logical and convincing. Critical assumptions included effective coordination and
strong support of the implementing agency for PBCs, as well as government support and funding for RAMS.

Outputs
The project achieved the following outputs:

      234 kilometers of roads maintained through performance-based contracts (PBC) directly implemented
         under the project, exceeding the target of 170 kilometers.
      168 kilometers of roads maintained directly under the project with traditional input method, exceeding
       the target of 161 kilometers.
      80.53 kilometers of road improved under the project, exceeding both the original target of 56
       kilometers and the revised target of 79.9 kilometers.
      Surveys were completed, and the road surface condition of 25,200 km of national highways was
       updated in the road management system, exceeding the target of 17,000.

Outcomes
The project achieved the following outcomes:

      Annual and mid-term 3 year-plans for priority and implementation of national road network
         maintenance were generated by RAMS as targeted. Target achieved.
        Annual, mid-term, and long-term maintenance strategies of 10 years were generated by RAMS as
         targeted. Target achieved.
        The two points above also demonstrate that the RAMS system has been verified, handed over, and
         put into use. The Department for Roads of Vietnam has issued regulations on the management,
         operation, and use of the RAMS system.
        For the improved financing of road maintenance measured by the increased maintenance financing
         covered by the Road Maintenance Fund (RMF), the project achieved an increase of 127 percent,
         exceeding the target of 100 percent (and compared to a baseline of 70 percent).
        25,200 km of national roads were maintained through the operational PBC (performance based
         contracts) program, exceeding the target of 17,000.
        Improved maintenance forecast and identification of repairs needed, as targeted.

The project inputs and activities, such as establishing a database for a roads management system and a
performance-based contracts system coupled with training of relevant staff to operate the systems,
contributed to improved maintenance of roads as well as enhancing the efficiency of the Department of
Roads in planning and maintenance of the road network. The introduction of the Performance Based Contract
(PBC) system has contributed to cost savings and efficiency gains. Sustainability was enhanced through
improved financing of road maintenance, as well as reduced future maintenance costs because the existing
roads were to be made more resilient to storms and severe rain. Efficacy is thus rated Substantial.




                                                                                                    Page 6 of 13
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Vietnam Road Asset Management Project (P123961)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial, as the sole objective was substantially achieved.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Efficiency
   An economic analysis was conducted on the viability of the project during preparation and appraisal, which was
   outlined in the final project paper (PAD, p.11). The economic analysis was derived from the World Bank ‘s
   Development and Management Model (HDM-4) to cover civil works of the PBC scale-up, periodic maintenance,
   and road asset improvement program. The model further focused on potential reduction in road costs (ICR,
   p.11). The economic analysis projected a 20 % Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and a Net Present Value of
   US$237 million. Additionally, it was estimated that road maintenance had an ERR higher than 12 percent.

   Upon completion, an updated economic analysis of the project was done, which confirmed the economic viability
   of the project. The updated NPV of 216.83 million USD and the IRR of 21.82 percent of the project were not only
   greater than the required thresholds of 0 (for NPV) and 10 percent for IRR, but were of greater benefit than
   expected in the PAD, namely 127 million USD for NPV and 20 percent for IRR.

   Administrative Efficiency
   Administrative efficiency was generally good, with sound implementation arrangements, adequately staffed
   Provincial People’s Committees, and low staff turnover.

   There were, however, initial delays in the provision of government counterpart funding, which affected the
   procurement of civil works and acquisition of land. The use of cost savings for the additional works was
   subjected to delays due to lengthy and rigid government processes and procedures. The project was extended
   and completed 24 months later than the original closing date.

   Given that the EIRR at completion was above the EIRR at appraisal and there were minor shortcomings in
   administrative efficiency, the overall efficiency is rated as substantial.


   Efficiency Rating
          Substantial

                                                                                                                              Page 7 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Vietnam Road Asset Management Project (P123961)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance, Efficacy and Efficiency are all rated Substantial, and this gives an overall Outcome rating of
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to Development Outcome can be summarized as follows:

Technical Risk: The technical risk is considered to be low, as the establishment, roll-out, and use of the
Road Asset Management System (RAMS) and the Road Asset Management Framework (RAMF) provide the
Department of Roads (DRVN) with access to reliable databases to guide and enhance government decisions
about the development and maintenance of the national road network. The RAMS and the RAMF have been
institutionalized and are serving as a national backbone that facilitates efficiency in the management of the
road sector.

Financial Risk: The financial risk is considered to be low, as the introduction of Performance Based
Contract (PBC) system has contributed to cost savings and efficiency gains that enabled the government to
use additional funds generated to support road development and maintenance. It is anticipated that the PBC
will be sustained as the GoV continues to invest in road infrastructure.

Political Risk: The political risk is also considered to be low, as the Government has demonstrated
ownership both in terms of implementation and financial contribution to the intervention. It is likely that the
Government will continue to finance road infrastructure development to propel the economic growth and
development of the country.




                                                                                                        Page 8 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Vietnam Road Asset Management Project (P123961)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The design of the Road Assessment Management Project was derived from lessons drawn from a
  previous World Bank funded Road Network Improvement Project (RNIP). The project design was logical
  as it focused on addressing persistent problems encountered in road maintenance/rehabilitation due to
  inadequate funding and lack of private sector participation in road maintenance works.

  The project development objective was relevant to the context and the project design had clearly
  structured and defined components, with clear implementation arrangements. Innovative tools such as
  the Roads Asset Management System (RAMS) and the Performance Based Contracts (PBC) were
  introduced to the design. The PBCs enabled private sector participation of road rehabilitation at reduced
  costs. The three project components were appropriate as they were designed to remove a key bottleneck
  in the development of the road infrastructure, namely the use of traditional approach to road maintenance
  and rehabilitation which before the intervention had resulted in poor quality road network.

  Environmental and safeguard measures were incorporated appropriately into the design. The project
  team paid attention to social safeguard issues such as settlement activities through preparation of
  Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team provided regular support to the Department for Roads of Viet Nam (DRVN) and the
 Project Management Unit 3 (PMU-3) through 17 implementation support missions and virtual meetings
 (conducted approximately twice per year) throughout the implementation of the project. The World Bank
 team played a proactive role throughout the implementation of the project by supporting the Ministry of
 Transport, DRVN and the PMU-3 to resolve any issues that emerged. The missions and frequent
 consultations provided opportunities to learn about emerging challenges and adoption of mitigating
 measures. A mid-term review (MTR) was conducted in January 2017.

 The MTR findings informed project restructuring in December 2020, which resulted in a 24-months’
 extension of project completion from December 2020 to December 2022. It was noted in the ICR that the
 restructuring of the project generated some savings which were ploughed back to improve the national
 road network. The readiness of the Bank to accept the restructuring of the project enabled the GoV to use
 the excess funds accrued from exchange rate gains to expand the road rehabilitation and maintenance
 works. As shown under the analysis of efficacy, the use of the additional funds contributed to exceeding
 the original targets, which has benefited the local population in the implementing areas. The World Bank
 team ensured that relevant stakeholders were adequately informed, and project-affected households
 (PAHs) were adequately compensated. The Bank team also addressed resettlement related risks and
 impacts by ensuring that the project prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), which was made


                                                                                                 Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Vietnam Road Asset Management Project (P123961)



 available to the public through the World Bank website on Respective Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)
 for easy access.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project development objective was relevant to the context, and the M&E design was logical, with
 clearly defined outputs and outcomes. The project’s results framework contained appropriately identified
 indicators that enabled systematic tracking and measurement of results throughout the project
 implementation period.

 Overall, the results framework was appropriately tailored to facilitate tracking and measurement of the key
 performance indicators that were reflected in semi-annual and annual progress reports, which
 report towards the achievement of the PDO.



b. M&E Implementation
  A dedicated M&E unit in the Department of Roads (DRVN) together with the PMU-3, the Supervision
  consultant and designated staff in the provinces contributed to ensuring data availability and collection at
  all levels of implementation. The Project procured modern road surface condition data collection devices
  which were compatible with the Pavement Management System and supported DRVN with data
  collection and processing of images obtained from CCTV cameras, surface crack detection using the
  international roughness index (IRI), road surface settlement, surveys, and geographic coordinates.

  The PMU-3’s previous experience with World Bank requirements enabled good performance in reporting
  and analysis, as well as monitoring and measuring PDO indicators. They regularly ordered and undertook
  monitoring, evaluation, and periodic reporting of performance, process, and compliance monitoring;
  operations reviews; beneficiary feedback surveys; risk management and assurance studies, third-party
  impact evaluations; and others. The project performed well, and two semi-annual reports were submitted
  yearly in a timely manner during the implementation period, and these were of good quality, as supported
  by an independent monitoring consultant.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data for the project were regularly used to monitor progress. Monitoring of progress towards
  project objectives, evaluating performance, and informing project management was done by the PMU3,

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Vietnam Road Asset Management Project (P123961)



  with guidance from the World Bank. The project restructuring and the closing date extension were based
  on inputs from the M&E system.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B, which triggered safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01 Environmental
   Assessment, OP/BP4.04 Natural Habitats, and OP/BP 4.12 Involuntarily Resettlement. OP/BP4.01
   necessitated a full Environmental Assessment (EA) whose findings provided guidance on compliance to
   World Bank policies aimed at ensuring that the interventions of the project did not adversely contribute to
   environmental degradation and livelihoods of communities in the project implementation areas. OP/BP 4.04
   Natural Habitats required adherence to Bank policies and aimed at protecting fauna and indigenous people
   living in adjacent communities. OP/BP 4.12 focused on the development of Involuntary Resettlement plans
   to ensure that communities that were affected by the road maintenance and rehabilitation works were either
   adequately compensated or resettled in ways that protected their livelihoods. OP/BP 4.10 focused on
   Indigenous People, which ensured that Indigenous communities who were directly affected by the road
   rehabilitation and maintenance works were given adequate protection. Overall, according to the ICR, the
   project complied with the environmental safeguard policies, and safeguards compliance during project
   implementation was rated Satisfactory or Moderately Satisfactory (ICR p.24).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management
   While the project’s financial management system was generally adequate, there were some
   inconsistencies in relation to the slow release of counterpart funds for land acquisition, but it did not
   undermine the implementation of the project. While waiting for the government to release funds, IDA funds
   were used to carry out activities with fewer encumbrances. There were no major issues in the external
   audit reports as the project complied with most of the audit recommendations to the satisfaction of the
   World Bank. Financial monitoring reports were regularly released. No qualified opinions were observed,
   and any audit observations were promptly resolved.

   Procurement
   Procurement performance was considered satisfactory throughout project implementation. Whilst some
   delays were encountered such as the procurement of contracts for data collection for the road asset
   management system, there was a total of 48 Bank financed goods, works, non-consulting and consulting
   contracts, which included project cost savings under the project (ICR p.25). The rate of disbursement of
   project funds was considered good throughout the implementation of the project.




                                                                                                Page 11 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Vietnam Road Asset Management Project (P123961)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons were derived from the ICR with some modifications to the language by IEG:

    1. Technical innovations may enhance implementing entities’ institutional capacity to
       perform beyond their traditional roles and administrative remit. The decision to acquire
       the Road Asset Management System/Road Asset Management Framework strengthened the
       institutional capacity of the Ministry of Transport and the Department for Roads Viet Nam,
       which made use of reliable data that guided them to use data to manage the Vietnam Road
       network effectively and efficiently at the national, provincial and district levels.
    2. Public and private sector partnerships can be effectively utilized to overcome public
       sector inertia and institutional lethargy. By introducing performance-based contracts
       (PBC), the project empowered the private sector to participate in the road maintenance
       scheme of the Government of Vietnam. This invariably brought efficiency gains that resulted
       in better road maintenance, which would go a long way in improving the safety of road users.
       PBCs can ensure the successful implementation and sustainability of road maintenance.
    3. If careful analysis and planning precedes the implementation of new activities in a well
       performing project, the additional activities may have greater potential for success. In
       the context of this project, the additional activities were ambitious, considering the capacity of
       the implementing agency, the financial constraints of the PPC, and the time left for
       implementation without extension. When discussing additional activities, in-depth
       assessment, selectivity, clearly defined activities with timeline and risk mitigation measures
       were factored in to provide a clear view of what would be possible to accomplish prior to
       project closing.



13. Assessment Recommended?

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Vietnam Road Asset Management Project (P123961)




  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well written, clear and succinct. It is sufficiently results oriented and provides good evidence of the
claims of achievements and it is candid with regard to both positive and negative outcomes. The evidence
presented is appropriately referenced. The quality of analysis is good with clear links of evidence to the
findings.

The report is internally consistent and there is a logical linking and integration of the various parts of he report.
It is consistent with the guidelines. The report is concise and there is sufficient clarity in the report’s messaging.
The ICR quality is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                        Page 13 of 13
