     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Mining and Gas TA Project (P129847)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023773

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P129847                                    Mozambique Mining and Gas TA Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Mozambique                                 Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-51990,IDA-D2390,TF-16113,TF-           31-May-2020                                          79,560,076.50
 A8583

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Mar-2013                                31-Dec-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            50,000,000.00                                     9,424,036.90

 Revised Commitment                             84,526,499.58                                     9,418,199.98

 Actual                                         79,560,076.50                                     8,436,705.92




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Kishore Laxmikant           Peter Nigel Freeman          Ramachandra Jammi               IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Nadkarni




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was "to strengthen the capacity and governance systems of key
   institutions to manage the mining and hydrocarbon sectors in Mozambique" (Financing Agreement Schedule
   1 dated October 21,2016 and Project Appraisal Document para. 28 dated March 1, 2013).

   The PDO remained unchanged during project implementation. During restructurings, changes were made to
   some of the PDO indicators to increase clarity in the definitions and the original targets were increased under

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Mining and Gas TA Project (P129847)



   an Additional Financing approved in 2017. The overall ambition of the Project increased under the Additional
   Financing.

   For the ICRR, the PDO is parsed as follows:

   Objective 1: To strengthen the capacity and governance systems of key institutions to manage the mining
   sector in Mozambique.

   Objective 2: To strengthen the capacity and governance systems of key institutions to manage the
   hydrocarbons sector in Mozambique.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  01-Nov-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   (Reference PAD paras. 29 to 36 and ICR paras. 12 to 18).

   The project components at appraisal are indicated below. Changes made during implementation are
   discussed under Restructurings.

   Component A: Mining Governance Capacity Building and Reform: (estimated cost appraisal US$17.65
   million; revised cost after Additional Financing US$20.40 million; actual cost at completion
   US$18.28 million). This component was to consist of the following seven subcomponents: A.1: Mining
   cadaster upgrading; (ii) A.2: Mining assets evaluation and tendering; (iii) A.3: Improving the capacity of the
   Government of Mozambique (GoM) to manage artisanal and small-scale mining; A.4: Capacity building of
   technical departments of the Ministry of Mineral Resources and Energy (MIREME); A.5: Geodata
   acquisition, interpretation, and promotion; A.6: Reinforcing state participation in mining concessions; and
   A.7: Transaction advisory services for large-scale mining operations and related infrastructure.

   Component B: Natural Gas Capacity Building and Governance Reform: (estimated cost at appraisal
   US$11.05 million; revised cost after Additional Financing US$30.62 million; actual cost at completion
   US$23.50 million). This component was to consist of the following four subcomponents: B.1: Strengthening
   MIREME's capacity to support governance reforms; B.2: Capacity building and governance reform support
   for the National Institute of Petroleum (INP); B.3: Capacity building and technical support for the National
   Hydrocarbon Company (ENH); and B.4 Transaction advisory services for negotiating gas operations and
   related infrastructure.


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Mozambique Mining and Gas TA Project (P129847)



  Component C: Cross-cutting Mining/ Natural Gas Capacity Building and Reforms: (estimated cost at
  appraisal US$9.95 million; revised cost after Additional Financing US$19.90 million; actual cost at
  completion US$23.25 million). This component was to consist of the following seven subcomponents: C.1:
  Legal and regulatory framework for mining and hydrocarbons; C.2: Support to the General Inspectorate for
  health and safety and regulatory enforcement; C.3: Support to the National Directorate of Planning and
  Development under MIREME; C.4: Strengthening and establishment of staff positions, capacity and
  infrastructure in MIREME and its agencies; C.5: Revenue generation and management; C.6: Enhancing
  environmental and social management in the mining and natural gas industries; and C.7: Support for
  implementation of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) and capacity building in civil
  society organizations.

  Component D: Cross-Sectoral Reforms: (estimated cost at appraisal US$0.80 million; revised cost after
  Additional Financing US$3.75 million; actual cost at completion US$4.97 million). This component was to
  consist of the following three subcomponents: D.1: Strengthening the recipient's Cross Sector Platform; D.2:
  Strengthening upstream and downstream linkages in mining and gas production; and D.3: Framework for oil
  spill preparedness and response capacity.

  Component E: Project Management and Coordination: (estimated cost at appraisal US$4.90 million;
  revised cost after Additional Financing US$8.99 million; actual cost at completion US$9.16 million). This
  component was to support MIREME in managing and coordinating the Project and building its capacity for
  procurement, financial management, safeguards, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) through provision of
  technical advisory services, training, supporting equipment, and coverage of operating costs.

  Project Preparation Facility (PPF): (estimated budget US$3 million; actual provision US$0.60 million). The
  Project included a Project Preparation Advance (PPA) to set up the Project Management Unit (PMU) and
  provide it with the necessary equipment.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: At appraisal, the total project cost was estimated at US$58.15 million. At the Additional
  Financing in 2017, the estimated cost was increased to US$92.67 million; the actual cost at completion was
  US$88.71 million. (based on ICR Data Sheet). The difference between the estimated and actual costs was
  mainly due to exchange rate changes.

  Financing: At appraisal, the Project was financed by an IDA credit of US$50 million. At the Additional
  Financing in 2017, the IDA financing was increased to US$86.40 million. At completion, the actual amount
  disbursed was US$79.56 million. (based on ICR Data Sheet).

  Co-Financing: At appraisal, the United Kingdom Department for International Development (DFID) was to
  provide grant financing of US$8.15 million. Complementary to the Additional Financing in 2017, DFID
  provided an additional grant of US$1 million. At completion, the allocated amounts had been contributed in
  full.

  Dates: The Project was approved on March 28, 2013. The planned effectiveness date was July 1, 2013; the
  Project became effective on August 22, 2013. The planned closing date was May 31, 2020. The actual




                                                                                                 Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Mining and Gas TA Project (P129847)



   closing date was December 31, 2022. The extension of the closing date was to allow for completion of
   activities added under the Additional Financing and those delayed due to the COVID pandemic.

   Mid-Term Review (MTR): An MTR was carried out in August 2016. The findings of the MTR informed the
   restructuring, including the Additional Financing, in November 2017.

   Restructurings: The Project underwent three restructurings as follows:

   First Restructuring: (November 2017, disbursed amount US$32.39 million). This was a Level 1
   restructuring including Additional Financing in the amount of US$28 million. The Additional Financing was to
   provide funding for scaling up some of the activities and to compensate for the effects of exchange rate
   losses between the US dollar and the SDR (Special Drawing Rights). The closing date was extended from
   May 31,2020 to December 31,2021 to allow for completion of the expanded activities.

   Second Restructuring: (May 24, 2021, disbursed amount US$62.59 million). This was a Level 2
   restructuring under which some changes were made to the Results Framework to provide greater clarity in
   definitions and the closing date was extended by one year to December 31,2022 to allow completion of
   activities impacted by the COVID pandemic.

   Third Restructuring: (April 29, 2023, disbursed amount US$79.36 million): This was a Level 2 restructuring
   to allow reallocation between disbursement categories to enable a fuller utilization of the available funds.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
(Reference PAD paras. 1 to 16 and ICR paras. 1 to 8).

Country and Sector Context: At the time of appraisal in 2013, Mozambique's abundant natural resources
presented a transformative opportunity to promote inclusive and resilient development. The extractives
sector in Mozambique accounted for about 5 percent of the country's Gross Domestic Product (GDP),
primarily from natural gas production. Mozambique had been successful in attracting foreign investment in
several extractives industry megaprojects, mainly in mining (aluminum, coal and mineral sands) and natural
gas production. However, while these investments did result in some benefits to communities in the vicinity
of the projects, they did not translate overall into significant poverty reduction. The absence of adequate
systems to collect, manage, and allocate taxes and royalties was a major impediment. To address these
issues, the Government of Mozambique (GoM) implemented major reforms in 2006 and 2007, including
adoption of a Mining Law and new fiscal laws for the mining and petroleum sectors. The GoM's strategy
was to integrate large-scale investments into the country's overall development target, particularly with the
aim of maximizing local employment, local procurement, and targeting of pro-poor growth. In regard to
natural gas production, with the discovery of massive amounts of natural gas (confirming volumes of over
1,000 trillion cubic feet), Mozambique was on the verge of a major expansion of its natural gas sector to
world-class scale. Potential benefits included substantial export revenues and developing a domestic gas
market for power production. The mining sector was growing with the discovery of large high-quality
reserves in titanium and heavy mineral sands. In addition, artisanal and small-scale mining (ASM), mainly
gold, gemstones, tantalum and small-scale quarrying for construction, provided livelihood in rural areas

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Mining and Gas TA Project (P129847)



directly for an estimated 150,000 miners and indirectly for over half a million people. However, most ASM
operations were unlicensed, poorly supervised, and typically environmentally and socially unsustainable.
(ICR paras. 1 to 4).

Prior to 2016, Mozambique's economy was growing rapidly at about 7 percent per year, but growth slowed
down significantly thereafter due to the impact of two main factors: (i) a hidden debt crisis arising from
previously undisclosed liabilities and (ii) insurgency in the northern region of Cabo Delgado which contained
substantial gas resources. The hidden debt crisis revealed institutional weaknesses in governance and
policy. To address these, the GoM introduced new reforms, and institutional and regulatory changes. The
World Bank Group (WBG) support to the GoM focused on providing further technical assistance
towards strengthening the governance, regulatory, and institutional framework.

Institutional Context: While Mozambique had a legal, regulatory and contractual framework for
management of its extractives sector, many reforms were still ongoing, and weaknesses in institutional and
technical capacity were constraints to effective implementation and monitoring of mining and gas
operations. To address these issues, a functional diagnosis of the principal GoM agency involved - Ministry
of Mineral Resources and Energy - MIREME - including its departments the National Institute of Petroleum
(INP) and the National Petroleum Company (ENH) - was carried out in 2012 prior to project effectiveness.
The diagnosis identified actions required to develop a comprehensive approach to sector management and
informed further institutional reforms. The World Bank's support under the Mining and Gas Technical
assistance Project (MAGTAP) focused on strengthening the capacity and governance systems of key
institutions in Mozambique to manage two important and growing sectors - mining and hydrocarbons - as
well as integrating them into the broader economy.

Alignment with Country Partnership Strategy/Framework: At appraisal in 2013, the PDO was consistent
with the CPS for FY2012 to 2014 in effect at the time and the PDO remained consistent with the CPF for
FY2023 to 2027 prevailing at project closure. Under the CPS for FY2012 to 2015, the PDO, with its focus
on strengthening institutional and governance capacity in two key sectors, was aligned with the CPS's
foundational pillar 'Governance and Public Sector Capacity'. After the disclosure of the hidden debt crisis in
2016, the WBG increased the emphasis on providing technical assistance for strengthening governance,
regulations, and institutional capacity and effectiveness. At project closing in 2023, the PDO was aligned
with CPF's objective of supporting Mozambique to build a climate-resilient economy and adopt smart
policies for low carbon growth and with its High-Level Outcome 2 (HLO 2) - Inclusive Green Job Creation.
The CPF confirms that, through its ongoing and planned support, the World Bank Group (WBG) will
continue to help enhance the sustainability of investments in non-renewable natural resources in the power
sector, including natural gas, and in the mining sector. The CPF proposes that Mozambique needs to
develop plans to transition out of coal extraction and exports given the decline in financing for coal and
restrictions on coal in international markets. In regard to mineral resources, the CPF underlines the
potential to shift attention to minerals central to the energy transition which offer greater long-term demand
and economic value. (ICR paras. 25 and 26).

Alignment with National Priorities: At appraisal in 2013, the PDO was aligned with the national priorities
in effect at the time and it remains aligned with the national priorities at project closure. The PDO was
aligned with the GoM's development strategy under the 'Action Plan for Poverty Reduction (PARP) for 2011
to 2014. The strategy identified the potential of natural resources (including mining and gas) as a source of
growth and for contributing to maximizing the social and economic benefits to the population. At project
closure in 2023, the PDO was aligned with the priorities in the GoM's Five-Year Development Plan for 2020
to 2024 and the National Development Strategy for 2015 to 2035. The priorities include 'sustainable

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Mozambique Mining and Gas TA Project (P129847)



               management of natural and environmental resources'. The strategic objectives include 'sustainable
               extraction of minerals and hydrocarbons'.

               Prior Bank Experience: While the WBG had been engaged in financing projects and carrying out sector
               work in Mozambique, the Project was the World Bank's first engagement in the mining and natural gas
               sectors in Mozambique. For the Project, the World Bank drew upon its experience in carrying out projects in
               these sectors in other countries.

               Relevance of Project Development Objectives: Given the context described above, the PDO was
               consistent, and remained consistent, with the priorities in the national programs and the WBG CPS/CPF
               prevailing at appraisal and at project closure. The PDO was appropriately pitched reflecting the GoM's
               priorities and the implementation capacities of the agencies involved. Although factors like the hidden debt
               crisis and the insurgency in northern Mozambique had an adverse impact, including the delays in
               realization of the anticipated private investments in the Liquified Natural Gas (LNG) sector, the Project's
               objectives of institutional and governance strengthening remain relevant for realization of such investments
               in future.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen the capacity and governance systems of key institutions to manage the mining sector in
                             Mozambique.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC): While the PAD did not articulate a specific TOC, the ICR includes a diagrammatic
                             presentation of the TOC drawn from the project design and implementation experience. The overall TOC was
                             that, to improve management of the mining and hydrocarbon sectors, it was necessary to strengthen the
                             capacity and governance systems in the key institutions involved. Furthermore, for better integration of the
                             mining and gas sectors in the broader economy in Mozambique, it was necessary to put in place the relevant
                             coordination mechanisms and integration platforms. In regard to Objective 1 (mining sector), some reforms
                             had already been initiated since 2006, but it was necessary to put in place required second-generation
                             reforms that would (i) enable greater transparency in licensing with efficient processing procedures; (ii)
                             strengthen institutional capacity to assess proposed projects leading to increased revenues; (iii) complete
                             geophysical surveying of prospective areas and provide public access to the information; and (iv) develop and
                             implement an Artisanal and Small-Scale Mining (ASM) Development Program Strategy. The Project would
                             provide inputs through financing of technical advisory services, training and supporting facilities and
                             equipment. The main resulting outputs would include: (i) improved procedures in licensing; (ii) expanded
                             aerial geophysical surveys of prospective areas; (iii) development and implementation of an ASM

                                                                                                                            Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mozambique Mining and Gas TA Project (P129847)



Development Program Strategy; (iv) procedures for improved revenue management; (v) creation of
environmental guidelines for small-scale and large-scale mining and onshore and offshore gas operations
including upgrading of the Environmental Impact assessment and Environmental Licensing Process. The
intermediate outcomes would be (i) greater transparency in licensing; (ii) increased capacity for revenue
management; (iii) strengthened technical capacity for environmental and social management; (iv) increased
capacity of mine inspectors to issue critical evaluation reports and make appropriate recommendations to
mine owners; and (v) increased number of companies complying with basic health and safety standards in
mines. The longer-term outcome would be increased benefits to the economy through more efficient and
effective operations in the mining sector. For better integration of the mining and gas sectors in the broader
economy, the Project would provide inputs through technical advisory services and training that would result
in outputs including: (i) development of a Local Content Law; (ii) an Operational Strategic Plan for 2019-2021;
(iii) creation of partnerships to prepare digital platforms for capacity building and assistance and increasing
transparency and providing information on work opportunities; and (iv) creation of a platform to utilize data
from interested Medium, Small and Microenterprises (MSMEs) for identifying goods and services supply
opportunities. These outputs would encourage greater participation of upstream and downstream enterprises
in expanding the benefits from the mining and gas sector investments.

While the ICR provided a diagrammatic presentation of the TOC, greater clarity could have been provided in
the causal links and full results chain. In regard to Objective 1, the Results Framework (RF) included five
PDO Indicators supported by eight Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs). The original definitions of some of
these indicators lacked clarity and were revised in the course of the restructurings. After the revisions, the
indicators were relevant and measurable for assessing achievement of the PDOs.

Key assumptions underlying the overall results chain were that (i) the improved practices and techniques
promoted by the Project would be accepted and utilized by the targeted beneficiaries; and (ii) the concerned
government agencies would more effectively cooperate among themselves, and adequately internalize and
implement the improved technologies and approaches supported by the Project.

Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs): (as reported in the ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework).

      Mining cadaster procedures updated (baseline - no; target - yes; actual - yes; target achieved).
      Mineral information system upgraded with new geodata for strategic areas (baseline - no; target - yes;
         actual - yes; target achieved).
        Number of ASM associations/cooperatives funded by the state budget (baseline 63; original target 89;
         revise target 50; actual 107; target exceeded).
        Number of Artisanal Mining Passes and Small-Scale Mining Certificates issued in accordance with
         regulations (baseline 0; target 200; actual 73; target substantially underachieved).
        Procedures for tendering and evaluation of mineral assets developed (baseline - no; target - yes;
         actual - no; target not achieved).
        Number of ASMs who have received target training (baseline 0; targeted 2,000; actual - 240; target
         substantially underachieved).
        Health, Safety and Environmental regulations, including standards and monitoring procedures
         updated (baseline - no; target - yes; actual - yes; target achieved).
        Local law enforcement and judicial personnel trained on mining law and regulations under the Project
         (baseline 0; target 200; actual 397; target exceeded).



                                                                                                  Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mozambique Mining and Gas TA Project (P129847)



PDO Indicators (as reported in ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework and paras. 31 to 35).

      Mining cadastral database and geographic information system (GIS) accessible online for public
         information (baseline - no; target - yes; actual - yes; target achieved). The configuration was
         completed, and the system is online. Access to the system is public and it allows consultation to
         visualize access areas, mining titles and upload of documents.
        Mines and quarries construction projects and gas construction projects subject to technical
         inspections in line with international industry standards (baseline 0; target 15; actual 15; target
         achieved). While the target was achieved, most of the inspections have been done in quarries in the
         south side of the country due to national budget constraints.
        Mining operations subject to annual cost and fiscal audits in compliance with established fiscal regime
         (baseline 0; target 15; achieved 21; target exceeded).
        Regular health, safety and environmental monitoring and control inspections to mines and gas
         projects in line with regulations for compliance and monitoring (baseline 0; target 50; actual 550; target
         substantially exceeded). The target was substantially exceeded due to the fact that filed visits were
         made to both large and small mining companies. Additionally, the number of operating companies was
         higher than anticipated.
        Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and Social Impact Assessments (SIAs)
         carried out for mining (LSM and ASM) and gas (baseline - no; target - yes; actual - yes; target
         achieved).

Outcomes: Objective 1 in regard to strengthening the institutional and governance capacity of the key GoM
institutions to manage the mining sector was substantially achieved. The Project interventions supported
reforms including improved regulations, systematic handling of information, and greater transparency and
accountability. As indicated above, targets were met or exceeded for all the PDO indicators. Upgrades were
made to the mining cadaster system, geodata collection and interpretation, and capacity building provided
through training and technical advisory services, including for assessment of mineral assets and carrying out
commercial transactions. However, in regard to ASM, targets were substantially underachieved for some of
the IRIs. Also, progress was slower than expected in regard to reforms and capacity building in ASM which
suffered delays due to funds having to be temporarily reallocated to address urgent needs during negotiations
of contracts in the Liquified Natural Gas (LNG) sector. Although the ASM strategy was completed in 2019 and
implementation had started. (ICR para. 33).

The ICRR rates the efficacy in achievement of Objective 1 as Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen the capacity and governance systems of key institutions to manage the hydrocarbons sector in
Mozambique.

Rationale

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mozambique Mining and Gas TA Project (P129847)



Theory of Change: The overall TOC relevant to both Objectives 1 and 2 was provided earlier under
Objective 1. In regard to Objective 2 (hydrocarbons sector), the Project would provide inputs through
financing of technical advisory services, training, and supporting facilities and equipment. The main resulting
outputs would include: (i) passage of a Decree Law for an LNG project that would pave the way for future
LNG projects; (ii) completion of negotiations for several agreements for LNG development in four key areas;
(iii) one Final Investment Decision (FID) completed and arrangements put in place for future FIDs; (iv) skill-
based human development in ENH; (v) acquisition of special software for ENH to analyze reservoirs and
make projections; and (vi) preparation of a Strategic Social and Environmental Assessment. The intermediate
outcomes would be (i) strengthened staff skills and capacity in MIREME and ENH; (ii) improved procedures
for contractual assessment and negotiations; (iii) greater transparency in regard to all contracts being made
public in accordance with the regulations; and (iv) putting in place improved environmental and social
safeguards guidelines. The longer-term outcome would be greater efficiency and effectiveness in the
hydrocarbons sector with benefits for the economy.

The adequacy of the TOC, PDO indicators, IRIs, as well as the key assumptions have been discussed earlier
under Objective 1.

Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs): (as reported in ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework).

      Number of studies carried out for assessing economic and financial feasibility of gas infrastructure
         (baseline 0; target 5; actual 5; target achieved).
      Emergency response procedures for INP developed (baseline - no; target - yes; actual - no; target not
         achieved).
      Staff of gas sector management institutions trained to manage, regulate and monitor the sector
         (baseline 0; original target 140; revised target 100; actual 196; target exceeded).
        Tools and mechanisms to attract financing for the State participation are in place (baseline - no; target
         - yes, actual - yes; target achieved).
        A regional office in the North has been equipped and is operational to undertake health and safety,
         and environmental inspections of gas operations (baseline - no; target - yes; actual - yes; target
         achieved).
        Computerized Environmental and Social Management Information System developed (baseline - no;
         target - yes; actual - no; target not achieved). This proved to be not possible because of differing
         systems within the entities involved.
        SESA Action Plan implementation is tracked regularly with the participation of the stakeholders
         through the public consultation and feedback mechanism (baseline - no; target - yes; actual - yes;
         target achieved).

PDO Indicators: (as reported in ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework and paras. 31 to 39).

      Number of gas project developments subject to technical inspections in line with international industry
         standards (baseline 0; target 10; actual 17; target substantially exceeded).
      Number of gas operations subject to annual cost and fiscal audits in compliance with established fiscal
         regime (baseline 0; target 10; actual 6; target underachieved).
      Number of new mining/gas infrastructure concessionary contracts negotiated in line with international
         industry standards (baseline 0; target 15; actual 15; target achieved).



                                                                                                    Page 9 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Mozambique Mining and Gas TA Project (P129847)




                                   Number of gas projects subject to regular technical inspections in line with international industry
                                    standards (baseline 0%; target 45%; actual 0%; target not achieved).

                            Outcomes: Objective 2 in regard to strengthening the institutional and governance capacity of the key
                            institutions to manage the hydrocarbons sector was substantially achieved with moderate shortcomings.
                            Institutional and governance capacity was strengthened in the relevant institutions to identify and oversee
                            viable investments while monitoring that safeguards and safety criteria are met in accordance with
                            international standards. The Project's interventions and assistance provided in regard to strategic, technical,
                            legal, financial and marketing aspects helped the institutions to better advise and support the GoM's
                            negotiations under more beneficial fiscal terms and conditions; develop Mozambique's oil and gas portfolio;
                            design a unifying national extractives policy and roadmap for further development of the sector; strengthen
                            the regulatory authority (INP) for oil and gas; develop well-defined Financial Investment Models; and
                            formulate appropriate contract models. Additionally, a skills-based human resources program was established
                            in INP to ensure sustainability of the institutional strengthening gains. In regard to the PDO indicators, as
                            discussed above, targets for two of the four indicators were met or exceeded. However, targets were not met
                            for the remaining two indicators (technical inspections and cost/fiscal audits) mainly due to the GoM's
                            budgetary constraints in meeting the high operational costs to cover the trips to the north side of
                            Mozambique, which limited the activities to only the south of the country. (ICR Results Framework).

                            The ICRR rates the efficacy in achievement of Objective 2 as Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            As discussed earlier in Section 4, the Project substantially achieved (with moderate shortcomings) the
                            targeted outcomes under Objectives 1 and 2. In addition, the GoM's overall capacity for better integrating the
                            mining and gas sectors into the broader economy in Mozambique was strengthened through a number of
                            actions supporting inter-ministerial cooperation and developing strong economic links across sectors. The
                            outputs of these actions included establishing frameworks for (i) building a production and distribution system
                            for affordable indigenously produced gas for the country; (ii) management of oil spills and providing
                            emergency response through the development of appropriate standards and procedures; and (iii) a national
                            extractives industry local content program.

                            Based on the foregoing, the overall efficacy is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating



                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Mozambique Mining and Gas TA Project (P129847)



  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
(Reference PAD paras. 56 to 60 and ICR paras. 48 and 49).

Economic Efficiency

At Appraisal: No cost-benefit economic analysis was carried out at appraisal since, as a technical assistance
project, the Project's activities focused on capacity building, making it difficult to attribute and quantify benefits.

Post-Completion: While no post-completion cost-benefit economic analysis was carried out, the ICR (para. 49)
reports, based on certain assumptions, that the financial benefits could amount to as much as US$1.4 billion at
a discount rate of 2 percent (which is low). On this basis, it opines that the MAGTAP investment of US$87
million was well-justified.

Rating of Economic Efficiency: Given the lack of relevant quantitative information, the ICRR does not rate the
economic efficiency of the Project.

Implementation Efficiency

Project Cost: The Project was carried out within the estimated cost at appraisal and the Additional Financing.
Compared to the total appraised cost of US$87.20 million, the actual cost reported at completion was
US$85.54 million - 99 percent of project funds after exchange rate fluctuations were disbursed. Most planned
project activities, including under the Additional Financing, were completed by project completion.

Project Duration: The Project was implemented over a period of 117 months (9.8 years) compared to the
original estimate of 86 months (7.2 years). The closing date was extended twice by a total of 31 months (2.5
years) to allow for completion of the expanded activities under the Additional Financing and those affected by
the COVID pandemic.

Implementation Cost: At appraisal, project management costs were estimated at US$4.9 million (8% of the
total project cost). At completion, the project management costs were estimated at US$9.16 million (11% of the
total project cost). The increase was due to the expanded activities after Additional financing and the impacts of
the COVID pandemic, which included a 25 percent drop in revenues for extractive activities due to
border closures.

Rating of Implementation Efficiency: Substantial


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:

                                                                                                          Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mozambique Mining and Gas TA Project (P129847)




                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The Project's outcome is rated on the basis of (i) Relevance of Project Development Objectives (PDOs), (ii)
Efficacy, and (iii) Efficiency.

As discussed in Section 3, the Relevance of the PDOs is rated High as the PDOs were well-aligned with, and
continued to remain well-aligned with, the priorities in the national programs and the World Bank Group's (WBG)
Country Partnership Strategy/Framework.

As discussed in Section 4, the Project's efficacy is rated Substantial. The Project substantially achieved (with
moderate shortcomings) its targeted outcomes for both PDOs. In addition, the achievement of the PDOs was
supported by the carrying out of measures and actions for strengthening cross-sector coordination and
integrating the mining and gas sectors in Mozambique's broader economy, which further contributed to
achievement of the two PDOs.

As discussed in Section 5, the Project's Efficiency is rated Substantial. While economic efficiency is not rated for
lack of relevant information, the Project's implementation efficiency is rated Substantial.

Rating: Based on the above, the Project's outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

(Reference ICR paras. 79 to 82).

Institutional Risks: These are rated Moderate. While the Project contributed to strengthening institutional
and governance capacity in the key institutions involved, the institutions will need to continue to further
internalize the improvements and remain committed to implement the reforms. This will require appropriate
attention and oversight from the GoM, particularly in regard to inter-agency coordination and cooperation.

Financial Risks: These are rated Moderate. During the implementation of the Project, the GoM's budgetary
constraints affected the implementation of some activities, particularly those related to ASM



                                                                                                     Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Mining and Gas TA Project (P129847)



development. Adequate and timely financial budgetary support from the GoM would be essential for effective
functioning of the institutions involved.

Political and Governance Risks: These are rated Moderate. Project implementation was affected by the
impacts of the hidden debt crisis in 2016 and the insurgency in Cabo Delgado. The GoM, with the support of
the WBG, has taken measures to address the institutional, governance, and regulatory weaknesses revealed
by the hidden debt crisis. In regard to the insurgency in Cabo Delgado, an agreement was reached and has
been holding to date.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  (Reference ICR para. 75).

  The strategic relevance and PDOs were well aligned, and continue to be well aligned, with the priorities in
  the national programs and the WBG Country Assistance Strategy/Partnership Framework. A theory of
  change, including causal links and the full results chain, were not included in the PAD (it was not a
  requirement at the time). There were shortcomings in the design of the Results Framework, including lack
  of clarity in definitions of some of the PDO indicators and IRIs which had to be addressed during project
  restructurings. Poverty, resilience, environmental and social aspects were adequately covered.
  Implementation risks were adequately identified along with mitigation measures. Recognizing the multi-
  agency, multi-stakeholder nature of the Project, the Project design provided for a Steering Committee in
  which the main beneficiaries were involved. Attention was given to appropriately staffing and equipping
  the Project Management Unit (PMU).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 (Reference ICR para. 76).

 During the Project's implementation period of nearly 10 years, the Bank's supervision team carried out
 16 supervision missions. The missions were adequately staffed with the required specialists. Advisory
 services of external experts were used as necessary. The team provided guidance and support to the PMU
 and agencies as needed, including enabling the hiring of external experts where required to provide
 information on new approaches, technologies, institutional set-up, and governance systems for the
 extractives sector. An MTR was carried out in August 2016 and the findings were utilized during project
 restructurings, including the Additional Financing. However, significant weaknesses in the design of the
 Results Framework were addressed relatively late during implementation. This area should have received
 attention earlier given that the ICR itself has rated the quality of the Project's Monitoring and Evaluation
 (M&E) system as Modest due to the weak M&E function of the PMU during the greater part of project

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Mining and Gas TA Project (P129847)



 implementation. (ICR para. 67). The supervision team's Back-to-Office reporting and filing of ISRs was
 done in a timely manner. However, the ISRs reported the Project's Development Outcomes (DO) and
 Implementation Progress (IP) ratings as Satisfactory over the entire implementation period which may not
 have been entirely candid given the significant implementation issues that emerged from time to time.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 (Reference ICR paras. 63 to 67).

 There were significant weaknesses in the design of the Results Framework including lack of clarity in
 definition of some of the indicators which impacted systematic function of the M&E function. (ICR para. 63).
 This constrained monitoring of the Project's outputs and outcomes.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR acknowledges that the lack of a systematic M&E function during a significant part of the Project
  was a barrier to proper monitoring of the Project's outcomes. The PMU lacked proper staff for a long
  period of time and was unable to take on a more proactive role in monitoring outputs and outcomes of the
  Project. With the recruitment of a qualified local M&E specialist within the PMU in 2021, and coaching by
  World Bank specialists, the capacity of the PMU was strengthened in the final stage of the Project to
  systematically track the results chain and monitor outputs and outcomes. (ICR para. 64).



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reports that, with the recruitment of an international M&E expert was hired to support the local
  M&E specialist in the PMU during the last phase of the Project's implementation. As a result, the quality
  of the M&E reporting reached an acceptable level towards project closing. (ICR paras. 66 and 67).

  Rating for the ICRR: Although the quality of M&E reporting improved and reached acceptable levels in
  the two years prior to Project closing, it was weak during the greater part of Project implementation. The
  M&E quality is therefore rated Modest.




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Mining and Gas TA Project (P129847)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards

   (Reference ICR paras. 68 to 72).

   At appraisal, the Project was designated Category B (Partial assessment). The safeguard policies triggered
   were: Environmental Assessment (EA) OP/BP 4.01 and Involuntary resettlement (IR) OP/BP 4.12.

   Environmental: A Strategic Social and Environmental Assessment (SESA) was prepared and approved by
   the Council of Ministers in October 2017. A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was created and
   operationalized. Implementation of the SESA was delayed due to inter-agency coordination challenges.
   While several significant outputs were completed, some of the activities and deliverables were canceled due
   to insufficient time. The SESA Working Group was not maintained after the closing of the Project which may
   impact completion of the SESA after completion of the Project. (ICR paras. 69 to 71). The ICR does not
   report on any other environmental related issues.

   Social: There was no land acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement and/or restrictions to access or
   livelihoods. However, given the importance of resettlement issues in the context of the mining sector, OP
   4.12 was triggered. The GoM developed a regulation on involuntary resettlement. An Involuntary
   Resettlement Decree was created in 2012 but criticized by stakeholders as having numerous weaknesses.
   The Project provided technical assistance and advisory services to the GoM to help improve the
   Decree. (ICR para. 72). The ICR does not report any IR related social issues or complaints.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   (Reference ICR paras. 73 to 74).

   Financial Management (FM): The ICR reports that the FM and disbursement arrangements were
   satisfactory. The PMU submitted Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) on time and with acceptable quality.
   However, some difficulties were experienced with respect to the closing activities, such as processing of
   eligible expenditures and submission of the final audit, due to the dissolution of the PMU after project
   closing on December 31, 2023. (ICR para. 73).

   Procurement: The ICR reports that procurement performance was generally satisfactory during project
   implementation. Procurement risk was rated high during appraisal, and to mitigate the risk, two qualified
   consultants (mining and gas) were recruited by the PMU at the start of implementation. However, the ICR
   reports (Annex 4) that the single person employed by the PMU to cover procurement matters was

                                                                                                  Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Mining and Gas TA Project (P129847)



   overwhelmed by the volume of work involved. The procurement plan for the Project was prepared at the
   start of implementation and updated periodically. There were delays in carrying out some of the
   procurement activities due to complexity of some of the sector-specific activities; involvement of multiple
   agencies; and the time required to comply with national procedures. (ICR para. 74). The ICR does not
   report any case of mis-procurement or non-compliance.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR does not report any significant unintended impacts.



d. Other
   (Reference ICR paras. 51 to 52).

   Gender: The Project was not gender-tagged. The number of women participating in training (30 percent)
   lagged behind the target (40 percent). (ICR para. 51).

   Institutional Strengthening: This was a key aspect under the Project as discussed earlier in Sections
   2 and 4.

   Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity: While not directly targeting poverty reduction, the Project
   included measures and actions to increase local content in the subprojects and activities supported through
   the Project which, in turn, lead to sharing of the economic benefits among local entities and the population.

   Mobilizing Private Sector Financing: The Project did not engage in activities related to mobilizing private
   capital but some of the activities could encourage greater participation from the private sector by (i)
   increasing transparency in licensing; (ii) generation of good quality geodata to inform and attract private
   investors; and (iii) support advancing of large-scale LNG projects towards feasibility or investment stage.
   (ICR para. 52).




11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                                 IEG rates Quality at Entry and
                                                                                 Supervision as Moderately
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                 Satisfactory due to some
                                                                                 shortcomings.
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest


                                                                                                    Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Mozambique Mining and Gas TA Project (P129847)



Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

(Reference ICR paras. 83 to 87).

The ICR lists a number of lessons drawn from the Project's experience which have relevance for
similar projects carried out in comparable environments. From these, with some adaptation, IEG
draws the following lessons:

Flexible and adaptive project design is desirable to capture emerging trends and national
priorities. The relatively simple design of the component structure allowed the opportunity at the
Additional Financing to make critical adjustments and restructuring to improve decisions and
practices by learning from outcomes of the previous actions. This was particularly evident in the
case of development of a domestic gas infrastructure which required introducing relevant policy
changes and strengthening interconnectivity between GoM agencies.

Uptake of project outputs is directly dependent on national priorities, particularly where the
outputs or outcomes depend upon parliamentary processes. During the implementation of the
Project, a shift in attention to developing bills for the energy sector delayed preparation of bills for
the petroleum and mining sectors.

Procurement proved to be challenging due to the complexity of the Project with many
beneficiaries and activities. The lesson learnt is to allocate sufficient supervision time in projects of
this complexity as well as to continue to have frequent contact with the PMU through online
correspondence and calls.

Too rapid dissolution of the PMU after project closing can create challenges for completing
fiduciary activities. In the case of the Project, proper completion of the financial management
activities, including closing of the books, was adversely affected by the premature dissolution of the
PMU. It is important to build a time buffer between the conclusion of the last procurement activity
and the closing date.

Proper planning is required, to the extent possible, in arranging for the transition of Task
Team Leaders (TTLs) in the World Bank supervision team to prevent disruptions and shorten
the learning curve for the new incoming TTL. This includes early identification, knowledge
transfer, structured handover, a shadowing period, and full access to relevant documentation and
reports. This would reduce the burden on the PMU and allocate additional time to facilitate the
takeover.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No



                                                                                                      Page 17 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Mining and Gas TA Project (P129847)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is generally well-written, candid, and follows the OPCS's ICR guidelines (except in regard to length -
29 pages instead of the recommended 15 pages or less). While it presents a diagrammatic theory of change,
the causal links and full results chain could have been more clearly articulated in regard to outputs and
outcomes. The analysis is generally evidence based but constrained by some weaknesses in the M&E system
particularly in regard to constraints in reporting of some results from the north part of the country due to the
insurgency situation prevailing during a part of the implementation period. One significant area where the ICR
does not provide adequate information is in regard to the impact on the Project from the disclosures of the
hidden debt crisis in 2016 which contributed to a substantial reduction in the growth of the
Mozambique economy. The ICR provides some lessons learned from the Project's experience that have
broader relevance for similar projects executed in comparable environments.

The ICRR rates the quality of the ICR as Substantial with some shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 18 of 18
