     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education Quality Improvement Project (P157922)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023651

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P157922                                    Education Quality Improvement Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Congo, Democratic Republic of              Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A3052                                   28-Feb-2021                                        99,418,355.74

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Apr-2017                                30-Dec-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                100,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            100,000,000.00                                  99,418,355.74

 Actual                                         99,418,355.74                                  99,418,355.74




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Livia Maria Angelica        Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
 Benavides Matarazzo                                      Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The original Project Development Objective (PDO), as stated in the Grant Agreement (Schedule 1, Project
   Description) and in the Project Appraisal Document, was to improve the quality of learning in primary
   education and to strengthen sector management.

   An August 2020 restructuring revised the PDO: “The Project Development Objectives are to improve the
   quality of learning conditions in primary education and to strengthen sector management.” This change meant


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education Quality Improvement Project (P157922)



   that the project now aimed to achieve improved learning conditions as opposed to learning outcomes. This
   ICRR therefore concurs with the ICR that a split rating was necessary, based on the 2020 restructuring.

   US$38.13 million, or 38.5 percent of total Bank financing of US$99.42 million, was disbursed at the time of the
   2020 restructuring.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project aimed to benefit children, teachers, and other stakeholders in nine provinces of the DRC. These
   provinces were selected based on poverty and equity indicators.

   The project included three components:

   1. Quality of Learning Conditions in Primary Education (appraisal: US$65.5 million; revised: US$61.6
   million; actual: US$60.4 million). This component aimed to improve the quality of teaching and learning in
   primary education through a conducive education environment enabled by the strengthening of Early
   Childhood Education (ECE), improved teacher training and support, and the provision of instructional
   materials. It had three subcomponents:

          Strengthening the ECE system for Quality Service Provision through the establishment of national
           quality standards and interventions to improve ECE teacher competencies.
          Enhancing Teacher Effectiveness under the three dimensions of (i) teacher training, (ii) teacher
           support, and (iii) teacher management.
          Supporting the Supply Chain of Learning and Teaching Materials through (i) providing and
           distributing learning and teaching materials to improve literacy and numeracy during the early
           grades of primary education, and (ii) strengthening the sustainability of the textbook supply chain.

   2. Strengthen Sector Management (appraisal: US$21.8 million; revised: US$24.7 million; actual:
   US$25.2 million). This component aimed to improve knowledge of sector performance and to build
   systems of accountability to be leveraged in support of improved learning outcomes at the school level, with
   a special emphasis on girls’ learning. The component had three sub-components:

          Institutionalizing Standardized Student Learning Assessment would support the creation of an
           independent unit responsible for learning assessment.
          Institutionalizing Accountability in the Administrative and Pedagogical Support Chain through the
           Performance-Based Financing (PBF) Approach/Program. The DRC was a pilot country for the
           Global Partnership for Education (GPE), which required meeting “stretch indicators” as a


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education Quality Improvement Project (P157922)



          prerequisite for some disbursements. There were three indicators under this project, each of which
          was valued at US$10 million, that were tied to the implementation of specific activities (these
          indicators and the corresponding assessments are further discussed under Efficacy, Section 4). This
          subcomponent would support technical assistance for the implementation of the PBF so as to
          incentivize specific results on the part of (i) the offices that provide administrative and pedagogical
          support to the schools, and (ii) the schools in the implementation of their School Development Plans
          (SDPs).
         Support to Girls’ Education. Under the PBF program, girls’ education would be promoted through
          ensuring that textbooks were free of gender stereotyping before their printing and
          distribution. Incentives would be provided to increase female enrollment, increase in the number of
          girls participating in student testing, and increase female retention at the end of grade one.

   3. Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation of the Program (appraisal: US$12.7 million; revised:
   US$13.7 million; actual: US$13.8 million). This component would support effective project implementation
   and coordination, as well as monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of project results and outcomes. Baseline and
   end-line surveys were to be implemented to assess impact of the PBF and of project activities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The project was fully financed through a GPE grant. At appraisal, total project costs were US$100 million.
   Actual disbursements were US$99.42 million.

   The project was approved on April 18, 2017, and became effective on August 9, 2017. It was originally
   scheduled to close on February 28, 2021. The mid-term review was carried out on September 30,
   2019. The project closed on December 30, 2022, after an extension of 22 months.

   The project was restructured once, on August 20, 2020, at which stage US$38.31 million had been
   disbursed. The restructuring included a change in PDO, where the objective of achieving improved learning
   outcomes was lowered in ambition to achieving improved learning conditions. There were also significant
   changes to the results framework. Of the original 13 outcome indicators, 10 were dropped, two were
   revised, and three new indicators were added. Intermediate and stretch indicators (under the PBF) were
   also changed. Component descriptions and costs were also modified to align with the change in PDO, as
   well as to drop several activities that were deemed not to be achievable by the end of the project
   implementation period. Most notably, teacher training was limited to in-service training, dropping the pre-
   service component and teacher support activities. Also, all infrastructure activities were dropped. An
   extension of 22 months was included as well as changes to safeguard policies and implementation
   schedules.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The objectives of the project, as well as the revised objectives, were highly relevant to the DRC’s country
context. The country had made progress in enrollment at the primary education level from 93 percent in


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education Quality Improvement Project (P157922)



2005 to 107 percent in 2014, driven mainly by increases in female participation. On the other hand, learning
achievement was persistently low, with only 47 percent of students being literate at the end of primary
school at the time of project appraisal. Poor achievement was primarily linked to three factors. First,
children entered primary school without or with inadequate preschool education. Second, teacher
effectiveness was very low, as teachers lacked adequate skills. The teacher training system, both at the
preservice and in-service levels, was very weak, and teachers’ compensation, work conditions, and
professional career path were very poor. Third, while there had been an effort to improve textbook
production and distribution, teaching and learning materials were not readily available in the classroom. In
large measure, this was caused by the lack of a distribution system that took into account the challenges of
the country’s climate and topography. Further to this, at the time of appraisal, the government was
transitioning to the use of four national languages for the introduction to literacy and early instruction, as
opposed to universal education in French. While this change was well aligned with the global evidence on
improved learning when literacy is done in the child’s mother tongue, the transition was proving to be
complex given that work was needed to develop a unified orthography and vocabulary for each of the four
languages.

The objectives were well aligned with government strategy. The government’s Second Poverty Reduction
and Growth Strategy Paper (2011-2015) focused on improving the quality of human capital to accelerate
growth and promote employment. The education sector was also identified as a priority in the government’s
National Development Plan (2017-2021). In addition, the government adopted in 2016 an Education and
Training Sector Strategy for the period 2016-2025. This Strategy established a sector-wide approach,
having as its main objective improving the quality of education, covering all education levels, from ECE to
tertiary. In 2020, the government implemented a fee-free schooling policy, which resulted in a large
increase in the number of children enrolling in public schools. While the fee-free policy did not affect the
relevance of the project's objectives, which were linked to improving quality of education, it raised the
stakes given that the system had to cater to a larger number of students, particularly those who were in the
poorer segments of the population.

The objectives were also highly relevant to the World Bank's FY13-16 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS)
at appraisal and to the FY22-26 Country Partnership Framework (CPF) at closing. The CAS for the DRC
included a strategic objective that aimed to improve social services delivery and increase human
development indicators, and a specific objective on improving access to basic education in targeted areas.
The CPF included a focus area on strengthening systems for improved service delivery and human capital
development, under which an objective was included on strengthening systems to increase access to and
quality of services in education, health, and social protection.

This project built on prior World Bank experience in the education sector through the GPE-financed
Education Sector Project (US$150 million, FY13-17, P086294), which aimed to support essential primary
education services in a context of fragility and violence. This project focused on providing inputs to the
primary education level, achieving important results in terms of enrollments, particularly for girls. The project
also supported the preparation of the Education and Training Sector Strategy mentioned above.

This project was financed through the GPE, an association of lower income countries and development
partners, including the World Bank. The project was aligned to the GPE 2012-2015 Strategic Plan and the
extended goals of the GPE 2020 Strategic Plan, which addressed improvement in the quality, efficacy, and
efficiency of education in fragile and conflict affected states. The project's design built on the previous GPE




                                                                                                      Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Education Quality Improvement Project (P157922)



               Projet de Soutien a l’Education de Base, (PROSEB), which supported production and distribution of school
               materials, in-service teacher training, and school management.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve the quality of learning in primary education

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change under this objective held that improving the quality of ECE, ensuring adequate teacher
                             training (including preservice and in-service), and making available teaching and learning materials in the
                             classroom would be conducive to improving learning in primary schools.



                             Outputs

                                        National Minimum Quality Standards for ECE were adopted.
                                        At the ECE level, National Minimum Quality Standards were adopted and validated, and parent
                                           training modules on ECE activities were developed and delivered through radio, in the context of the
                                           COVID-19 pandemic.
                                          A Teacher Training Directorate was established, and the pre-service teacher training curriculum was
                                           revised. With respect to in-service training, a module on pedagogical leadership for school directors
                                           was developed.
                                          80,387 first, second, and third grade teachers were trained in how to effectively teach reading in
                                           national languages nationwide, below the target of 150,000 teachers.
                                          The standardized class observation method was implemented.
                                          A total of 1,520,000 French textbooks were distributed for third and fourth grade students in schools
                                           nationwide, slightly exceeding the target of 1,500,000 textbooks.
                                          A total of 4,839,869 textbooks in math (first, second, third, and fourth grades) were distributed to
                                           schools nationwide, slightly missing the target of 5,000,000 textbooks.
                                          2,967,457 textbooks in science (second, third, and fourth grades) were distributed to schools
                                           nationwide, slightly missing the target of 3,000,000 textbooks.
                                          More than 70 percent of textbooks were distributed to schools before the start of the targeted school
                                           year, meeting the target.



                                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Education Quality Improvement Project (P157922)




      6,400 teachers, who had been previously unpaid, were included in the government payroll, thus
       contributing to filling needed positions as enrollment of children increased due to the implementation
       of the fee-free primary education policy.
      The number of direct beneficiaries (students in grades one through four that benefited from textbooks
       and teachers who benefited from training) was 14,222,497, exceeding the revised target of
       11,0000,000. While this indicator was expected to be disaggregated by gender, the data were not
       reported due to difficulties in collecting information in the field.

Some planned activities were not achieved by the time of restructuring, including:

      Implementation of Interactive Audio Instruction in the project provinces.
      Implementation of the standardized class observation method.
      Evaluation of the PBF scheme's impact on learning outcomes.



Outcomes

This objective had ten PDO indicators, only one of which was monitored. The remainder, all of which
addressed achievement in learning attainment at different grade levels, were not monitored, as they
depended on the implementation of at least two standardized student performance assessments.

      The primary completion rate in the project provinces increased from 69 percent (62 percent for girls) in
       January 2017 to 71 percent (63 percent for girls) in August 2020, from a baseline of 69 percent (of
       which 62 were female), not meeting the target of 82 percent (74 for girls). This indicator was dropped
       as part of the restructuring, as were all indicators on student learning outcomes.

Although the restructuring lowered the bar in terms of measuring student performance in the Early Grade
Reading Assessment (EGRA), the ICR (p. 22) reported on the results for 2019 (baseline) and 2022
(progress). At the national level, there was some improvement with positive trends for grades two and
four. At the provincial level, results were somewhat mixed, with two provinces showing negative results, while
seven showed positive trends. As reported by the team, these trends are consistent with the diversity of the
country, where poorer and more conflict affected provinces perform worse, overall.

In addition to the outcome indicators, the variable component of the program included three stretch indicators
on quality, efficiency, and equity to be disbursed based on performance. These were: (1) Improvement of
grade 2 and 4 students’ test scores in reading, in French and in national languages, as measured by
standardized learning assessments done by teachers and supervised by parents’ committees; (2) Reduction
of the dropout rate at the end of the first year of primary education, especially in provinces with low internal
efficiency; and (3) Elimination of direct school fees across the country for primary schools and reduction of
households’ out-of-pocket expenses for education. While some progress had been reached for the targets
under each of these indicators, none were fully achieved as of project restructuring, and there were no
disbursements under the PBF. These indicators were modified as part of the 2020 restructuring.



Rating

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Education Quality Improvement Project (P157922)



Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improve the quality of learning conditions in primary education

Revised Rationale
The revised objective continued to focus on improving learning, such that the theory of change did not vary
significantly. However, the expected outcomes were lowered to improving conditions for learning in the
classroom. The increase in enrollment rates resulting from the implementation of fee-free education was
expected to have a negative impact on learning in the short to medium term as the system adjusted to an
increased number of students in the classroom. Together with this change in objectives, activities were
simplified under the project components. For example, activities under pre-service teacher training
were dropped. Outcome indicators were modified accordingly.

Revised Outcomes

      The percentage of second grade students with a reading textbook in targeted provinces increased
       from 30 percent (May 2019) to 80 percent (December 2022), exceeding the target of 70 percent.
      The percentage of fourth grade students with a mathematics textbook in targeted provinces increased
       from a baseline of 29 percent (May 2019) to 33 percent (December 2022), missing the target of 45
       percent.
      The percentage of second grade teachers in targeted provinces who report having and frequently
       utilizing a teachers’ guide for reading increased from a baseline of 65 percent (May 2019) to
       93.3 percent (December 2022), exceeding the target of 80 percent.

Under the revision, two of three outcomes were met or exceeded, while one was not achieved. While
textbooks distribution was key in order to make them available to students, there was no direct evidence on
their use in the classroom, beyond the self-reported data on teachers' use of guides. Thus, while outcomes
were mostly met, the evidence was not sufficient to confirm that textbooks contributed to the children's
learning process.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthen sector management

Rationale
The theory of change underlying this objective was that sustained positive learning outcomes would be
leveraged by improving knowledge of sector performance and building accountability systems, with a
particular emphasis on closing the gender gap. Sector performance would be leveraged through the


                                                                                                Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Education Quality Improvement Project (P157922)



institutionalization of student performance assessment. The accountability system would rely on school level-
initiatives and the use of incentives for improved performance. The gender gap would be addressed by
supporting girls’ education through communication strategies and outreach interventions.

This objective did not change in the restructuring of 2020, but one PDO indicator was modified to include one
additional large-scale standardized test.



Outputs

      The teacher training directorate was established within the Ministry of Primary, Secondary and
         Technical Education (MEPST), with a clearly defined institutional mandate, in coordination with the
         Ministry of Civil Service.
        The MEPST elaborated a pre-service teacher training policy and a budget action plan.
        A policy framework providing incentives to better performing teachers and teacher educators was
         developed and approved.
        Inter-school pedagogical training networks in project provinces met regularly.
        The percentage of school directors in the project provinces that were trained in leadership (including
         classroom observation and school development plans) was 15.9 percent, well below the target of 80
         percent.
        Five communication/sensitization campaigns were carried out, surpassing the target of four
         campaigns.
        An independent Learning Assessment Unit (Cellulle Indépendante d’Evaluation des Acquis Scolaires,
         CIEAS) was created and was functional.
        The share of targeted schools (under the PBF component) receiving funds for dropout reduction in
         grade one, as a part of their management plans, was 48.3 percent below the target of 80 percent. It
         should be noted that during the pre-pandemic school years, the share was 54.1 percent (2018-2019)
         and 74.4 percent (2019-2020). The lower share at the end of the project was attributed to the recovery
         process from school closures resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and the implementation of the
         fee-free primary school program in a context of limited resources.
        The number of programs and related textbooks that were revised for elimination of stereotypes was
         21, surpassing the target of 8.
        Semi-annual communication campaigns to prevent violence against females and early child marriage
         were conducted. While the target was qualitative (yes/no), the ICR indicated that 716 trainers (of
         whom 174 were women) were trained, and 2,156 people (of whom 597 were women) benefited from
         the program.
        Annual campaigns for girls’ education were conducted.
        The impact evaluation of the PBF scheme on learning outcomes was carried out. This impact
         evaluation included an Early Grade Mathematics assessment for grades 2 and 4 as well as
         assessment of service delivery indicators based on surveys.
        Sector annual reviews were conducted by the Permanent Secretariat of Support and Coordination of
         the Education sector in 2019 and 2021. The annual review for 2020 could not be carried out due to
         the pandemic.
        The share of school management plans co-signed by parent committees in targeted schools was 100
         percent, well above the 60 percent target. The total number of targeted schools was 1,350.

                                                                                                 Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Education Quality Improvement Project (P157922)




      The share of schools receiving textbooks where parent or student representatives confirmed receipt
       was 98 percent, exceeding the target of 65 percent.



Outcomes

      Two large-scale standardized student learning assessments were undertaken in 2020 and 2022,
       meeting the target.
      Public primary school fees paid in targeted provinces were reduced by 89 percent from 2017
       to December 2022, exceeding the target of a 20 percent reduction.

While the two outcome indicators met or exceeded their targets, they did not measure the overall
achievement of the Objective as they only referred to the implementation of two student learning
assessments, and the reduction of primary school fees. On the other hand, two of the output indicators that
were below target were relevant to the objective of strengthening sector management: training of school
directors and schools receiving funds for dropout reduction in grade 1.

Achievement of the performance-based financing stretch indicators

As part of the restructuring, stretch indicators were modified to focus on school system management:

      Stretch Indicator 1 was modified to read “reliable measurement of student learning in place,
       particularly in the early grades.” It had two objectives: (a) the first/baseline evaluation has been
       conducted, the results are available and have been disseminated, and (b) a student assessment
       framework for primary education is developed and validated by MEPST. This indicator had an
       allocation of US$8 million.
      Stretch indicator 2 was modified to “developing and implementing strategies to reduce dropout” and
       had two objectives: (a) study on operationalization of government strategies to fight dropout
       disseminated, and (b) implementation of some strategies to fight dropout begin to roll out. This
       indicator had an allocation of US$5 million.
      Stretch indicator 3 was modified to “elimination of direct school fees and reduction of households’ out-
       of-pocket expenses for primary education." This indicator had three objectives: (1) government
       abolishes several major types of school fees, (2) inclusion of 6,400 previously unpaid primary school
       teachers in government payroll (9 provinces), and (3) the government regularly pays the monthly
       salaries of the 6,400 newly included primary school teachers (9 project provinces). This last stretch
       indicator had the highest allocation (US$17 million) because of the government's emphasis on fee-free
       education.

All three stretch indicators described above were fully disbursed. The ICR summarized the positive results
from the impact evaluation of the PBF, as follows: (a) the performance level of PBF schools (including
indicators on school management, enrollment, and learning outcomes) increased from 30 percent to 85
percent, (b) pedagogical supervision increased by 50 percent, and (c) 75 percent of the 1350 schools
obtained a minimum performance level score of 70 percent. In addition, the MEPST secured a new funding
line item to sustain PBF activities.




                                                                                                 Page 9 of 18
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Education Quality Improvement Project (P157922)




                              Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Prior to restructuring most outcomes and outputs related to Objective 1 on improved quality of learning were
                            not achieved. On the other hand, outcomes were met under Objective 2 on strengthening sector
                            management. It should be noted that these outcomes did not fully measure the achievement of this objective,
                            while at the same time some key outputs that were key to this objective did not reach their expected
                            targets. This is consistent with a Modest rating.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                     Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            After restructuring, with the ambition of the first objective adjusted to improvement in learning conditions, two
                            of three outcomes were achieved. In addition, outcomes were largely achieved under the second objective,
                            with caveats as stated above. This is consistent with an overall efficacy rating of Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The cost-benefit analysis at appraisal calculated the expected economic benefits from the increase in
   beneficiaries’ future earnings, as a result of the attainment of more school years and improved quality of
   learning. The analysis used global evidence on the impact of more and better-quality education in order to
   quantify benefits. These would be derived from: (a) higher rates of enrolment, thus reducing the number of out-
   of-school children; (b) improved primary completion rates, thus reducing the number of children who would drop
   out of school; and (c) improvement in the quality of education, raising learning outcomes. In addition, there
   would be a benefit at the household level, as out-of-pocket expenditures would be reduced through the results-
   based component in support of the fee-free education policy.

   Benefits and costs were quantified as follows. The benefit of including out of school children in the education
   system was estimated at US$29.3 million. The benefit associated with primary completion rate was estimated at
   US$387 million. The reason for the large difference between the first and second benefit is that the second one

                                                                                                                                Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Education Quality Improvement Project (P157922)



estimates the benefit of the full completion of primary education, which ensures greater returns in the long run.
The benefit of improving quality was estimated to be US$955 million, mostly driven by the improvement in the
quality of teachers and, much less so, by the implementation of student performance testing and the
implementation of accountability mechanisms using these results. The distribution of textbooks was not included
in the calculation, possibly making the estimate a lower-bound. The total costs of the project included the direct
project costs (US$100 million), the expected costs of the student performance assessments between 2018 and
2025 (US$5.1 million), and the expected added teacher salaries, resulting from better qualified teachers
demanding higher compensation (US$9.1 million). Based on these estimates, the rate of return (IRR) was 16.1
percent, and the Net Present Value (NPV) was US$295.7 million.

As part of the restructuring of 2020, the economic analysis of the project was revised, resulting in an IRR of 24
percent and a positive NPV of US$150 million. These estimates included the provision of textbooks and
teachers' guides as well as in-service teacher training, as opposed to the focus at appraisal on pre-service
teacher training. The differences in IRR and NPV were attributed to the inclusion of costs linked to textbooks
and learning materials, the increase in the number of primary school students benefitting from the project as a
result of the fee-free policy, and the use of more conservative assumptions on impacts on student attainment.

The ICR also included an economic analysis, calculating an IRR of 16.9 percent and a NPV of US$587.7 million.
The ICR estimates were based on an analysis of the outcomes from Objective 1, where an estimated 4,020,000
students benefited from better teaching and learning conditions. The ICR noted that there were non-quantifiable
outputs from the project, including the creation and operation of a learning assessment program, the production
of materials in national languages, and the efforts to protect girls against gender-based violence. The sensitivity
analysis, which estimated a higher discount rate (12 percent versus 10 percent) and half the impact, still
produced an IRR of 13.3 percent and an NPV of US$230 million. Given that the in-service teacher training was a
one-off exercise, and that the number of teachers trained was below the target, the lower bound estimate might
be more realistic.

Operational efficiency was difficult during the first phase but improved significantly after restructuring. The Bank
had a country-based team that supported implementation, thus facilitating dialogue with the various government
units that were part of the project. During the earlier phase of the implementation process, procurement was
slow, impacting project implementation. The Bank provided training and, as a result, procurement processes
improved. An initial confusion with respect to whether new Teacher Training Institutions (TTI) should be built or
whether existing ones should be rehabilitated led to delays and ultimately to the cancellation of planned support
for TTIs. The project’s closing date was extended by 22 months, allowing for the project to almost disburse
fully. The project underwent several other exogenous challenges such as governance and conflict conditions
between 2018 and 2019 and the COVID-19 pandemic, which forced school closures for almost one year in
2020-2021. Finally, the introduction of the fee-free policy in 2020 led to a substantive increase in enrollment of
students, prompting the restructuring of the project as the original objective of improved learning outcomes could
not realistically be met.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Education Quality Improvement Project (P157922)




                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     66.00
Appraisal                                                  16.10
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     62.00
ICR Estimate                                               16.90
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives was rated High in view of the alignment with the CPF at project closing and with the
DRC’s Education and training Sector Strategy. Efficacy was rated Modest under the objectives and targets prior
to restructuring and Substantial under the objectives and targets after restructuring, at which time the project
development objectives were partially achieved, but with some shortcomings. Efficiency was Substantial. These
ratings produce an Outcome rating of Moderately Unsatisfactory under the original objectives, and Satisfactory
under the revised objectives. At the restructuring, 38.5 percent of funds had been disbursed.

Weighting the outcome ratings according to IEG/OPCS guidelines:

      MU (3) * 0.385 = 1.155
      S (5) * 0.615 = 3.075
      1.155 + 3.075 = 4.230, which rounds to 4, producing an overall Outcome rating of Moderately
       Satisfactory, indicative of moderate shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and
       achievement. In particular, the indicators used, and their respective partial achievement, did not ensure
       that the revised Objective 1, addressing learning conditions in primary education, could be measured
       adequately.




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to development outcome at the sector level appears to be low. The MEPST showed commitment to
the objectives of the project and, even though implementation capacity was reportedly low, the Ministry was
able to execute the project effectively after restructuring. In addition, the MEPST secured a funding line item
to sustain PBF activities, given the positive results from the impact evaluation. The restructuring process
dropped pre-service teacher training as it could not be implemented during the life of the project. This poses
a risk in ensuring adequate learning environments, particularly in the context of a major increase in
enrollment. This risk was addressed by the Bank through two projects, the Emergency Equity and System



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Education Quality Improvement Project (P157922)



Strengthening in Education project (US$800 million, 2020-2024, P172341) and the Girls’ Learning and
Empowerment Project (US$400 million, 2023-2028, P178684).

The main risk to development outcome is related to the weak governance and poverty conditions in the
country. The DRC is highly dependent on the support of development partners for the implementation of
education programs. In addition, as the ICR indicated, local conflicts affect the provision of education in
several areas of the country.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design included notable innovations for education projects in the DRC. In particular, the
  project introduced performance-based financing linked to local accomplishment of specified targets such
  as school improvement plans. The project also supported the development of learning materials in the
  national languages, and activities to counter gender-based violence. At closing, these initiatives showed
  positive results. However, the overall project design was overly ambitious and complex, with “too many
  [activities] to effectively implement with limited capacity” (ICR, p. 30). The lack of clarity with respect to
  the TTIs led to the cancellation of these infrastructure activities. In addition, there were capacity
  constraints at the ECE level such that an Interactive Audio Instruction (IAI) program for teachers and
  parents had to be cancelled (ICR, p. 32). Furthermore, the project was expected to produce outcomes on
  improved student performance in a period of less than four years (April 2017-February 2021) in a difficult
  country context.

  While the project was designed using global evidence that allowed for the design of a good quality results
  chain or theory of change, neither was included in the project design. In addition, the number of PDO and
  intermediate results indicators was extremely long, making monitoring and evaluation cumbersome. On
  the other hand, ECE was deemed to be very important, but there were no outcome or output indicators
  on ECE in the results framework.

  The implementation arrangements were mainstreamed within government structures and built on the
  systems established under the PROSEB project, which was ongoing at the time of appraisal. At that
  point, fiduciary risk was deemed to be substantial, weaknesses were identified, and remedial actions
  were agreed upon. The performance-based financing component was designed to have an external
  verification agency that would need to confirm the compliance of activities before disbursements
  occurred.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education Quality Improvement Project (P157922)



 According to the ICR, the World Bank carried out semi-annual supervision missions that included education
 specialists as well as fiduciary and safeguards staff and consultants. The supervision team consistently
 reported on project progress as well as compliance with fiduciary and safeguards policies. The team also
 provided technical assistance to the DRC government agencies involved in the project implementation to
 improve processes and address challenges.

 The World Bank responded to the major challenges faced by the project, albeit relatively late. The project
 was facing major implementation issues from early 2019, but the mid-term review was only carried out in
 late September 2019 and the restructuring was approved in August 2020, almost a year later. While this
 was a major restructuring that would require time to prepare, the lag of time was somewhat long. Further to
 this, the restructuring did not include ECE indicators to measure the outcomes of the project in this area.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 M&E was included under the third component on project management. The M&E activities included
 baseline and end-line surveys, an impact assessment of the PBF (which would be implemented in 1350
 schools to be compared with a control group), and a joint evaluation with UNICEF of the ECE intervention.
 Further to this, student performance evaluation was to be determined through the implementation of the
 Early Grade Reading Assessment. The project design also included surveys that would measure
 beneficiaries’ perceptions and would serve to report on citizen engagement. Regular monitoring of project
 implementation would be carried out through annual joint reviews between the government and the Local
 Education Group. The Project Coordination Team (PCT) was expected to include an M&E specialist who
 would be responsible for the design of an M&E system during the early stages of the project.

 There was a total of 49 indicators, of which 10 were PDO-level indicators. This very large number of
 indicators made monitoring and evaluation a cumbersome task.



b. M&E Implementation
  Prior to restructuring, M&E faced challenges, with difficulties in obtaining data and reporting actually
  occurring for very few indicators. After restructuring, when the number of indicators was reduced to 27,
  five of which were at the PDO level, data reporting was more effective, and indicators were reported on a
  regular basis. The PBF impact evaluation was carried out and third-party validation of activities
  was implemented, allowing for the PBF component to be disbursed. The baseline and end-line surveys
  were carried out, and data were collected for a statistical yearbook.



                                                                                                 Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education Quality Improvement Project (P157922)




c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reports that the Independent Learning Assessment Unit, even though in its early stages, used
  the project's assessment and evaluation data to provide feedback on training programs in response to
  the initial learning results, inform decision makers, and support decision-making on expansion of PBF
  activities. In addition, the service delivery indicator surveys were used to prepare a GPE project and a
  proposed girls' project in the DRC. In addition, the MEPST has committed to producing statistical
  yearbooks on an annual basis.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the project was rated Category B, Partial Environmental Assessment. The Environmental
   Assessment (EA) policy (OP/BP 4.01) was triggered to address minor potential environmental and social
   impacts linked with the construction of four teacher training institutions (TTI). The project also triggered
   OP/BP 4.11 Physical and Cultural Resources, because the construction of the TTIs would require
   excavations and thus the potential finding of archeological sites. The corresponding Environmental and
   Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared and disclosed, as per Bank policy, prior to project
   approval. In addition, OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples was triggered because the nine provinces supported
   by the project were home to indigenous peoples. An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) was
   prepared and disclosed.

   The restructuring of the project led to partial changes with respect to the safeguard categories. The
   construction of TTIs was cancelled, and the EA category was changed from B to C. The Indigenous
   Peoples policy continued to be triggered, as the project area did not change.

   A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM), Allo Ecole, was implemented as part of the project within the
   MEPST. The GRM platform served all the Bank’s education projects. In addition, a system supported by
   UNICEF and United Nations Population Fund received complaints related to sexual exploitation and sexual
   harassment. The GRM faced implementation challenges, as it did not comply with policies established
   under the project. These issues were addressed during the implementation process.

   Safeguards were monitored during project implementation and were consistently rated as Moderately
   Satisfactory (MS), mainly due to the challenges faced with the GRM.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


                                                                                                  Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education Quality Improvement Project (P157922)



   At appraisal, overall fiduciary risk was rated as substantial. The main reason for this rating was the
   relatively weak implementation capacity in the public sector in the DRC.

    A financial management (FM) assessment was carried out at appraisal. Since the project was to be
   implemented by the same unit that had been implementing a prior Bank project, staffing was found to be
   satisfactory, but the assessment recommended that two additional FM staff be added to the
   implementation team. During implementation, interim financial reports were submitted in a timely manner
   and were of acceptable quality. Audits were unqualified but came with recommendations for
   improvements, which coincided with Bank supervision mission recommendations. During the life of the
   project, FM performance was rated as moderately satisfactory.

   A procurement assessment was carried out at appraisal, concluding that the risk was high. Even though
   the implementation unit had been strengthened under the Bank’s previous project, further strengthening
   was needed. During implementation, procurement was rated mostly as moderately satisfactory, with the
   exception of one period where it was rated moderately unsatisfactory. The main challenges faced by the
   project were related to long delays in processing contracts, which resulted in implementation
   delays. Procurement plans were updated and submitted to the Bank as required. Staff showed adequate
   capacity for implementation of procurement processes, having received training by the Bank.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   Not applicable.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 The ICR assigned a High
                                                                                 efficacy rating after the
                                                                                 restructuring, whereas under the
                                                                                 ICRR, the efficacy was rated as
                                                                                 Substantial. Despite meeting the
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory   proposed outcome targets,
                                                                                 these did not entirely align with
                                                                                 the objective, and there were
                                                                                 also shortcomings in delivering
                                                                                 some key outcomes relevant to
                                                                                 the achievement of the objective



                                                                                                    Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Education Quality Improvement Project (P157922)



                                                                                 Project design was overly
                                                                                 ambitious. Restructuring was
Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory   carried out on the third year of a
                                                                                 projected implementation period
                                                                                 of less than four years.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR provided some important lessons learned, the most relevant of which are summarized
below:

Performance based financing (PBF) can be an effective instrument to focus on results rather
than inputs. This is particularly relevant for countries such as the DRC, as it shows that PBF
strategies can be implemented in fragile and conflict-affected settings. Commitment from the
MEPST and the government was key in the implementation of this policy. One particularly important
outcome was that, as a result of the incentives posed under the PBF, more female teachers were
hired.

Addressing sexual exploitation and harassment is a critical component of any effort to
increase enrollment and permanence of girls in schools. The project focused on
communications campaigns to raise awareness, removed stereotyping in textbooks, included this
topic in teacher and administrator training, and implemented a GRM. Subsequently, two projects will
be addressing this cross-cutting area in order to sustain these efforts.

Effective training for teachers goes beyond in-service teacher training. A teacher professional
development system includes training at the pre-service and in-service levels as well as continuous
support through classroom observation and feedback. This project only provided a short-term
training program through cascade trainings. This limitation was recognized by the country and the
Bank, and a wider scope of teacher development activities will be supported through the two new
projects.

Ensuring that textbooks arrive and are used in the classroom is a critical factor in achieving
better learning conditions. The project supported a last-mile textbook distribution system to avoid
a previously observed situation where textbooks would arrive at the district level but would not reach
the classroom. Logistics are particularly challenging in large countries with underdeveloped
infrastructure, difficult climate conditions, and conflict situations.

Defining a realistic results framework is fundamental to the processes of evaluating
outcomes and monitoring progress. The original project design had a very large set of indicators
to be monitored, with a particularly large number of them at the PDO level. While the restructuring
reduced the number of indicators, it was still large. A well-designed theory of change can contribute
to the design of indicators, so as to selectively trace project activities and measure results and
outcomes.



                                                                                                    Page 17 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Education Quality Improvement Project (P157922)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well written and provided a clear overview of the project. It aptly explained the changes resulting
from the restructuring of the project, which was complex and included a great deal of detail. The analysis was
results-oriented, and conclusions were based on evidence. The ICR provided two theories of change, one for
the period prior up to restructuring, and the other for the period after restructuring, thus compensating for the
lack of them at appraisal and restructuring. However, these TOCs were not clear and did not connect well with
the project's objectives. Further to this, the ICR did not provide a description of the work with other development
partners, while the PAD indicated that coordination was very important in order to generate synergies and avoid
overlaps. The PAD also indicated that the ECD pilot would be evaluated jointly with UNICEF, but there was no
mention of this in the ICR.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 18 of 18
