     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     -HCMC Green Transport Development (P126507)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023856

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P126507                                      -HCMC Green Transport Development

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Viet Nam                                     Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-56540,TF-A2457                           31-Dec-2020                                           1,643,502.19

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 29-May-2015                                  31-Dec-2023

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            124,000,000.00                                     5,261,000.00

 Revised Commitment                               8,484,159.63                                                0.00

 Actual                                           1,643,502.19                                                0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Alejandra Eguiluz            Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) is “To improve the performance and efficiency of public transport
   along a high priority corridor in Ho Chi Minh City” (Grant agreement p. 4). The PDO formulation in the PAD is
   identical (PAD, p. 5).

   The PDO will be parsed, for the purpose of this review as follows:

           To improve the performance of public transport along a high priority corridor in Ho Chi Minh City

                                                                                                     Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     -HCMC Green Transport Development (P126507)



         To improve the efficiency of public transport along a high priority corridor in Ho Chi Minh City



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Bus Rapid Transit Corridor Development. Total Cost at appraisal: US$122.80 million
   (of which IDA US$110.36 million); actual cost: US$1.64 million. This component was to develop a Bus
   Rapid Transit (BRT) corridor between An Lac, in the southwest of Ho Chi Minh City (HCMC), to Rach Chiec,
   in the northeast of HCMC, and included the following: (a) Carrying out the construction and supervision of
   the BRT infrastructure and facilities; (b) Improvement of the traffic management system, including the
   modification of intersection controls and the deployment of an intelligent transport system and associated
   technologies; (c) Development of a fare collection system, including smart cards and servers; (d) Provision
   of BRT vehicles and fueling facilities; (e) Carrying out integrated planning and urban development measures
   around BRT stations; (f) Carrying out of marketing and public communication activities; (g) Provision of
   support for Project management; and (h) Land acquisition and resettlement.

   Component 2: Institutional Strengthening (Total cost at appraisal: US$5.00 million, of which
   IDA US$5.00 million; actual cost: US$ 0 million). This component included the following activities: (a)
   Carrying out of training programs and technical support for relevant implementing agencies in project
   management, urban transport planning and public transport operation, including strategic support for the
   operation of the BRT system; (b) Carrying out of monitoring and evaluation activities, including the
   assessment of the BRT system success on an on-going basis; (c) Carrying out of feasibility and design
   studies for maximizing connectivity and ridership and continued development of the BRT system; and (d)
   Carrying out of a study to develop the optimal fare structure and fare product range for the public
   transportation system.

   The following three components were approved with the AF in Jan 2020:

   Component 3: Integrated Urban Development (at appraisal : US$5 million; actual: US$ 0 million).
   This component aimed at enabling integrated and transit-oriented urban development (TOD) around the
   BRT corridor with the following sub-components: (i) Creating the foundation for TOD, through the
   amendment of existing urban design and district zoning plans. Based on this, construction permits would be
   granted and the institutional capacity of HCMC would be strengthened, (ii) Leveraging the private sector to
   engage it in the TOD, by developing legal, regulatory and financial mechanisms such as land value-
   capturing and public-private partnerships, and (iii) the design and implementation of a Public Space Pilot
   Project, on existing public land along the BRT corridor in accordance with urban design, enhancing the
   connectivity and attractiveness of the BRT.



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    -HCMC Green Transport Development (P126507)



  Component 4: Transport Planning for Enhanced Connectivity (at appraisal: US$ 4 million; actual:
  US$ 0 million). This component would support integration of the BRT system with other transport modes
  and consisted of the following sub-components: (i) Improving the BRT connectivity, including organization of
  feeder bus routes and improvement of non-motorized transport connections, and (ii) the design and
  implementation of a Connectivity Pilot Project, to provide non-motorized transport (NMT)-based last-
  kilometer connectivity solutions to/from BRT stations.

  Component 5: Capacity Strengthening (at appraisal: US$1.5 million; actual: US$ 0 million). This
  component would strengthen: (i) the project management capacity of the "Transport Works Construction
  Investment Project Management Authority" of Ho Chi Minh City (TCIP) for implementation of the project
  and the AF activities, and (ii) the corporate and business capacity of modal authorities including the
  Department of Transport (DOT), and the Management Centre of Public Transport (MCPT), which had been
  assigned to perform as a Public Transport Authority agency (PTA) that integrates operations of all modes of
  public transport, and to institutionalize TOD.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. At appraisal, the total project cost was estimated at US$ 124.0 million (IDA credit IDA-56540).
  Additional Financing (AF) was approved in January 2020 (TF-A2457) and added US $10,5 million, which
  brought the total estimated project cost to US$ 134.5 million. The AF grant closed in June 2022 with 0
  amount disbursed. The IDA credit was cancelled on May 31, 2023.The actual project cost was US$1.64
  million. The percentage of project disbursement was 1.32%. There is a discrepancy in the document as the
  amount of US$8,484,159.63 (ICR page 2, data sheet) is presented as the revised project amount. The Bank
  team clarified that the discrepancy was due to exchange rate fluctuations between XDR and USD.

  Financing. The Project was financed through an IDA credit of US$ 124 million (IDA-56540), approved in
  May 2015 and a grant from the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO) in the form of AF of
  US$ 10.5 million.

  Borrower contribution. At appraisal, the planned borrower contribution was US$13.44 million. When the
  AF was approved, the agreed borrower contribution for the AF was US$0.2 million. The actual borrower
  contribution was US$ 0 million.

  Dates

  The IBRD IDA loan was approved in May 2015, and became effective in October 2015. The original closing
  date was December 2020. The actual closing date was December 2023, i.e., a 36 months’ extension.

  Additional Financing as approved in January 2020 (Report No: PAD3605). The grant aimed at scaling up
  activities to enhance the impact of the original project, introducing activities that aimed at integrating the
  project with the urban development in which it was inserted, in order to increase the accessibility of the
  public (connecting different transport modes) and the critical mass of users. The need for increasing the
  technical capacity of the borrower and inter-agency coordination was also identified as deserving stronger
  focus.

  The December 2020 restructuring (Report No: RES44552) allowed for a project extension up to December
  31, 2023. It contained revisions to indicators and disbursement estimates that concerned extending the

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     -HCMC Green Transport Development (P126507)



   timeline of achievement of targets in the RF. Two of the outcome-level indicator targets were increased
   (i.e., number of workers and students accessing Thu Thiem Development within 45 minutes- with the sub-
   indicator of number of residents). Some of the training and technical support activities were cancelled from
   component 2 and organizational reforms in the institutional structure of the government were reflected
   (change in the name of project owner, from “Urban Civil Works Construction Investment Management
   Authority of Ho Chi Minh City (UCCI)” to “Transport Works Construction Investment Project Management
   Authority of Ho Chi Minh City (TCIP)”.

   The SECO TA trust fund TF0A2457 closed in June 2022, with no disbursements made. On December 28,
   2021, the World Bank issued a threat of suspension to the Recipient, followed by a notice of suspension on
   July 1, 2022. The notice of suspension required that in order for the World Bank to lift the suspension of
   disbursements, HCMC must approve the detailed design and bidding documents for four key contracts, as
   the remedial action. In a meeting on September 19, 2022, the HCMC PC agreed that having the whole
   project cancelled was the best course of action. All activities stopped on December 31, 2022. On May 31,
   2023, the undisbursed amount of the IDA credit was cancelled as the remedial action notified in the
   suspension notice had not been addressed by the Recipient for a period longer than 30 days after the
   issuance of the suspension notice.

   A split evaluation is not necessary given that the changes during restructuring did not significantly affect the
   PDO or the key indicators.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal

Since Viet Nam adopted its economic reform policy in 1986, transitioning from a centrally planned economy
to a market economy, the major cities experienced significant urban development. This spurred economic
growth, which averaged 6.4 percent from 2000 to 2012. The national capital Hanoi, and the most populous
city Ho Chi Minh City (HCMC) had solidified their status as the country’s two principal economic and
industrial centers. To ensure continued strong economic performance and to achieve Viet Nam’s goal of
successfully transitioning to a middle-income status, the national government was seeking to address
infrastructure constraints to the country’s economic competitiveness, with a focus on the quality of urban
infrastructure and services in the main cities, including the development of sustainable urban transport
systems.

With 7.7 million inhabitants (in 2012) in HCMC and over 9 million in the metropolitan area, rapid urban
development made urban transport planning challenging. The poor quality of public transport infrastructure
and services resulted in a very low reliance and utilization of public transport and a heavy reliance on
motorcycles; they accounted for almost two thirds (62%) of all daily trips, whereas buses accounted for
1.4%. This was impacting traffic performance, safety, and air quality in HCMC. Growing congestion and
limited public transport options disproportionately affected the most vulnerable segments of the population –
women, youth, the elderly, the disabled, the very poor, and in general anyone reliant on public transport. In
terms of road safety, the casualty rate (including injuries and fatalities) in the An Lac - Rach Chiec corridor
alone, increased 4.8 times between 2010 and 2013. The environmental effect was also concerning, as

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     -HCMC Green Transport Development (P126507)



almost all motorbikes operated on fossil fuels and contributed significantly to poor air quality in the city (ICR,
page 5).

The World Bank had been involved in shaping Viet Nam’s public transport agenda since the 2000’s,
considering Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) as a cost-effective alternative to metro. In the context of the CPS
2012-2016, the Government of Viet Nam approached the World Bank for support for its first BRT line in
Hanoi, as a demonstration project intended to show the advantages of BRT in terms of performance and
efficiency and help the authorities in HCMC to extract lessons for the implementation of the planned six-line
BRT network.

Nonetheless, the political support for the project was underestimated. The Prime Minister, in a decision
dated 8 April 2013, had already signaled the intention to replace the subject BRT line No. 1 (among other
two lines) with a tram line in the future, as noted in the ICR, para 41.

Consistency with Country Strategy

In 2008, HCMC’s city government had approved the Master Plan for Public Transport Development in Ho
Chi Minh City to 2025, including a hierarchical approach in which seven metro lines, three tramway lines,
six BRT lines, and 212 bus lines together constituted an integrated transit system. The Master Plan sought
to increase the supply and quality of public transport while regulating motorcycle use by enacting and
enforcing regulations. The plan sought to raise the capacity of the public transport system to meet 25-30%
of the total travel demand in the city, encouraging the use of public transport, reducing motor vehicle use,
and improving traffic safety. The PDO was aligned with the country strategy at appraisal and continued to
be at closing, as the strategy is a long-term vision to be achieved in 2025.

Consistency with Bank Strategies

At appraisal, the Bank’s assistance was shifting from a sectoral focus towards an integrated city-wide
approach in support of the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS 2012-2016): competitiveness (developing a
financing framework for integrated urban development), sustainability (promoting resilient urban
development, including BRT, and focusing on environmental sustainability), and opportunity (improving low-
income areas by upgrading basic infrastructure). The PDO was well aligned with the Bank strategy at
appraisal.

The project’s PDO remained relevant to the CPS for the period 2018-2022 (Report No. 111771-VN), as
sustainable urban transport remained a key priority, focusing on more environmentally sustainable transport
modes that would lower the GHG emission in the transport sector. At project closing, the need to improve
urban mobility by promoting public transport and integrated urban growth had become even more relevant
in HCMC, as its performance and efficiency remained a bottleneck for urban mobility until project closure.
From 2012 to 2022, the population of HCMC grew from 7.7 million to 9.4 million (ICR page 6), motorization
accelerated dramatically and the urban road network remains severely congested during peak hours.

Previous Bank experience

The PAD highlighted a considerable amount of previous experience and lessons learned that the Bank had
accumulated in the sector, outlining previous projects that financed the same public transport concept of
BRT, in Lima (P035740), Bogotá (P006872 and P074726) and Colombia (P082466) (PAD, page 16 and
17). The Project Preparation Technical Assistance Facility for Vietnam and the IDF-financed Public
Transport Authority Development Project (P144037) were reported to be instrumental in the preparation of

                                                                                                       Page 5 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      -HCMC Green Transport Development (P126507)



               this project. While the project benefitted from previous experiences in other countries, it did not sufficiently
               address the political context in which the project was designed.

               Even though the project was aligned with the country and Bank strategy, it failed to adequately account for
               the political context. The choice of BRT as the most optimum public transport strategy for HCMC could
               have been more rigorously analyzed at appraisal, especially in light of the weak political commitment. Thus,
               the overall relevance of the objectives is rated as Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve performance of public transport along a high priority corridor in Ho Chi Minh City

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change (ToC)

                             The PAD does not include an explicit ToC. The ICR presents a logical and adequate ToC to achieve the
                             PDO (page 7): .The activities of construction of the BRT, of transport management improvement and fare
                             collection system (inputs), plus the activities regarding the trainings and operational support, the annual
                             surveys and the studies (inputs) will lead to the construction of the transport facilities (output) and the
                             improvement of traffic management (output), together with the raised awareness of the public (output) and the
                             inter-agency planning and operation (output) were expected to lead to an increased usage and higher
                             satisfaction of passengers, reduced travel time, improved accessibility for residential areas and a reduction of
                             GHG emissions along the BRT corridor (outcomes). These, in turn, were expected to lead to an improved
                             performance and efficiency of the public transport along the selected corridor (PDO1 and PDO2).

                             The logic of the ToC that applies more specifically to PDO1 (performance) concerns the outputs and
                             intermediary outcomes that deal more directly with the setting up of the system, its operativity and its usage,
                             thus the indicators reflecting number of passengers, people satisfied and travel time.

                             The outcome-level indicators related to PDO1 and the level of achievement of the targets are the following:

                                        Number of passengers per day using the BRT system. The original target was 28,300 passengers
                                         (target revised to 23,312). The result was 0, as no BRT was implemented. Not achieved.
                                        Percentage of people satisfied with the service provided by public transport, disaggregated by gender
                                         and income. The baseline was 30% and the target was 50%. This was not measured during the
                                         project as the BRT system was not implemented. Not achieved.


                                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 16
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               -HCMC Green Transport Development (P126507)




                                   Travel time by public transport along the project corridor, measured as in-vehicle time from An Lac to
                                    Ky Con (14.1 km): The initial travel time of 60 minutes (baseline) could not be reduced to the target of
                                    37 minutes, since no BRT was implemented. Not achieved

                            The ICR does not report on any progress at the project output level. The lack of achievement of outcomes
                            leads to a rating of Negligible for the efficacy of PDO1.



                            Rating
                            Negligible


                            OBJECTIVE 2
                            Objective
                            To improve efficiency of public transport along a high priority corridor in Ho Chi Minh City

                            Rationale
                            ToC

                            The ToC is the same as above. The logic of the ToC that applies more specifically to PDO2 (efficiency)
                            concerns the outputs and outcomes regarding the increased accessibility of users and the reduction on GHG
                            emissions.

                            No progress on outputs are reported in the ICR for PDO2.

                            The outcome-level indicators are the following:

                                   Number of workers and students accessing Thu Thiem Development within 45 minutes. The baseline
                                    was 1,122,000 users and the target was to increase that number by 168,000 people, thus a target of
                                    1,290,000 people). Not achieved (no feeder routes or non-motorized transport upgrades were
                                    implemented under the project).
                                   Difference in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions along the project corridor compared to the business-
                                    as-usual (BAU) case: the difference that was targeted was 23,000 tones/year (a reduction of that
                                    amount). Not achieved, as there was no shift from private vehicles usage to public transport.

                            The lack of achievement of outputs and outcomes lead to a rating of negligible for the efficacy of PDO2.



                            Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY

                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       -HCMC Green Transport Development (P126507)




  Rationale
  PDO1 and PDO2 are rated Negligible, which means an overall rating for efficacy of Negligible.



  Overall Efficacy Rating                                      Primary Reason
  Negligible                                                   Low achievement


5. Efficiency
Ex-ante analysis

At Appraisal, a detailed cost-benefit analysis was conducted for the project, which shed an economic net
present value (ENPV) of US$120.56 million at a 12 percent discount rate. Over a life of 20 years (of which 16
years of operation), the project was expected to deliver an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 18.43%
and an economic benefit-cost ratio (EBCR) of 1.59.

The main quantifiable economic benefits measured were passenger time savings, reduced vehicle operating
costs, and improved traffic safety. Additional benefits, such as transport-related local emissions, noise reduction,
gender equity, and access to employment opportunities, could not be quantified with enough certainty and thus
were not included in the analysis. The main costs included in the model are the infrastructure investments
required to support the BRT system (including BRT and Integrated Transport Systems), traffic engineering,
system management and safety, land use improvements, operation and maintenance costs, and infrastructure
maintenance.

Ex-post analysis

At completion, EIR, NPV, carbon emission reduction, and health benefits from improved air quality could not be
calculated or estimated due to the lack of implementation progress. From the $124 million IDA credit, a total of
$1.64 million was utilized for various consultancies, namely for the detailed design, implementation support,
financial audit, and marketing and public communication, plus consulting services for a study on the re-
organization of the city-wide bus network.

The project missed the opportunity to provide considerable benefits through time savings for passengers,
reductions in vehicle operating costs, improved traffic safety, reduced vehicle congestion, reduced emissions of
atmospheric pollutants, reduced traffic accidents, lower noise levels in the city, and benefits for vulnerable social
groups.

Operational and administrative efficiency

Implementation was hampered at various stages due to the delays in the decision-making process by HCMC
authorities, the reassessment of the project feasibility at an early phase, the difficulties in the preparation of a
quality design and bidding package at intermediate stages, and the onset of the COVID19 pandemic.

The comments of the borrower to the ICR (Annex V) reveal that the borrower's assessment of the main causes
for the lack of implementation relies on the unsatisfactory contractual relationship with the consulting firm in
charge of elaborating the detailed design, which was a main deliverable without which further progress in the


                                                                                                          Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      -HCMC Green Transport Development (P126507)



project could not take place. The procurement context for such a contract did not allow for alternatives other
than to try to make that relationship work, which proved impossible.

The project underwent over three years without implementation and was extended for another three years.
Overall, efficiency is rated as Negligible.


Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Substantial relevance, negligible efficacy and negligible efficiency, give an overall rating of Highly
Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following risks materialized and prevented the achievement of the outcome. Since the development
outcomes of the operation have not been achieved, the various risks to achieving such an objective remain.

Government ownership/commitment: a project of this nature involves a strong and sustained political
leadership that champions the project across ministries and public agencies over time.

Technical risk: The technical capacity of the client and the consulting services available for the main and
initial deliverables need to meet a certain standard. The reinforcement of the PMU with additional technical
expertise happened after the project had started.



                                                                                                         Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      -HCMC Green Transport Development (P126507)



Institutional support risk: The process of planning and implementing an integrated policy for urban
transport requires the pre-existence of a coordinated institutional infrastructure in the country with sound
inter-agency collaboration mechanisms. The risk materialized as the lack of these integrated institutional
mechanisms hindered project implementation.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The PAD states that the project was conceived and designed following extensive consultations with
  critical stakeholders from government to civil society to public transport users (including household
  surveys and focus groups to understand the mobility needs of the potential users).

  However, the ICR notes that the project design was highly ambitious, and it did not consider the previous
  experience and lessons learned for an engagement of this type. The project was founded on master
  plans and feasibility studies based on a traditional approach to focus on hard infrastructure, improvement
  of traffic capacity, and decongestion. However, the selection of BRT should have undergone a more
  thorough analysis at appraisal and involved pros and cons of all public transport technologies considering
  the needs of people, accessibility, integrated development of all transport modes, and the involvement of
  stakeholders and citizens using a transparent and participatory approach.

  The political and governance risk was underestimated, and insufficient mitigation measures were
  proposed. The risk materialized, and leadership changes and shifts in government priorities took place
  soon after the project's commencement in 2016. The decision-making powers of political leaders and risk
  mitigations via an escalation process within the central government were not clear. On the technical side,
  the ICR (para 40) notes that considering the lessons learned from Hanoi BRT in retrospect, the project
  design did not incorporate some aspects and necessary components for a sustainable, attractive and
  efficient BRT system.

  The rapidly changing environment in HCMC’s transport sector was underestimated. The project
  preparation started in 2012 and the project was approved in 2015. This long gestation period in a rapidly
  changing city posed risks for project design. Traffic demand shifted towards other areas as initially
  investigated. The metro construction picking up around Ben Thanh station required that new multimodal
  connectivity requirements and design solutions be considered. The changing environment caused
  designs to be adjusted, traffic surveys to be re-done, and new branch lines to be added to the BRT
  corridor. These circumstances might have caused the authorities to re-assess the project in 2016 to
  confirm the feasibility of the investment in the new context.

  The technical additions that were introduced with the AF came to complete what was lacking in the
  original design: the integration of the project into the bigger picture of the mobility system and a focus on
  accessibility and connectivity. The ICR points at key factors that were not sufficiently addressed in the
  original design: (i) a comprehensive package of priority actions and interventions (policies, investments,
  service improvements, new systems and mechanisms, and institutional development) (ii) inclusion of
  important interlinkages to the metro, non-motorized transport and transit-oriented development (TOD);



                                                                                                     Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     -HCMC Green Transport Development (P126507)



  (iii) inter-related actions and policies, especially with regards to control of motorcycles and connectivity to
  other public transport modes; and (iv) coordinated action from multiple agencies and departments.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The task team was proactive and gave technical guidance to the counterpart on the management
 approach, the detailed design and the strategic study outputs, the regulation, and the quality auditing. The
 task team consistently recommended to the client to mitigate the key risks identified. The quality of
 progress reporting by the task team to the World Bank management was high. Although the plan was to
 undertake quarterly missions only 2 missions per year took place in average. The team missed important
 opportunities to timely address arising project challenges.

 A Mid-Term Review was planned to be conducted after 24 to 30 months of implementation (i.e. in 2017)
 but was deferred until mid 2021 due to implementation delays. This decision was detrimental as the
 structural problems were not addressed on time. At the restructuring process of December 2020, given the
 project declining ratings since 2016, more determined actions could have been decided. The first threat of
 suspension was only issued on December 28, 2021.

 The AF was approved requesting a waiver from bank policy, as the project was not performing well.
 Despite the low performance, very low disbursement, substantial associated risks, and several
 consecutive ISRs rating the project MU or U, the AF was approved 5 years after implementation started.
 Both the AF and the restructurings failed to address the core underlying political and governance
 challenges, such as the technical capacity gaps, the adequacy of project design to the changing
 environment, the inadequacy of the results framework to measure progress towards achieving the PDO or
 the need to improve governance and delivery performance of both the borrower and the consultant in
 charge of the detailed design of the intervention. The World Bank team could have provided more hands-
 on support beyond monitoring of progress of implementation and could have empowered both the
 Borrower and the Consultant to take informed risks and implement robust risk mitigation measures.

 Given the major shortcomings at both quality at entry and supervision, the overall Bank Performance is
 rated as Unsatisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     -HCMC Green Transport Development (P126507)




a. M&E Design
 At appraisal, the PAD (page 11 and Annex I) presents a framework with a baseline and cumulative target
 values that were produced in different studies. The set of outcome-level indicators is adequate to measure
 the achievement of the PDO. Given the low capacity identified for HCMC authorities regarding M&E, the
 design included a comprehensive monitoring and evaluation study under Component 2. It was foreseen
 that a consultant would be hired to carry out the necessary measurements of the outcome and intermediate
 indicators. The responsibility for collecting the data rested on the Urban Civil Works Construction
 Investment Management Authority of Ho Chi Minh City (UCCI), where the PMU was. The intermediate
 indicators were to be tracked semiannually.




b. M&E Implementation
  Progress in the project was very much tributary to progress on the construction of the BRT, which did not
  happen. The use of the M&E system to measure progress and impact was very limited, not having
  activities to report on.



c. M&E Utilization
  Monitoring of progress towards project objectives, evaluating performance, and informing project
  management could not be done. The M&E framework could not be utilized to inform in any decision-
  making.



  Given that the project activities were not implemented, M&E data on performance and results progress
  could not be collected. The absence of data impeded the evaluation of achievements relative to the
  stated objective or to examine the cause and effect relationship in the results chain. Thus, the M&E is
  rated as Negligible.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Negligible

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project triggered the following safeguards:

   The project was categorized as an Environmental Category B project and triggered the following
   safeguards:


                                                                                                 Page 12 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    -HCMC Green Transport Development (P126507)



  OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment. The project was expected to bring about long-term environmental
  benefits and positive impacts on the lives of the people in Ho Chi Minh City and reduce traffic safety risks
  and emissions from private vehicles. The potential negative socio-environmental impacts were associated
  with rehabilitating and improving existing road infrastructure to support BRT operations, constructing BRT
  infrastructure, and other non-motorized transport infrastructure to facilitate access to BRT services.

  The client prepared the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), which confirmed the potential adverse
  impacts of the project during site preparation and construction. Mitigation measures were to be designed to
  reduce the negative impacts. No construction occurred during the project, so no environmental impacts
  were identified.

  OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. The affected land for the construction of the BRT was about 13,3 ha of
  agricultural land, with a total of 15 households potentially affected. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was
  prepared by the client and cleared by the Bank on July 28, 2020. Compensation payments were to be paid
  as per the Resettlement Policy Framework. A social assessment (SA) assessed the overall project's social
  impact.

  The Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was implemented in anticipation of the planned civil works. At the time
  of project closing, there were outstanding compensation issues, and a Post Closure Action Plan (PCAP)
  was prepared to address outstanding E&S issues in collaboration with the client and was cleared by RSA
  on June 5, 2023. As of November 2023, 4 cases were pending for various reasons, including disagreement
  on the compensation and legal documents needing correction. The cases are being addressed through the
  courts, and the compensation budget has been kept in escrow. The ICR notes that HCMC is committed to
  following up on these cases.

  The Bank closed the PCAP (closure note, November 29, 2023) based on the following: (i) the pending
  issues, although having started with the Bank-funded project, fell under the responsibility of HCMC, given
  that the bank project was canceled; (ii) the minor scale of the pending issues, limited to mainly unused land
  except for two cases with renters; (iii) the arrangement in place within the client, by which the PMU, a
  permanent organization within HCMC continues to follow up with Thu Duc City Resettlement Committee;
  (IV) the active engagement of the bank with HCMC, including TCIP, for an ongoing technical assistance
  partnership.

  The Project operated a Grievance Redress Mechanism accessible to affected households. Two complaints
  (one sent through the World Bank Grievance Redress Service) were received, resolved, and closed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement. During project preparation, appropriate attention was given to procurement risks and
  capacity constraints within the local government transport departments and PMU. The limited experience
  with the World Bank policy requirements at the local level in HCMC justified foreseeing adequate
  procurement training, clear procedures, and support of a competent project implementation support
  consultant.

  During implementation, 4 out of 18 packages for consulting services were awarded. The largest contract
  (detailed design) suffered from contract execution and management challenges. Once the new authorities

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     -HCMC Green Transport Development (P126507)



   had committed to the project content (issue that had cost several years delay to project implementation)
   the ToRs for the consultant underwent important changes in scope and timeline. The authorities (HCMC)
   estimated that the consultant was not qualified to follow through, and had a discussion with the World Bank
   on the opportunity to terminate the contract with the design consultant to carry out procurement to select a
   new consultant, but this solution was not supported by the World Bank. The contractual relationship
   remained but implementation never progressed.

   At time of cancellation, there were four consultancy contracts with unpaid amounts which TCIP originally
   planned to pay with IDA proceeds after verifying these claims. Since the remaining balance of IDA was
   cancelled, HCMC must secure the needed counterpart funds to clear the payments with the consultants (in
   the context of a bi-partite contract between the client and the consultant).

   Financial Management. Most aspects of financial management (accounting, internal controls, reporting,
   auditing) were properly maintained. Interim Financial Reports were submitted on time with acceptable
   quality. In 2017, an adequate allocation for the project was not made in HCMC Medium-Term Public
   Investment Plan (MTIP) for 2016-2020 in order to enable payments once project implementation got back
   on track. This was only resolved when the budget for 2019 was sufficiently allocated.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                               Highly
Outcome                                              Highly Unsatisfactory
                               Unsatisfactory
                                                                                 There are severe shortcomings
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Unsatisfactory              in both Quality at Entry and
                               Unsatisfactory
                                                                                 Supervision.
Quality of M&E                 Negligible            Negligible

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons are selected as most relevant, from the ICR (rephrased):

Transport projects may be more likely to succeed when there is an institutional framework
with an established dynamic of cooperation and strong political leadership. Maintaining a
high-level political ‘champion’ and dedicated technical focal points who are responsible for
implementing the decisions is key. In this project, a continuous political ‘buy-in’ and commitment

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       -HCMC Green Transport Development (P126507)



from the authorities was missing (the political changes weakened the original leadership’s
commitment), and some important political and technical risks materialized.

A BRT approach is likely to be more successful if tailored to the new contexts and as part of
a more integrated vision. Despite the BRT's diverse, successful interventions in other countries,
this approach was more questionable in the case of Vietnam. Specific contexts regarding safety,
reliability, convenience, meeting local demand, etc, are to be analyzed in each case. The specific
factors in each country lead to realizing the need to consider other alternatives, which also facilitates
getting more political support for the finally chosen technology as the most optimum public transport
strategy.

In rapidly changing urban environments, projects may get more traction through well-
prepared and ready-to-go interventions. There is often a disconnection between big master plans
that take time to start implementation and the need for short-term pragmatic investments that
address the problem and provide results early in the process. In this project, implementation
depended heavily on a major initial contract that had a lengthy procurement process and got
delayed, blocking the interventions. Projects financed by the Bank should be grounded on a
comprehensive package of priority actions and interventions (policies, investments, service
improvements, new systems and mechanisms, and institutional development).

Technical and project management capacity gaps of the client may hinder project
implementation if not addressed early. In this project, many new urban and transport planning
concepts were introduced (the BRT, feeder modes, and Transit-Oriented Development were all
new), and the lack of capacity negatively affected implementation.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR presents the lack of performance with candor and analyses the events during project appraisal and
implementation to identify what could have been done differently, proposing alternative courses of action that
could have prevented the low project performance. Although the few actions that the project did undertake are
highlighted in the ICR as impactful in the way they built up capacity and paved the way for better integration
across agencies, these actions are not sufficiently detailed, and their translation into outputs has not been
presented under the efficacy section (policies, training, coordination among agencies).

The lessons extracted are rich and numerous. They appropriately respond to the key project issues during
appraisal and implementation and are linked to the narrative and ratings presented in the report. The report is
consistent and presents a logical linking and integration of its various parts. It is concise and clear in its



                                                                                                     Page 15 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      -HCMC Green Transport Development (P126507)



message. The sequence of events that led to project cancellation is clearly presented. The report is largely
consistent with the guidelines. The table of project costs by component was incomplete.

Overall, the ICR quality is rated as Substantial



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 16
