     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TG-Economic Governance (P158078)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023933

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P158078                                  TG-Economic Governance

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Togo                                     Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D2340,TF-A8463                       31-Oct-2022                                         18,328,872.83

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 03-Oct-2017                              30-Jun-2023

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          15,000,000.00                                    4,500,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           19,500,000.00                                    4,500,000.00

 Actual                                       18,328,872.83                                    4,231,173.03




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Gloria Carolina            Ranga Rajan                 Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC (Unit 1)
 Gutierrez Tejada           Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p. 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 15), the
   Project Development Objective (PDO) was:

   “ To improve public investment management, domestic revenue mobilization and public
   accountability and monitoring mechanisms for better service delivery in priority sectors.”



                                                                                                Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TG-Economic Governance (P158078)



   For the purposes of this review the PDOs have been parsed as follows:

        1. To improve public investment management;
        2. To improve domestic revenue mobilization;
        3. To improve public accountability and monitoring mechanisms for better service delivery in priority
          sectors.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were four components as follows:

   Component 1: Management of Public Investments and Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs). The
   estimated cost at appraisal was US$ 6.06 million (US$ 5.5 million from International Development
   Association (IDA) Grant and US$ 0.56 million from the European Union (EU) Trust Fund (TF) administered
   by the Bank). The actual cost was as estimated.

   This component aimed to improve the effectiveness of Public Investment Management (PIM). There were
   three subcomponents:

        1. enhancing planning/programming of public investments (including strengthening selection and
           implementation of PPPs);
        2. selecting and budgeting of high-quality public investments; and
        3. improving implementation of public investment projects.

   The first restructuring (discussed below) added a new subcomponent: (iv) strengthening the capacity of the
   ministry of economy and finance in supporting the COVID-19 response.

   Component 2: Supporting Domestic Resource Mobilization (DRM). The estimated cost at appraisal was
   US$ 7.20 million (US$ 6.0 million from IDA Grant and US$ 1.2 million from the EU TF). The actual cost was
   as estimated.

   This component aimed to support DRM by strengthening the tax policy and its implementation. There were
   three subcomponents:

        1. strengthening capacity for tax policy;
        2. broadening the tax base through administrative improvements; and
        3. enhancing the quality of tax payer system to promote voluntary compliance.




                                                                                                   Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    TG-Economic Governance (P158078)



  Component 3: Increasing Public Accountability and Citizen Engagement. The estimated cost at
  appraisal was US$ 3.98 million (US$ 1.5 million from the IDA Grant and US$ 2.48 million from the EU
  TF). The actual cost was as estimated.

  This component aimed to enhance public accountability and promote citizen engagement in the budget
  process. There were three subcomponents:

      1. strengthening the capacities of formal oversight and accountability institutions;
      2. strengthening civil society engagement in the budget process;
      3. strengthening citizen engagement in priority sectors (maternal and child health), primary education,
         and urban water supply).

  Component 4: Project Implementation support. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$ 2.56 million
  (US$ 2.00 million from the IDA Grant and US$ 0.56 million from the EU TF). The actual cost was as
  estimated.

  This component aimed to support project coordination. There were two components: (i) support for project
  management and reform coordination; (ii) support for monitoring, evaluation, independent review, and
  communication.

  US$0.80 million of the IDA grant was unallocated at appraisal.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The estimated cost at appraisal was US$19.50 million. The actual cost was US$ 18.32
  million.

  Financing: The project was financed by an IDA grant of US$ 15.00 million and a EU TF of US$ 4.50
  million. The total financing for the project was US$19.50 million. The total amount disbursed was US$ 18.32
  million (US$ 14.07 million of the IDA grant and US$ 4.23 million of the EU TF). The difference between the
  appraisal estimate and amount disbursed was due to the savings realized during implementation.
  The difference in the amount from the EU TF in the PAD and the ICR was due to the currency changes
  during implementation.

  Borrower Contribution: The Republic of Togo had not planned and did not provide counterpart funding
  during implementation.

  Dates: The Bank approved the project on October 3, 2017, and the project became effective on April 20,
  2018 with an original closing date of October 22, 2022. However, the project closed eight months behind
  schedule on June 30, 2023.

  Other changes. There were two level 2 restructurings during the project lifetime.

  The main changes made through the first restructuring on August 3, 2020 (ICR, p. ii):

        Savings realized during realization were utilized for scaling up activities to support the Government's
         efforts to address the COVID-19 health crisis.

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TG-Economic Governance (P158078)



        Grant proceeds were reallocated for carrying out additional activities.
        A new Intermediate Results Indicator (IRI) was added related to transparency of debt management.

   The main change made through the project restructuring on October 25, 2022:

        The closing date was extended by eight months from October 31, 2022, to June 30, 2023 for
          completing the ongoing activities that were delayed in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context: Togo was emerging from years of isolation, donor disengagement, and economic
mismanagement that deteriorated the fiscal situation and weakened the financial management (FM) system
at appraisal. When this project was under preparation, the World Bank had classified Togo as a fragile,
conflict-affected state (FCS) due to its weak governance capacity. The Togo Risk and Resilience
Assessment (RRA, 2023) identified weak governance as the main source of fragility and impediment to
Togo’s development. Togo exited FCS status in 2020.

Sector context: The Bank prepared this project in a context in which development outcomes in Togo were
constrained by Public Financial Management (PFM) challenges, such as issues relating to budget
credibility, predictability and execution. To ensure adequate service delivery, Togo also needed to enhance
the efficiency of its public investments, increase its DRM capacity, and address accountability and
monitoring of institutions.

Bank strategy: The project’s PDO was well aligned with the World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework
(CPF) FY17-FY20 and the Bank's 2016 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) at appraisal. The CPF
emphasized strengthening governance, including strengthening institutions and accountability, as a cross-
cutting theme. The governance theme focused on: (a) addressing transparency and efficiency of PFM,
DRM, and PIM, including PPPs; (b) decentralizing service delivery to bring decision making closer to
citizens; (c) enhancing citizen engagement in monitoring of budget execution in key sectors; and (e)
combating corruption through more effective public oversight of institutions.

The PDO is well-aligned with the current Bank strategy for Togo. The SCD that was updated in March
2023, and which was to be the basis for the Bank's upcoming CPF, reiterated weak governance as a
foundational constraint to Togo's growth and development. The SCD (2023) specifically highlighted the
importance of strengthening PFM, increasing DRM, increasing the effectiveness of public spending,
modernizing public administration, and improving delivery of essential services.

Government strategy: The PDO was well-aligned with the government’s strategic vision of development
articulated in the National Development Plan (NDP) (2018 - 2022) and Strategy for Accelerated Growth
(SCAPE). The NDP identified “Strengthening governance and consolidating peace” as a crucial objective.
The PDO was in line with the government’s Vision 2030 which identified the need for reinforcing capacities
of local and national actors; mobilizing resources and strengthening management of public finances (PAD.



                                                                                                  Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      TG-Economic Governance (P158078)



               P 14). SCAPE acknowledged serious challenges in the governance system and articulated the need for
               improving governance and promoting sustainable and participatory development.

               Previous Bank experience: The project was aligned with its CPF, and complemented other operations,
               including a parallel Bank-financed Development Policy Operation (DPO). The project activities were
               grounded in robust analytical works such as the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA),
               Public Investment Management Assessment (PIMA), Public Expenditure Management and Financial
               Accountability Review (PEMFAR) and the Bank's 2016 SCD. A Project Preparation Advance (PPA) helped
               to ensure a quick start to implementation.

               The overall level of ambition of the project was appropriate, given that at approval, Togo had not yet exited
               its fragile status and had weak implementation and governance capacity. With the savings realized during
               implementation, the level of ambition of the project scope was expanded. Therefore, the overall relevance is
               rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve public investment management

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. The project aimed to address the weaknesses in the management of public
                             investments. The TOC held that effective coordination of investment planning between sectors and budget
                             units, public investment management tools, standardized cost-benefit analysis for public investment projects
                             and monitoring, systems for training and public investment professionals and setting a framework for
                             selecting PPPs were likely to aid in enhancing planning of public investments. It held that identification
                             of mature projects and developing tools for securing funding, developing annual performance plans, work
                             programs and performance reports of priority sectors, and adapting the information management system to
                             the requirements of program budgeting were likely to aid in selecting high-quality public
                             investments. Dissemination of procedures for new procurement tools and developing information tracking
                             systems for expediting procurement, were likely to help in enhancing implementation of public
                             investments. This combination of activities was expected to help in improving the management of public
                             investments. The causal links activities, outputs and outcomes were logical and the intended outcomes were
                             monitorable.

                             Outputs



                                                                                                                             Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TG-Economic Governance (P158078)




        A website dedicated to the activities of the Directorate General of Budget and Finance (DGBF) was
           operational when the project closed for disseminating budget information. The 2023 budget integrated
           the criteria of equity and equality with gender-sensitive budgeting.(Gender budgeting would make it
           possible to identify the differentiated impact of public budget income and expenditure on women and
           men and to propose measures to redress any discrepancies). From 2024, the budget was to
           include aspects of climate change and environmental protection.
          The project provided support for operationalizing the program budget and annual performance reports.
           The project provided capacity building to the line ministries on the new Program-based Budgeting
           approach. When the project closed, 69% of the 31 Togo’s Public Expenditure and Financial
           Accountability (PEFA) indicators obtained a grade equal to or higher than C (the basic standard),
           compared to 40% in 2016.
          The project aided in preparing a public procurement strategy. Togo was the first country in the West
           African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) to develop such a strategy. Togo’s PEFA rating for
           procurement improved to B+ in 2023, compared to B in 2016.
          Three Annual Debt Reports were published, exceeding the target of two. A Medium Term Debt
           Strategy (MTDS) for 2020 – 2024 was completed as targeted.
          New Public Investment guidelines and manual were developed for screening public investment
           projects through a cost-benefit analysis.
          The project aided in providing support in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic.

           Intermediate outcomes.

        All major public investment projects (including PPPs) utilized an economic and cost-benefit analysis
         for appraising investments (as compared to none at the baseline) and far exceeding the target of 30%.
        There was only one percent difference between Public Investment Program, Sectoral Medium Term
         Budget Framework (DPPD) and Finance Law in priority sectors, as compared to 15% at the baseline
         and far exceeding the target of 5%.
        Three annual debt reports were published when the project closed, exceeding the target of two.

Outcomes

The outputs described above were expected to contribute to increasing the percentage of public investment
projects that were appraised and approved for financing according to the Public Investment Management
guidelines developed under the project.

        All public investment projects approved for financing adhered to the Public Investment Management
           guidelines when the project closed, far exceeding the target of 50%.

Efficacy of this PDO is rated as High.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
                                                                                                   Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TG-Economic Governance (P158078)




Objective
To improve domestic resource mobilization

Rationale
Theory of Change. The project activities aimed at mobilizing domestic resources through strengthening the
capacity for tax policy, broadening the tax base and promoting voluntary compliance.

The TOC held that simplifying the tax system and training staff in the Policy Unit responsible for revenue
forecasting were likely to help in strengthening capacities for tax policy. In addition, the tax registration
campaign, integration of customs and tax information, capacity building for auditors, an electronic system of
taxpayer filing and documentation were likely to contribute to broadening the tax base. Action plans to
respond to taxpayers’ grievances, and a targeted outreach and information campaign were likely to help in
promoting voluntary compliance. The combination of these activities were expected to help improve domestic
resource mobilization. The causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical and the
intended outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs

      A new tax simpler code was adopted in 2018 as targeted.
      A tax census was conducted in 2018 in Greater Lomé. This was followed by a broader tax census in
         the interior of Togo in 2022 as targeted.
        The Togolese Revenue Authority (OTR) acquired equipment for modernizing land registry services.
         OTR staff were trained in the ISO 9001 Quality Management System (QMS). A pilot phase of digitizing
         land registry services was completed as targeted.
        A Tax Policy Unit (UPF) was established as targeted. This contributed to financing salaries of key staff
         and developing a Strategic Action Plan.
        The project’s support for OTR and UPF operations contributed to a 46.3 percent increase in tax
         revenues in Togo between 2017 and 2022. Value Added Tax (VAT) collection for small and medium
         enterprises grew by 27 percent between 2018 and 2021.
        Report on tax expenditure evaluation was completed and appended to the Finance bill from 2023, for
         complying with WAEMU's convergence criteria.

Intermediate outcomes

      The number of national tax instruments reduced from 29 to 13, exceeding the target of 15.
      The tax and customs information were integrated as targeted for automatic reconciliation of VAT and
       customs declarations.
      23 OTR's qualified operational staff were deployed for field audits, far exceeding the target of 15.
      The time taken to process files and reply to taxpayers reduced from 12 days at the baseline to 1,
       exceeding the specified target of 6 days.

Outcomes

The outputs described above were expected to increase the percentage of tax payers who were filing
returns.



                                                                                                   Page 7 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TG-Economic Governance (P158078)




        The share of total taxpayers who were filing returns in Lomé increased from 0% at baseline to 36.9%
         when the project closed, far exceeding the 15% target.
        Taxpayers filing tax returns in Lomé with a turnover exceeding 10 million CFAF increased from 0% at
         baseline to 38.5% when the project closed, exceeding the 30% target.

Efficacy of this PDO is rated as High.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve public accountability and monitoring mechanisms for better service delivery in priority sectors

Rationale
Theory of Change. The TOC held that addressing the weaknesses in the public accountability and
monitoring mechanisms, specifically, strengthening the capacity of formal oversight and accountability
institutions, strengthening civil society engagement in the budget process and citizen engagement in priority
sectors would improve public accountability and monitoring mechanisms for better service delivery.

Risk mapping of targeted sectors, implementing a risk based approach and executing multiyear strategic
audit plans and a strategic plan for the newly created Court of Accounts (CdC, Cour des Comptes), Technical
Assistance (TA) to the Inspector General of Finance on conducting internal audits, and training staff on PFM
regulations were likely to help in strengthening the capacity of accountability institutions. In addition
disseminating citizens’ budget, training of Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) and the government officials on
using BOOST (Togo’s public budget database), capacity building of the CSOs in budget tracking were likely
to help in strengthening civil society engagement in the budget process. The development of citizen report
cards and tools to address service delivery challenges were likely to help in strengthening citizen engagement
in priority sectors. The causal links between activities, outputs and outcomes were logical and the intended
outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs

        Financial and technical support was provided as targeted to the Court of Accounts (CdC), local
         elected representatives, and other actors in managing public funds and for producing audit reports.
        A risk-based audit strategy was developed as targeted.
        The annual budget was published online as targeted.
        The project helped in assessing public service delivery in the subsectors of maternal and child health,
         urban water supply, and primary education.

Intermediate outcomes




                                                                                                   Page 8 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                TG-Economic Governance (P158078)




                                  Six report cards were produced to provide the Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) with
                                   citizen feedback on quality of service delivery for maternal and child health, primary education, and
                                   urban water supply, as targeted.
                                  Three regular publications of citizens’ budget, which integrated the criteria of equity and equality with
                                   gender-sensitive budgeting were published since 2020 as targeted.
                                  1,115 government and CSO staff were trained in accountability, citizens engagement mechanisms
                                   and PFM, far surpassing the target of 400. 21% women were trained in citizens engagement
                                   mechanisms and PFM, surpassing the target of 21.

                            Outcomes

                            The outputs described above were expected to contribute to increasing the percentage of citizens who
                            expressed satisfaction with the the service delivery in priority sectors and increasing the percentage of large
                            taxpayers who were satisfied with the responsiveness of OTR.

                                  Satisfaction between 2020 and 2022 with the quality of and access to basic services in maternal and
                                   child health increased from 42% to 61%, in primary education from 61% to 68%, and in urban water
                                   from 50% to 68%. In maternal and child health and urban water, the results exceeded the targets of
                                   52 and 60% respectively. In primary education, the result was below the target of 71.4%.
                                  Satisfaction rate of large taxpayers rose from 43.8% at the baseline to 65% in 2021, exceeding the
                                   target of 60%.

                            Efficacy is rated as substantial, given that most of the outcomes were realized.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is rated as substantial, given that outcomes were realized in most cases.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency: An Economic rate of return (ERR) was not conducted at appraisal, as it was not required
   for fragile countries. The PAD included a financial analysis on a few quantifiable benefits of Component 2

                                                                                                                                Page 9 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       TG-Economic Governance (P158078)



activities on increasing fiscal space. The PAD cited a work by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Making
Public Investment More Efficient, which indicated that moving from the lowest quartile where Togo was at
appraisal, with a public investment efficiency of 30 percent, to the highest quartile, could double the impact of
that investment on economic growth. This in turn could add 3 to 4 percentage points of Gross Domestic Product
(GDP) (PAD p. 33).

The ICR conducted an Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA) of the project. Two types of economic benefits
were considered in the EFA: (i) higher public investment due to improved public investment management; and
(ii) higher revenue collected due to increase in DRM. Based on this analysis, the Net Present Value (NPV) was
US$177.00 million (more public investment) and an Internal Rate of Return of 197%. For the revenue collection
side, increased registration supported by the tax census, yielded an increase in VAT collection by about 2.85
percent between 2018 and 2021 which was expected to result in a 5.6 increase in VAT collection between 2018-
2022.

Operational efficiency. The project demonstrated good value for money, given the fragile country context. The
actual project cost was lower than the appraisal estimate, due to the savings realized during implementation.
The savings were utilized to support the Government's efforts in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. Although
the project closed about eight months behind schedule, this was partly due adverse exogenous factors over
which the project closed (the restrictions in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic).

In sum, efficiency is rated as substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?           Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              197.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The PDO was highly relevant to the Government strategy and the Bank strategy for Togo. Overall efficacy is
rated as substantial, given that the outcomes were realized for the most part. Efficiency is rated as substantial
as the project demonstrated good value for money in a fragile context. Taking these into account, overall
outcome is rated as Satisfactory.



                                                                                                     Page 10 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TG-Economic Governance (P158078)



a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government Commitment/ownership. The ICR (para 91) noted that the Government is highly committed to
the Public Investment Management Reforms, including strengthening the process of developing,
implementing and monitoring the Public Investment Program. However, the Government still needs to
complete the shift from incremental to program-based budgeting. The risk to development outcome is rated
as moderate.

 Financial risk. There is moderate risk that the deterioration of the fiscal situation after the COVID-19
pandemic could undermine the implementation of sustainability plans by the Government.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design responded directly to the Government's NDP (2018-2022), the PFM Strategy and the
  Bank's CPF. This helped in sustained government ownership. Project activities were well-grounded in
  previous robust analytical works including the PEFA, the PIMA, the PEMFAR, and the Bank's SCD. This
  helped in focusing on realistic project interventions that were feasible in the project's time frame. The
  project had a Project Preparation Advance (PPA) which enabled a quick start to project effectiveness and
  implementation, The Bank prepared this project in close collaboration with the EU, which had a track
  record in engaging in PFM policy dialogue in Togo.

  The project was implemented under the overall leadership of the MEF. Implementation arrangements
  included a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) in charge of day-to-day implementation. A project Steering
  Committee (PSC) chaired by the Permanent Secretary (SR-PRPF) and comprising the key project
  stakeholders, was responsible for overall policy guidance (PAD, para 19). The implementation
  arrangements were appropriate as project performance was not undermined by the implementation
  arrangements made at appraisal.

  The Bank identified several risks at appraisal, including political and governance risks (given the
  country’s long standing political fragility) and , macroeconomic risks due to the high public debt levels and
  fragile fiscal sustainability. The Bank incorporated several mitigation measures. These measures were
  appropriate as project performance was not hampered by the risks identified at appraisal (ICR, p. 31-32).

  The measures for fiduciary compliance were appropriate (discussed in section 10).

  However, the absence of a standard and complete cost-benefit analysis at appraisal was a missed
  opportunity to better understand the economic context. The ICR doesn’t mention this aspect (p. 23).



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TG-Economic Governance (P158078)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank’s team had regular supervision missions, including joint missions with the EU. These missions
 included site-visits. The project benefited from continuity of leadership. The Task Team Leader (TTL) and
 key team members were based in Togo from 2019. This helped in consistent engagement with the relevant
 Government counterparts. The Bank conducted a Mid--Term Review (MTR) one month earlier than
 planned, in May 2021. The bank team was proactive in responding to the challenges that rose during
 implementation through the two project restructurings and in the face of the challenges emerging from the
 COVID-19 pandemic through telecommuting.

 There was one minor shortcoming. The supervision team could have increased the project’s ambition in the
 second restructuring, given that at the time the project had attained all its objectives and there were still
 some unutilized savings.

 In sum, overall Bank performance is rated as satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework was clear and the theory of changes clearly articulated the clear causal links
 between project activities, outputs and outcomes. The indicators were for the most part appropriate for
 monitoring project performance. The baseline and targets were clearly specified at design. However, there
 were some project activities not tracked by specific indicators. For instance, there were no indicators for the
 activity of the PPP project planning chain and the establishment of a computerized database of public
 investment projects.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E arrangements were adequate. This facilitated data collection required for monitoring outcomes.
  M&E data helped inform decision-making, such as the mitigation of delays related to the COVID-19




                                                                                                    Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TG-Economic Governance (P158078)



  pandemic. The detailed view of implementation progress of activities and disbursements, allowed a
  second restructuring to enable the part utilization of undisbursed funds.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data was used for monitoring project performance. The data was used by the government for
  making policy decisions and by the Bank for project restructuring purposes.

  In sum, overall M&E is rated as substantial, in view of the minor shortcomings in the M&E framework.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards: The project was classified under Category C (no assessment
   project) under the World Bank safeguard policies at appraisal, as it did not include any activities that
   involved environmental or social risks. No safeguard policies were triggered during implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. The Bank conducted a financial management assessment at appraisal. The
   assessment concluded that the financial management arrangements of the PCU met the Bank’s minimum
   requirements. At appraisal, the PAD assessed fiduciary risks as Substantia, given the fragile country
   context. The project complied with the financing agreement covenants and Financial Management was
   consistently rated as Satisfactory during implementation (ICR, para 83-84).

    Procurement. The PCU had knowledgeable staff. Although there were prolonged delays linked to the
   contracting procedures in the initial years, these were rectified. The procurement performance was rated
   as Satisfactory (ICR, para 84). There was no reported case of mis-procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were no unintended impacts.



d. Other


                                                                                                  Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       TG-Economic Governance (P158078)



   Not applicable.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following three main lessons from the experience of implementing this project,
with some adaptation of language.

1. A well-defined project design, driven by robust analytical underpinnings, and
understanding of political dynamics may raise the potential for success even in
fragile environments. The project design reflected the Government's priorities. The analytical
underpinnings formed the basis for establishing clear and measurable goals. This ensured
Government commitment and cooperation with other development stakeholders.

2. Proper sequencing of reforms in Public Financial Management (PFM) initiatives may help
in addressing downstream complexities in fragile settings with low initial benchmarks. The
project prioritized laying the groundwork for PFM enhancements effectively, recognizing Togo’s low
initial benchmarks and its status as a fragile country at appraisal.

3. Achieving and attributing service delivery improvements within the timeframes of
individual Governance operations can be challenging. Although the project supported activities
with solid rationale, their discrete nature hindered establishing a direct link to enhancing service
delivery.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR presented a clear, coherent and well organized narrative of the project. The theory of change
articulated in the text clearly shows the causal links between project activities, outputs and the intended

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TG-Economic Governance (P158078)



outcomes which were quantifiable. The analysis discussed in the text provides sufficient evidence for assessing
project performance. The text adheres to the ICR guidelines and methodology. The ICR draws reasonably good
lessons from the experience of implementing this project. The lessons logically flow from the data and analysis
provided in the ICR.

There were minor shortcomings. There is a discrepancy between the rating for overall efficacy. While overall
efficacy was rated as High on page 15 in the ICR (para 52), in the Executive Summary (page v), overall efficacy
is rated as Substantial. The overall length of the main body of the text at 25 pages is considerably more than
the recommended length of 15 pages. The ICR would have benefitted by better editing.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 15 of 15
