     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Quality Data for Decision Making (P165062)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023915

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P165062                                     Quality Data for Decision Making

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Niger                                       Poverty and Equity


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D3420                                   30-Jun-2023                                         18,720,462.79

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Jul-2018                                 30-Jun-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              20,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                               20,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                           18,720,462.79                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Lars Johannes               Ranga Rajan                   Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC (Unit 1)
                             Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, p. 5) and in the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 5) was " To improve the quality, availability, and use of
   macroeconomic and sector statistics".

   For the purposes of this review the PDO will be parsed into three objectives that will be referred to as PDO1,
   PDO2 and PDO3 as follows:


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Quality Data for Decision Making (P165062)



         PDO 1. To improve the quality of macroeconomic and sector statistics.
         PDO 2. To improve the availability of macroeconomic and sector statistics.
         PDO 3. To improve the use of macroeconomic and sector statistics.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Improvement in Data Quality and Use. The estimated cost at appraisal was
   US$11.0 million. The actual cost was US$12.4 million. This component planned to support production of
   quality macroeconomic (national account, price, enterprise, and labor) and sector statistics (agriculture,
   planning and finance) and establishing a call center by modernizing data collection using tablets.

   Component 2: Modernization and Professionalization of the National Statistical System (INS). The
   estimated cost at appraisal was US$7.0 million. The actual cost was US$4.4 million. This component
   planned to support institutional reforms through conducting a study assessing the optimal institutional
   structure of sectoral statistical services and supporting its recommendations. Activities included
   organizational restructuring of the INS for developing new staffing regulations and human resource
   development.

   Component 3: Project Management and Coordination. The estimated cost at appraisal was
   US$2.0 million. The actual cost was US$2.1 million. This component planned to support project
   coordination and fiduciary management.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$20.0 million. The actual cost was US$18.7 million.

   Project financing. This project was financed by an International Development Association Grant (IDA) of
   US$20.0 million. The amount disbursed was US$18.7 million.

   Recipient contribution. Recipient contribution was not planned at appraisal. There was no recipient
   contribution during implementation.

   Dates. The project was approved on July 6, 2018, declared effective on December 19, 2018, and closed as
   scheduled on June 30, 2023.




3. Relevance of Objectives


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Quality Data for Decision Making (P165062)



Rationale
Country context. Niger is a geographically (in terms land area) and a fragile, conflict and violence (FCV)
affected county in West Africa. The country ranked last among the 188 countries based on the Human
Development Index (HDI). This was partly due to Niger’s poor governance capacity.

Sector context. Niger has a decentralized statistical system with the National Statistical Institute (Institut
National de la Statistique INS) as the entity responsible for providing official statistics. Before appraisal, the
NNS adopted the National Data Quality Assurance Framework (NDQAF) that was based on international
best practices (such as the International Monetary Fund’s (IMF) Data Quality Assessment and the Eurostat
Quality Assurance Framework), for improving the quality of macroeconomic and sector statistics. This
framework was yet to be implemented when this project was being prepared.

The main conclusions of the sectoral and institutional assessment of Niger’s statistical system (Rapport sur
I’Etat de la Statistique, June 2017) were: (i) Although INS produced various data, there were issues about
the quality of the macroeconomic data; (ii) While line ministries collected sector statistics as a byproduct of
their administrative work and service delivery, this data was neither processed nor complied and
disseminated in a systematic manner; and (iii) limited public financing of the National Statistical System
(NSS), including for the INS and the line ministries contributed to the low capacity of staff to produce quality
outputs. Therefore, the outcomes of improving the quality, reliability and use of statistical data for evidence-
based policy making was important to the government strategy.

Government Strategy. The PDO was consistent with the Government strategy articulated in the second
Economic and Social Development Strategy (Plan de Developpment Economique et Social, PDES) for
2017-2021.This strategy broadly highlighted the need for strengthening statistical information for decision
making and citizen accountability. The PDO was also aligned with the National Strategy for the
Development of Statistics. This strategy specifically underscored the need for meeting the demand for
quality data through undertaking censuses, surveys, data processing and analysis, improving public access
to statistical products through modern technologies and improving coordination within the NSS..

Bank strategy. The PDO was well-aligned with the Bank’s Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD, 2017) and
the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Niger for FY18-FY22. The SCD recognized that inadequate
core funding hindered the efficiency of statistical operations. Of the three main focus areas of the CPF, the
PDO was relevant to the third focus area: Better Governance. The current Bank strategy for Niger is
currently under preparation.

Bank experience. This was the first major Bank-financed project aimed at building the statistical capacity in
Niger. This project built on prior efforts to improve statistics capacity which were primarily grant funded and
did not completely address the constraints in the field. While this project was being prepared, Niger was
also participating in an IDA funded Regional Program aimed at harmonizing household welfare across eight
West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) countries.

As the first of its kind, the project clearly addressed a clear need for building the foundational blocks for
evidence-based policy making and a sector with broad externalities for other sectors. The three objectives
of improving the quality, availability, and use of macroeconomic and sector statistics, were complementary
and mutually reinforced each other.




                                                                                                        Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Quality Data for Decision Making (P165062)



               The PDO was highly relevant to the Government strategy and Bank strategy for Niger. The project was
               pitched at an appropriate level, given the fragile country context. The project scope was expanded with the
               savings realized during implementation. The relevance of the PDO is rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the quality of macroeconomic and sector statistics.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. The project activities aimed at improving the quality of statistical data through a
                             combination of activities including through improving the legislative framework, building institutional capacities
                             and replacing outdated equipment. The outputs of inputs such as training the staff of the NSS, the relevant
                             ministries and agencies, professionalizing NSS, replacing obsolete Infrastructure Technology (IT) equipment
                             and implementing the recently adopted National Quality Assurance Framework for Public Statistics
                             (CNAQ/SP) were likely to contribute to the intended outcome of improving the quality of macroeconomic and
                             sector statistics. The causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. The intended
                             outcomes were monitorable.

                             Outputs.

                             TA was provided as targeted for the following:

                                        The national accountants were trained for rebasing national accounts (Rebasing national accounts
                                           series means replacing the old base year for compiling price estimates to a more recent base year for
                                           computing constant price estimates for enabling comparisons of national income estimates over time).
                                          The project aided in financing purchase of survey and computer equipment and training staff for
                                           increasing the geographic coverage of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) in the different regions of
                                           Niger.
                                          The project aided in supporting the first enterprise census (which included informal enterprises as
                                           well) Nearly 98.9% of the country market units were enumerated.
                                          The Ministry of Agriculture staff were trained for producing agricultural statistics. Three studies on
                                           fisheries and fish farming, moringa and gum arabica were completed. A quarterly series extending
                                           from the first quarter of 2009 to the fourth quarter of 2022 was completed.
                                          Foreign Trade Statistics Service team were trained on preparing foreign trade statistics with
                                           EUROTRACE SQL SERVER software.
                                          The Ministry of Education staff were trained in filing questionnaires and processing school data.

                                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Quality Data for Decision Making (P165062)




      A National Survey on Fertility and Mortality of Children under Five was conducted as targeted.
      The project supported: (i) The pilot cartography and pilot enumeration for the fifth Population and
       Housing Census and the upcoming agricultural census; and (ii) establishing call centers in the
       INS using new technologies.
      The project financed the following studies: (i) A study on the impact of public infrastructure projects in
       Niger; (ii) Two studies on the effects of COVID-19 on the economy; (iii) A study on the impact of
       agricultural productivity; and (iv) A study on the impact of the informal sector on the Nigerian
       economy.
      The project supported the implementation of the National Quality Assurance Framework for Public
       Statistics (CNAQ/SP) adopted by the Government in 2017, through setting a committee responsible
       for evaluating and validating the publications of the INS.

Intermediate Outcomes.

      Rebased Gross Domestic Product (GDP) were released in a timely manner, and the CPI was revised
       and released quarterly. The GDP and CPI data were released on the INS website when the project
       closed.

Outcomes

The outputs described above aimed at increasing the number of statistical products that adhered to the
National Statistical System (NSS) quality standards framework.

      The following statistical products were produced based on the NSS quality standards framework as
       targeted:
            o CPI with increased geographical coverage
            o rebased national accounts figures
            o Foreign trade statistics
            o Harvest Forecasting and Estimation Survey
            o Survey on Living Conditions of Households
            o Statistical yearbook of the Ministry of Transport
            o Statistical yearbook of the Ministry of Community Development
            o Statistical yearbook of the Ministry of Finance
            o Revised demographic projections
            o The statistical yearbook of the Ministry of Planning.

Efficacy of this PDO was rated as substantial as the intended outcomes were realized.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improved availability of macroeconomic and sector statistics

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Quality Data for Decision Making (P165062)




Rationale
Theory of Change. While the project activities related to PDO1 sought to improve the quality of
macroeconomic and sector statistics, activities under PDO2 aimed at improving the availability of statistical
data. Activities such as improving the information network in INS, installing high speed internet network in INS
regional directorates, organizational restructuring of the INS for developing new staffing requirements and
human resource development and introducing performance-based mechanisms for incentivizing staff were
likely to help in improving the availability of macroeconomic and sector statistics. The casual links between
inputs, outputs and outcomes were logical. The intended outcomes were measurable.

Outputs

      The INS and the Ministry of Planning website were renovated. 43 databases were posted on the INS
       website: The project supported the migration of the NIGERINFO database from the DEVINFO
       technology to the DATA FOR ALL technology.
      Two study programs involving 55 students were trained at the Niger National Statistic School
       (ENSTAT – Niger).

Intermediate Outcomes.

      The INS website provided public access to micro-databases as targeted.

Outcomes.

The outputs described above were expected to increase the number of core data that were produced and
disseminated.

      43 core data sets were produced and publicly disseminated, far exceeding the target of 20.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improved use of macroeconomics and sector statistics.

Rationale
Theory of Change. The final step in the causal chain of the project was to improve the use of high-quality
data. Activities such as strengthening demand for statistical data were likely to contribute to the desired
outcome of improving the use of macroeconomics and sector statistics. The casual links between inputs,
outputs and the intended outcomes were logical. The outcomes could be monitored.

Outputs.



                                                                                                  Page 6 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Quality Data for Decision Making (P165062)




                                  A communication plan was developed as targeted that considered local contexts for all large-scale
                                   NSS produced statistical activities.
                                  The civil servants, journalists, persons in charge of programming sectoral ministry activities and
                                   members of the traditional chiefs’ associations in Niger were trained as targeted on using the
                                   statistical products produced under the project.
                                  Awareness raising activities were conducted as targeted.
                                  The Network of Journalists for the Development of Statistics (Réseau des Journalistes pour le
                                   Développement de la Statistique, RJDSN) was operationalized

                            Intermediate Outcomes.

                                  An online platform was established to collect users’ feedback and gender relevance.

                            Outcomes.

                                  340 government officials and private citizens were trained in the use of statistical information, far
                                   exceeding the target of 200.
                                  Two user surveys were conducted (one in 2018 and one in 2022) to assess the extent to which the
                                   training helped in enhancing performance of staff. The survey respondents included public and
                                   semipublic administrations, local authorities, technical and financial partners, Non Governmental
                                   Organizations (NGOs), public and private companies, universities, research and training centers. The
                                   results of the surveys showed a high level of satisfaction of data users with the produced statistical
                                   products. For instance, the survey in 2022 indicated an overall satisfaction rate of 86.2%.

                            Efficacy of this PDO is rated as substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is rated as Substantial, given that all the intended outcomes were realized.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency

                                                                                                                                Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Quality Data for Decision Making (P165062)



It is universally acknowledged that good statistical information for evidence-based policy making is a public good
with significant positive externalities. However, the benefits of good statistical information do not lend
themselves to an economic rate of return analysis (PAD, para 67). Accordingly, and consistent with practice for
similar projects, no economic rate of return analysis was performed for this project either at appraisal or at
closure. Research in middle-income contexts indicated that the availability of quality, transparent and timely
disseminated data reduces sovereign borrowing cost on international capital markets. The PAD noted that in a
fragile context such as Niger, the national statistical office had limited opportunities for significant cost recovery
and so the financial returns from this project will not be representative of the economic returns which are likely to
be very high.

The ICR provides benchmarking information which indicated that the costs of administering household surveys
in this project compared favorably with that of the peers in the region, despite the relatively low population
density of Niger which can result in relatively higher travel costs between households and the security
challenges in the country. The average cost of the survey per household was US$311 in Niger, slightly higher
than in Benin (US$243), but lower than in Mali (US$311) and nearly US$450 for the Democratic Republic of
Congo (DRC).

The project demonstrated good value-for-money. The actual cost of planned activities were lower than their
appraisal estimates and the savings realized during implementation were utilized for scaling up project activities.
For example, initially the project planned to only support the population census by financing the drafting process
of the population census document. However, because of the availability of additional resources, the project
went beyond by also supporting two other phases of the population census: the cartography mapping pilot and
the enumeration pilot exercises. The actual cost of implementation support (at US$2.06 million), was only
slightly higher than the appraisal estimate of US$2.00 million, despite the fragile country context.

There were no serious operational inefficiencies, with all the planned activities completed within the originally
scheduled closing date, despite the restrictions in the wake of the COVID – 19 pandemic and worsening security
situation in the country which affected the household survey activities.

Overall efficiency is rated as substantial. Although there was no standard economic analysis, the project
demonstrated good value for money in a fragile context.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                         Not Applicable



                                                                                                        Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Quality Data for Decision Making (P165062)



* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The Project was highly relevant to the Government and the Bank strategy. As all the intended outcomes were
realized, overall efficacy is rated as Substantial. Efficiency is rated as Substantial. Although there was no
standard economic analysis, there were no serious operational issues and the project demonstrated good value
for money in a fragile country context. Taking these ratings into account, overall outcome is rated as
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional Risk. There is risk to the sustainability of development outcomes given that the Government
and the National Assembly is yet to adopt legislation ( Law No. 2014-66), intended to strengthen the legal,
institutional, and organizational framework of the NSS.

Financial Risk. There is also risk pertaining to the long-term financial viability of NSS, which in turn would
undermine its ability to hire and retain quality staff.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank team prepared this project based on the experiences from previous Bank-financed statistical
  building projects in fragile settings. Lessons incorporated included: (i) the need to have coordinated
  programs: (ii) provide support for organizational and management change; (ii) provide support for
  strengthening the legal and institutional frameworks; and (iv) transition towards a more focused and
  results-oriented approach for sustainability of outcomes. The analytical underpinnings of the project were
  robust and based on the Bank’s SCD and other analytical products such as the Statistical Capacity
  Building Indicator and internal work comparing the experiences of Statistics Reforms in Africa
  (Hoogeveen, and Nguyen. 2016.- mimeo). The project appropriately included a Project Preparation
  Advance (PPA), which aided in commencing project activities soon after Bank approval.

  The Project Management Team (PMT) in the National Statistical System (NSS), was responsible for
  project implementation. The PMT had experience with implementing Bank-funded projects. The
  implementation arrangement was appropriate, as project performance was not undermined by the
  arrangement during implementation.




                                                                                                      Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Quality Data for Decision Making (P165062)



  The overall project risk was rated as substantial at appraisal due to the risks related to technical design,
  weak institutional and fiduciary capacities, and security risks. Several mitigation measures were
  incorporated at appraisal such as incorporating performance-based financing arrangements to focus on
  quality, relying on the coordinating role for INS to enhance budget allocation for well-performing line
  ministries, hiring dedicated procurement staff and partnering with third parties (Non-Governmental
  Organizations) to support implementation in insecure areas. The mitigation measures were appropriate,
  as project performance was not undermined by the risks identified at appraisal.

  The arrangements made at appraisal for M&E and fiduciary compliance were appropriate (discussed in
  section 9 and 10).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank conducted twice a year supervision missions on average as per the norm during the project
 lifetime. These missions helped in providing targeted support to the respective agencies during
 implementation. The Bank maintained the continuity of leadership, with one task team leader during the
 project duration. In addition to the task team leaders, several other technical World Bank specialists
 provided training and advice to the respective agencies when needed. The team was proactive in adapting
 to changing circumstances such as the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and the deteriorating security
 situation in the country. The support provided by the team aided in M&E and fiduciary compliance
 (discussed in section 9 and 10).

 Overall Bank performance is rated as satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design consisted of clearly measurable and well-defined indicators, pertaining to the three
 intended outcomes: (i) improving data quality; (ii) improving the availability and reliability of data reliability;
 and (iii) utilization of the macroeconomic and sector data; The indicators were directly attributable to the
 project activities. The baseline figures and the targets were specified at appraisal.



                                                                                                         Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Quality Data for Decision Making (P165062)



 The National Statistical System (NSS) was responsible for monitoring project performance.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation was sound and based on regular reporting of results, implementation progress and
  related issues by the Project Management Team (PMT) in NSS. Although there were Initial issues such
  as hiring key PMT staff and coordinating activities between the NSS and sector ministries, these were
  resolved two and half years after project effectiveness.



c. M&E Utilization
  The PMT regularly reported data on M&E Indicators. The data was utilized to provide evidence on
  achievement of outcomes.

  Overall M&E is rated as substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   This project was classified as a Category C (no assessment project) under the World Bank’s safeguard
   policies. The project funds only supported activities pertaining to institutional reforms and no safeguard
   policies were triggered at appraisal. There were no adverse environmental and social impacts identified
   during implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The Bank conducted an assessment of the fiduciary arrangements of the INS at appraisal. The fiduciary
   management risk was rated as substantial due to shortcomings in the financial management (FM) and
   procurement at arrangements of INS. FM and procurement specialists initially hired were replaced after a
   year due to poor performance. This resulted in ratings of moderately unsatisfactory during the relevant
   period. However these shortcomings were resolved when the INS hired FM and procurement specialists
   with relevant skills.

   The overall fiduciary management was rated as satisfactory during implementation. There were no
   ineligible expenses and the financial audits were unqualified. There was no case of mis procurement.




                                                                                                   Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Quality Data for Decision Making (P165062)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None



d. Other
   None



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following three main lessons from the experience of implementing this
project, with some adaptation of language.

1. A simple design and modest targets may raise the potential for success in fragile settings,
especially when implementing a project in a sector for the first time. When this project
was under preparation, Niger had not previously implemented a large statistics capacity building
project. Therefore, the results of this project deliberately focused on outputs that were easy to
measure, and the targets set at relatively less ambitious results. The risks associated with project
implementation did not materialize and the project scope was expanded with the savings realized
during implementation. The lesson from this project is that appropriate target setting during design,
may provide scope for the project to obtain its objectives and go beyond its results indicators.

2. Inclusive arrangements may help in when the project is introducing innovative systems.
This project introduced the Project-Based Financing (PBF) incentive system in the National
Statistical System (NSS). Under this system, the NSS staff participating in project activities provided
incentives to improve their performance. Although the system did help in improving production of
quality statistics, the arrangement caused resentment among the staff not participating in the
system. Inclusive arrangements at design would have helped in ensuring that the system was
perceived as fair. While the performance-based financing (PBF) arrangement helped the project to
achieve and surpass its objective, it created some frustration within INS staff not benefiting from
PBF incentives, hence the need to have a more inclusive PBF in the future.



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Quality Data for Decision Making (P165062)



3. A careful consideration of the implementation arrangements and tailoring them to the
country context can help project implementation. In this project, the National Statistical Institute
(INS), an autonomous entity, had to provide guidance to ministries which had a more prominent
government role, and were responsible for generating the sector statistics. At the same time, the INS
was a well-performing statistics provider, while the sector ministries' capacity to produce statistics
was weak. Over time and through the implementation of different mitigation activities, this difficulty
was resolved and the staff of the ministries were working closely with the INS staff. Since the project
used the existing implementation arrangements of INS, it encouraged them to resolve institutional
arrangements and implement the project to reach the PDO. The project had positive experiences
working through existing institutional structures. In the case of INS, which had existing capacity, this
was relatively frictionless. The project helped resolve significant capacity issues within line
ministries, with the help of the INS, helping create sustainable arrangements and building on exiting
structures which are likely more sustainable than arrangements created exclusively for the project.

Further lessons highlight good practices regarding consultation and buy-in from the population as
well as successful mitigation of risks related to the country’s status as fragile and conflict-affected.

The IEG draws the following lesson from the experience of implementing this project.

The ICRR noted that use of less ambitious indicators was a necessary response to the country’s
lack of experience with large statistics and capacity-building projects. The project could have
benefited from tracking relatively easy to collect metrics of data use, e.g., through the tracking of
number of downloads of relevant data sets from the newly established websites.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear and evidence-based and complies with the guidelines. Overall, the ICR offers well-
documented evidence for project indicators, and provides enough information to support ratings. The theory of
change provided in the text clearly shows the casual links between inputs (project activities), outputs and the
intended outcomes. The ICR provides relevant lessons.

One minor shortcoming is the length of the ICR. The main body of the text exceeds the recommended length of
15 pages.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                        Page 13 of 14
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Quality Data for Decision Making (P165062)




                                                                          Page 14 of 14
