     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Development Support for Tanzania Stats (P159954)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023804

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P159954                                      Development Support for Tanzania Stats

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Tanzania                                     Poverty and Equity


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A5710                                    31-Jan-2021                                            8,481,467.10

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 14-Aug-2018                                 31-Dec-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               8,750,864.62                                     8,750,864.62

 Revised Commitment                                8,095,217.84                                     8,749,837.49

 Actual                                            8,481,467.10                                     8,481,467.10




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Giuseppe Iarossi             Clay Wescott                 Donna Kaidou Jeffrey            IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) was to strengthen the capacity of the National Statistical Bureau to
   collect, process, and disseminate data and statistics on living standards, labor markets, and agriculture (Grant
   Agreement, Schedule I). For this Review, the objectives are parsed as follows:

           Strengthen the capacity of the National Statistical Bureau to collect data and statistics on living
            standards, labor markets, and agriculture.


                                                                                                     Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Development Support for Tanzania Stats (P159954)



         Strengthen the capacity of the National Statistical Bureau to process data and statistics on living
          standards, labor markets, and agriculture.
         Strengthen the capacity of the National Statistical Bureau to disseminate data and statistics on
          living standards, labor markets, and agriculture.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Implementation of the Tanzania National Panel Survey (NPS) (US$3.96 million at
   appraisal, US$2.6 million equivalent at closure). This component sought to support the implementation
   of this nationally representative, longitudinal, socio-economic household-level survey by supporting the
   following aspects of survey implementation: (i) sample design; (ii) questionnaire design; (iii) enumeration
   and fieldwork; (iv) data management; and (v) data documentation, analysis, dissemination, and visibility.

   Component 2: Implementation of the National Sample Census of Agriculture - Small Holder Survey
   (NSCA) (US$2.56 million at appraisal, US$3.3 million equivalent at closure). This component sought to
   support the implementation of this smallholder agriculture survey by supporting the following aspects of
   survey implementation: (i) sample design; (ii) questionnaire design; (iii) enumeration and fieldwork; (iv) data
   management; and (v) data documentation, analysis, dissemination, and visibility.

   Component 3: Implementation of the Integrated Labor Force Survey (ILFS) (US$2.04 million at
   appraisal, US$2.4 million equivalent at completion). This component sought to support the
   implementation of a labor survey to inform national policies on topics related to economic growth and
   employment. The project supported the following activities: (i) sample design; (ii) questionnaire design; (iii)
   enumeration and fieldwork; (iv) data management; and (v) data documentation, analysis, dissemination,
   and visibility.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The Project's original cost at appraisal was US$8.8 million. The grant agreement was signed
   on October 11, 2019, for Euro 7.3 million. A total of US$ 8.48 million was disbursed at closure. The
   discrepancy is explained by exchange rate differences US and the Euro. The difference in costs also
   reflects two reallocations within and between component activities and the updated cost estimates for the
   integrated labor force survey (ILFS).

   The Government of Tanzania did not contribute financially to the project.

   Dates: The Project was approved on August 14, 2018, and became effective on February 7, 2020. The
   original closing date was January 31, 2021; however, this was revised twice, and the project closing date
   was extended by 30 months to December 31, 2022.


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Development Support for Tanzania Stats (P159954)



   The delayed effectiveness of the project (about 17 months) was due mainly to changes in the statistical law
   of 2015 which were overly restrictive and not aligned with international standards. Legislation changes were
   made to address the shortcoming in the statistical law before the project became effective on February 7,
   2020. Further delays were due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.

   The project underwent two level 2 restructuring as follows:

         Restructuring 1: The first restructuring was approved on January 29, 2021, extended the closing
          date by one month to February 28, 2021, while the administrative agreement between the WB and
          the European Union was being extended.
         Restructuring 2: The second restructuring in February 2021 extended the closing date by 23 months
          to December 31, 2022, and reallocated of funds among components. The reallocation combined the
          two NPSs into one single survey and used the savings to add two sub-activities (the digitalization of
          surveyed enumeration areas using geographical information systems and telephone survey for rapid
          assessment of the welfare of the impact of COVID-19). The second sub-activity was the introduction
          of improved crop yield measurement techniques in the NSCA to enhance data accuracy. The
          reallocation is described in the table below:



                                         Original amount     Revised amount
   Component
                                         (EUR)               (EUR)
   National Panel Survey (NPS)           € 3,392,687         € 2,959,008
   National Sample Census of
                                         € 2,189,658         € 2,512,514
   Agriculture (NSCA)
   Integrated Labour Force Survey
                                         € 1,748,223         € 1,859,045
   (ILFS)
   Sub Total                             € 7,330,568         € 7,330,567

   Source: ICR p. 9.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Poverty in Tanzania remained high despite strong economic growth and strong resilience to external
shocks in the decade prior to project appraisal. The poverty rate using the US$2.15 per day measure in
2017 PPP was 45 percent for 2011 and 2018. Over 80 percent of the poor lived in rural areas, and
inequality between regions was growing. To achieve more equitable growth and poverty reduction over the
period 2016/17-2020/21, the government adopted the Second Five Year Development Plan and the new
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), which aimed at fostering industrialization and human
development. To monitor and evaluate the achievement of such objectives, more and higher-quality
statistics were needed. Specifically, the availability of timely and accurate household survey and agricultural

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 14
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Development Support for Tanzania Stats (P159954)



data was critical to designing, monitoring, and evaluating development programs, including the SDG
indicators. The National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) was responsible for providing statistics and received
valuable support from Tanzania Statistical Master Plan (TSMP) 1 and its basket fund for donor support.
However, the closure of TSMP1 in 2018 risked many of the gains achieved. Additional donor support was
needed to bridge the gap while a post-TSMP1 strategy was being designed.

The PDO was aligned with the Tanzania Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY18-FY22, which called
for the production of timely and high-quality survey data relevant to: (i) the Agenda 2030 for the SDGs; (ii)
the Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want; and (iii) the Busan Action Plan for Statistics agreed at the level of
PARIS21/OECD (ICR, p. 11). These all call for improving statistical systems and fill data gaps for
policymaking. Household and agricultural statistics were aligned with these objectives as they made
available data to design projects and monitor progress toward the achievement of their objectives. The
Project was also aligned with regional efforts to harmonize poverty measurement in the East African
Community, an effort supported by the Bank through East African Statistics Development and
Harmonization (P164243), a parallel regional project.

The PDO was coherent with the government’s strategies, such as the Tanzania Development Vision 2025,
the Zanzibar Vision 2050, Zanzibar’s Medium Term Development Strategy (ZADES 2021-2026), and the
TSMP1, which expired in 2018, and the second that was finalized in early 2022 (TSMP - II 2022-2027),
(ICR, p. 10). These strategies prioritized strengthening capacity building in the NBS, Office of the Chief
Government Statistician (OCGS), Sector Ministries and Local Government Authorities to produce timely,
comprehensive, and updated statistics to fill relevant data gaps for policy and making these data available
on time to the user community to inform policy debates in the country, (ICR, p. 11).

The theory of change was constructed ex-post using information from the PAD and the project Results
Framework (ICR, p. 7) but was plausible in many respects (ICR p. 7). It described the main challenge as
the limited availability of socioeconomic data, which can be addressed by three activities represented by
collecting accurate data using modern technologies and proper capacity building. The outputs of these
activities are identified as the data itself, and the outcomes were the enhanced capacity and the availability
of the data to conduct policy-relevant research and the dissemination of new knowledge leading to
improved policymaking. The key challenge was correctly identified as the availability of socioeconomic
indicators. Additional challenges included a need for clear career growth opportunities for professional
statisticians. This has the potential to undermine staff morale and lead to turnover which in turn could
compromise the capacity built by the project. Second, there is inadequate quality of formal statistical
training in the country’s universities, which emphasizes theory rather than applied skills. These are
presented as risks in the future (Implementation Completion and Results Report - ICR, para. 78), but they
were also challenges to be addressed by the project being assessed. The activities supported by the Bank
were aligned with the challenges, such as collecting and analyzing survey data by enhancing local capacity
and applying modern techniques. The output was the availability of high-quality data. The availability of
analytical products could have been added as well. Finally, the outcomes are properly identified as the
improved capacity to collect and analyze survey data and, in turn, improve the ability to design development
projects and monitor their progress.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


                                                                                                        Page 4 of 14
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Development Support for Tanzania Stats (P159954)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Strengthen the capacity of the National Statistical Bureau to collect data and statistics on living standards,
               labor markets, and agriculture.

               Rationale
               All outcome indicators were met. All indicators measuring the achievement of this, and other objectives used
               baselines for 2017. The project used two PDO indicators to measure the achievement of the first objective:

                     1. the number of household surveys supported by the project, designed in line with international
                      standards and best practices. The baseline was 0, the target was 4 (2021 revised to 4 in 2022), and
                      the actual was 4 (2022) (ICR p. 21).
                     2. the number of household surveys supported by the project, with enumeration activities
                      completed. The baseline was 0, the target was 4 (2021, revised to 4 in 2022), and the actual was 4
                      (2022) (ICR p. 22)

               IEG notes that the outcome indicator, “number of household surveys, supported by the project, with improved
               data collection methods and computerized data checking” was not reported in the ICR (p. 11).

               For both indicators, at restructuring, two NPSs were combined into one survey, and a high-frequency welfare
               monitoring telephone survey was added, keeping the total at 4. The NSCA 2020, ILFS 2002/21 and the NPS
               2021 were all designed in accordance with global standards through TA supported by the project. World Bank
               experts working alongside other international experts (the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) - and the
               International Labor Organization (ILO)) contributed to the project. ILO played a major role in preparation,
               questionnaire design, and training of the ILFS. The United States Department of Agriculture and FAO
               supported the implementation of the NSCA during its design, training of enumerators and supervisors, quality
               control, coordination with other development partners, and communication and dissemination of results. For
               NPS, however, the Bank led the whole survey. Data were collected using new technologies, such as
               Computer-Assisted Personal Interviewing (CAPI) methods, that included automated data checking and
               survey skipping patterns. Because of the adoption of these technologies, data quality improved, as commonly
               known in the industry.

               The statistical performance indicator, measuring overall improvements in methodology, data sources,
               periodicity, and timeliness, shows an improvement in the overall score from 2018 to 2022. Similarly, one
               component of the indicators, which relates to quality, access, and effectiveness of advisory related to
               statistics, also shows an improvement during the same period.



               Rating
               Substantial


                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Development Support for Tanzania Stats (P159954)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthen the capacity of the National Statistical Bureau to process data and statistics on living standards,
labor markets, and agriculture.

Rationale
The targets of the four PDO indicators used to measure the achievement of this objective were met:

      1. Number of household surveys with improved data collection methods and computerized data
       checking. The baseline was 0 (2017), the target was 4 (2021) (revised to 4 in 2022), and the actual
       was 4 (2022) (ICR p. 21). At restructuring, two NPS were combined into one survey, and a high-
       frequency welfare monitoring telephone survey was added, keeping the total at 4.
      2. The number of NPS survey datasets finalized within 6 months of fieldwork completion. The baseline
       was 0 (2017), the target was 1 (2021) (revised to 1 in 2022), and the actual was 1 (ICR p. 22). The
       target reflects the fact that two NPS were combined into one survey, bringing the target down from 2
       to 1 (Although the ICR indicates a target of 1).
      3. The number of non-NPS household survey datasets finalized within 8 months of fieldwork
       completion. The baseline was 0 (2017), the target was 2 (2021) (revised to 3 in 2022), and the actual
       was 3 (2022) (ICR p.23). At restructuring, this phone survey included an assessment of the impact of
       COVID-19.
      4. Number of final survey statistical reports completed within 6 months of dataset finalization. The
       baseline was 0 (2017), the target was 3 (2021) (revised to 3 in 2022), and the actual was 3 (2022)
       (ICR p. 23).

These were appropriate measures of capacity in survey data processing; hence, this objective was achieved.
NBS and OCGS staff analyzed the survey data with the support of various TAs along with Bank experts and
specialists from the US Department of Agriculture, the FAO, and the ILO.

One component of the statistical performance indicator, data infrastructure, which relates to skills, methods,
and governance of statistics, shows an improvement in the indicator during the project period from 2018 to
2022.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Strengthen the capacity of the National Statistical Bureau to disseminate data and statistics on living
standards, labor markets, and agriculture.

Rationale



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Development Support for Tanzania Stats (P159954)



                            All outcome and intermediate indicators were met. The project used one PDO indicator and four intermediate
                            indicators. The PDO indicator was:

                            Number of micro-datasets available through the Tanzania National Data Archive and the World Bank
                            Microdata Library. The baseline was 0 (2017). The target was 3 (2021) (revised to 4 in 2022). The actual was
                            4 (2022) (ICR p. 24). At restructuring, one additional survey and several telephone surveys were conducted to
                            assess the impact of COVID-19.

                            The Intermediate Results Indicators were:

                                  1. Number of stakeholder / technical working group preparation meetings. The baseline was 0 (2017).
                                   The target was 4 (2021). Actual was 4 (2021) (ICR p. 24).
                                  2. Reports and briefing notes on NSCA, ILFS and NPS are prepared. The baseline was No (2020).
                                   The target was Yes (2021). Actual was Yes (2022) (ICR p. 25).
                                  3. Number of seminars conducted with policymakers to discuss survey findings and policy
                                   implications. The Baseline was 0 (2017). The target was 3 (2021 revised to 3 in 2022). Actual was 3
                                   (2023) (ICR p. 25).
                                  4. Number of advanced policy research notes using survey NSCA/ ILFS and NPS data sets completed
                                   and discussed. The baseline was 0 (2020). The target was 5 (2021) (revised to 6 in 2022). Actual was
                                   6 (2023) (ICR p. 25).

                            In August 2021, the results from the 2020 NSCA were disseminated to more than 150 government
                            representatives and other stakeholders. In addition, an interactive web generation instrument was published
                            on the NBS website to disseminate the surveys further. In November 2021, key findings of the 2020/2021
                            ILFS were disseminated at the workshop of 250+ participants chaired by the prime minister. In June 2022,
                            findings from the NSCA were also featured during the 8th Annual Agricultural Policy Conference, and several
                            policy notes on agriculture were produced using these survey data. These debates led to debates and
                            discussions on increasing budget allocation for agricultural extension services and improving irrigation
                            facilities. They led to the ongoing revision and update of the 2008 National Employment Policy, Youth
                            Development Policy 2007, and the 2007 National Employment Creation Program. The 2021 ILFS led to the
                            production of a publication on the gendered dimensions of the labor market outcomes in Tanzania. In
                            addition, three policy briefs were produced using the ILFS data (covering agriculture and informal sector
                            employment), and the main findings of the NPS 2021 survey were released during a workshop attended by
                            government officials and development partners. Similarly, the NSCA and the ILFS received widespread press
                            coverage. To better monitor and mitigate the COVID-19 impact on households in Tanzania, the High-
                            Frequency Welfare Monitoring Phone Survey proved particularly useful, providing timely and valuable
                            information to the authorities.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY

                                                                                                                           Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Development Support for Tanzania Stats (P159954)




  Rationale
  All objectives were achieved.

  The key findings of the 2020/2021 ILFS were disseminated at a workshop in November 2021, four months
  after survey completion. The findings have contributed to a discussion on the need to improve labor market
  outcomes in Tanzania and have partly led to a efforts to revise and update the 2008 National Employment
  Policy, Youth Development Policy 2007 and the 2007 National Employment Creation Program. The main
  findings of the NPS 2021 survey were released in January 2023. The 2021 NPS also collected data to
  compare a current 14-day diary with a 7-day recall for daily consumption measurement as part of the effort to
  harmonize poverty measurement in the East African Community (ICR, p. 12). The High Frequency Welfare
  Monitoring Phone Survey have been used in various WB analytical products, including Tanzania Economic
  Updates. In addition, the digitization of Enumeration Areas (EAs) was a success with a total of 3,680 EAs
  being digitized, and their geo-information updated.




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
A cost-benefit analysis was not undertaken because it is not possible to assess the benefits of improvements in
data collection and data usage for development decisions (ICR, p. 13). The efficiency of the project is judged
based on its cost, time, and design/quality of data collection compared (at times) to previous practices. The use
of modern data collection technologies, such as CAPI and Survey Solutions software, enhanced fieldwork
logistics, cartography of the country, and monitoring of the data collection process. The earlier data collection
system (Paper Assisted Personal Interviewing) was more labor intensive, leading to a high turn-over rate for.
This enumerator turnover had proven costly for surveys (in terms of time lost and the need to retrain
enumerators); hence, the adoption of CAPI led to cost efficiencies. The cost of data collection was also
managed more efficiently by paying enumerators monthly salaries rather than (higher) daily compensation. The
use of CAPI reduced the time to conduct post-survey quality control.

The survey implementation experienced some initial delays (18 months) due to changes in the resident
statistician (in July 2021), the Bank’s Task Team Leader (July 2019) and COVID restrictions (ICR p. 14). Yet the
project implementation was smooth thanks to the proper design, strong government ownership and the quality of
the project’s implementation team. The surveys were completed on time.




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Development Support for Tanzania Stats (P159954)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project achieved all its objectives, with systems and capacities improved, notwithstanding initial delays and
the onset of COVID-19. Relevance is rated High because the project was aligned with the Tanzania CPF FY18-
FY22 and with the government’s strategies. Efficacy is rated Substantial because the project achieved all its
objectives, although the ICR does not provide numerical evidence, which is instead found in the Implementation
Status Reports (ISRs). Efficiency is rated substantial because the project was implemented in a timely and cost-
conscious manner while improving data quality. Combining these indicates an overall outcome rating of
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR identified four potential risks to the development outcomes:

    1. Lack of clear career growth opportunities for professional statisticians could contribute to staff-
       turnover, thereby compromising the capacity built by the project.
    2. Inadequate quality of formal statistical training in the country’s universities, which emphasizes theory
       rather than applied skills.
    3. Uncertainty regarding government funding for continued funding of the new statistical practices
       supported by the projects.
    4. The legal framework restricts independent data collection and interpretation, although some of the
       restrictions have been amended in the new statistical law of 2019.

Risk mitigation includes the following: (1) during project implementation, the government requested Bank
support for capacity building also for local government authorities, (2) the new project (Program for Results)
provides funding for independently collected and high-quality data for the next 5 years, (3) the renewed
interest of Tanzanian researchers to use and produce analytical work with up-to-date statistics, and (4) the
continued interest by the government to support statical data [DKJ1]


                                                                                                       Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Development Support for Tanzania Stats (P159954)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design drew from an assessment of data gaps in NBS following the completion of TSMP 1
  and recommendations to address technical, financial, economic, institutional, and procurement
  aspects. The technical design of the project incorporated national priorities and a needs assessment and
  benefitted from consultations with main users of statistics in the Government and other key stakeholders.
  The survey design and data collection incorporated best practice guidelines consolidated in the UN
  Statistical Division document on “Designing Household Survey Samples: Practical Guidelines,” ILO
  guidelines on collecting LFS data, and FAO Programme for the Census of Agriculture. A European Union
  Trust Fund provided support for a recipient executed component, the Development Support for Tanzania
  Statistics Project (P159954) for survey implementation, data processing and dissemination, and a Bank
  executed component for technical assistance. The ICR focused on the first component but also pointed
  out how TA from the second reinforced the first.

  The Bank should have addressed the lack of clear career growth opportunities for professional
  statisticians but mitigated the other constraints. The inadequate quality of formal statistical capacity was
  mitigated with a series of large statistical training through the Bank Executed component to fill skills gaps.
  Overall, the identified risks are substantial as they can limit the ability of the country to continue producing
  reliable and timely data for policy advice. The team applied reasonable mitigation measures.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team maintained continuous dialogue and communication with NBS and OCGS and conducted
 weekly virtual meetings during implementation to discuss progress. The Bank team included the Task
 Team Leader, the resident statistician, and Bank technical specialists, and the supervision budget was
 adequate. The task team prepared aide-memoirs regularly and ISRs to communicate any necessary
 corrective measures. The project also included a Steering Committee that held formal discussions of
 progress and constraints with NBS and OCGS management. Recommendations of ISRs were adequately
 implemented as in the case of the adaptation of the training schedule due to mobility restrictions caused by
 COVID-19.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory


                                                                                                       Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Development Support for Tanzania Stats (P159954)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The indicators were appropriate to monitor progress, although they were at a very high level (e.g., number
 of surveys completed, technical working group preparation meetings completed, number of surveys
 analyzed). More detailed indicators would have allowed for better monitoring of progress.



b. M&E Implementation
  A Government program implementation team produced progress reports every six months. The reports
  were compiled against a set of indicators of progress in implementation as well as capacity-building
  activities and dissemination of results. The steering committee used these reports and met with survey
  technical working groups for constructive discussion on progress and issues raised during
  implementation. The implementing partners (World Bank, EU, and NBS/ OCGS) regularly reviewed these
  six-month reports to address risks and challenges faced by the project. The World Bank team, in
  collaboration with NBS and OCGS project coordinators and survey managers, produced ISRs every six
  months with information from both the progress reviews and the weekly virtual implementation support
  meetings.



c. M&E Utilization
  The six-month progress report, the ISRs, and the weekly implementation meetings were regularly and
  effectively used to discuss the implementation status of the project.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   This project triggered no environmental safeguard or social policies since it focused only on data collection
   activities.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Development Support for Tanzania Stats (P159954)



   Expenses for which the NBS and the OCGS were responsible underwent normal internal audits within the
   institutions as well as by the Controller and Auditor General of the United Republic of Tanzania. The two
   audit reports were issued (December 2020 and December 2021) confirmed the accuracy of the financial
   statements. A third audit report was published on January 10, 2024.

   Arrangements for financial management were aligned with Bank policy on project financing. The risk was
   assessed as Moderate, and risks were periodically reviewed and assessed during ISRs. All planned
   activities were completed, and planned disbursements were made.

   Procurement was conducted in accordance with Bank rules for Investment Project Financing. The project
   used Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement, a planning and tracking system that provides
   data on procurement activities, identifies benchmarks, and measures performance. A project procurement
   strategy was prepared, which was updated annually. A review of the procurement capacity of the NBS was
   conducted, which assessed the procurement risk as high. Consequently, an action plan was agreed upon.
   Still, no information was provided on its implementation in the ICR. However, shared documents (ISRs and
   progress reports) show that capacity building of local officials was conducted to mitigate this risk. Bank
   supervision ("support mechanism") ensures close monitoring and respect of rules (ICR p. 16).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The project contributed to strengthening collaboration between NBS/OCGS, Sector Ministries, and
   international non-governmental organizations like the United Nations Children Fund and ILO.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Modest


12. Lessons

Five lessons can be deduced from this ICR:

      A legal framework for statistics is as important to develop statistical capacity as the technical
         support to produce statistics. A proper legal framework for statistics must incorporate

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Development Support for Tanzania Stats (P159954)



           international standards and must support the independent production and use of data and
           analysis.
          Capacity building in statistics projects is enhanced when in-class theoretical training and in-
           the-field practical implementation are conducted sequentially. This also ensures the
           sustainability of learning outcomes.
          Close integration of recipient-executed and Bank-executed parts of a project can make
           important contributions to the achievement of the PDO. In the case of this project, there was
           a close integration of training and survey activities and a flexible means to respond to
           emerging needs while ensuring quality control.
          In survey data collection projects like this, close monitoring and timely reaction are very
           important to ensure that reliable data is collected. The use of weekly meetings and the use of
           traditional tools, such as phone calls, along with more modern digital tools - such as
           WhatsApp, along with field visits ensure the timely resolution of problems and the
           preservation of trust in the data collected.
          Initiatives to support the analysis of newly collected data can increase awareness and usage
           of new data to conduct innovative analysis and can contribute to the development of
           homegrown policy analysis, thus creating a virtuous cycle to collect additional and more
           detailed statistics to support more in-depth policy analysis.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a general and impartial account of the project design, implementation, and achievement of its
objectives. Still, there needs to be more evidence to support several claims included in the document.
Additional evidence had to be collected from ISRs, Aide Memoires, external data, and the interview with the
TTL. The ICR could have presented such evidence in the report. In addition, there are inconsistencies in the
ICR on the project cost (approval, actual - in financing section and annex 3) without explanation. The ICR uses
multiple terminologies to indicate the same thing: intervention logic, theory of change, results chain, and results
framework. Finally, indicators of outcome are very aggregated.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                      Page 13 of 14
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Development Support for Tanzania Stats (P159954)




                                                                                Page 14 of 14
