        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        ML-Urban Water Supply Project (P122826)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023785

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P122826                                      ML-Urban Water Supply Project

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Mali                                         Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)             Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53170,IDA-58800,IDA-D1270                31-Dec-2018                                      119,565,803.22

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Nov-2013                                  31-Dec-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               80,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Revised Commitment                               130,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Actual                                           119,565,803.22                                           0.00




 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator       Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan            Kishore Laxmikant            Ramachandra Jammi            IEGSD (Unit 4)
                               Nadkarni




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to both the International Development Association (IDA) Financing Agreement (p.5) dated
   December 23, 2013, and the Project Appraisal Document (p.8) dated October 25, 2013, the project objective
   was “to increase access to sustainable water services in Bamako,” the capital of Mali.




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ML-Urban Water Supply Project (P122826)



   In the IDA Additional Financing Agreement (p.5) dated September 15, 2016, the project objective was revised
   to read as follows: “To increase access to sustainable water services in selected urban areas within the
   Recipient's territory,” where the Recipient is defined as the Republic of Mali.

   The revision did not result in a material change in the project objective. The additional financing increased the
   geographical scope of the project with the addition of six other urban centers without altering the original
   scope of the project in Bamako. Therefore, this review will not undertake a split assessment of the project’s
   performance; it will be assessed based on the revised project objective and revised indicator targets.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  28-Jun-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project constituted a part of the larger Kabala Project—a multi-donor funded water project for
   Bamako—and originally consisted of three components as defined in the Financing Agreement (p.5) and
   the Project Appraisal Document (p.10). A fourth component was added at the time of additional financing.

   A. Water Storage and Transmission. (Appraisal cost: US$48.68 million; actual cost: US$ 41.86 million)

   This component was to finance the following activities to increase the availability of water and improve the
   quality of water services in the districts of Bamako on the right bank of the Niger River: (a) the installation of
   two groundwater storage tanks with a total storage capacity of 20,000 cubic meters in the Bacodjicoroni
   district; (b) the supply and installation of approximately 13 kilometers (km) of water transmission pipes to
   connect the storage tanks in the Bacodjicoroni district with the Badalabougou and Faladié districts; and (c)
   the provision of design and supervision services for the activities listed above.

   B. Water Distribution. (Appraisal cost: US$28.07 million; actual cost: US$50.13 million)

   This component was to finance the following investments to increase access to water services in Bamako’s
   districts on the right bank of the Niger River: (a) expansion of the water distribution networks by about 597
   km; (b) installation of 30,000 social household connections; (c) construction of 300 standposts; and (d) the
   provision of design and supervision services for the activities listed above. The significant difference
   between the cost of this component estimated at appraisal and the actual cost is because of the favorable
   exchange rate fluctuations during project implementation and reallocation of credit savings from the first
   component and fourth component (added at the time of additional financing; see Revised Components
   below) to this component to extend the distribution networks.


                                                                                                        Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ML-Urban Water Supply Project (P122826)



  C. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building. (Appraisal cost: US$3.25 million; actual cost:
  US$4.14 million)

  This component consisted of three subcomponents:

  C.1. Institutional support to the urban water sub-sector institutions: This subcomponent was to
  finance the following technical assistance activities: (a) assistance to the Malian Water Assets Holding
  Company (SOMAPEP - Société Malienne de Patrimoine de l’Eau Potable) and the Malian Water Operating
  Company (SOMAGEP - Société Malienne de Gestion de l’Eau Potable) in information technology,
  communication and workshops organization; (b) updates of business plans and financial forecasts; (c)
  financial audits, technical audits, and independent assessment of the reform; (d) customer satisfaction
  surveys; (e) relevant technical assistance and impact studies; and (f) institutional and technical studies.

  C.2. Capacity building: This subcomponent was to finance trainings and technical assistance for capacity
  building and development of regulatory skills for SOMAPEP, SOMAGEP, the Electricity and Water
  Regulatory Commission (CREE - Commission de Régulation de l’Electricité et de l’Eau), and the staff of the
  Ministry of Energy and Water (MEW) involved in the water sector reform.

  C.3. Safeguards implementation support: Under this subcomponent, the project was to support the
  project implementing entities in environmental and social management and provide capacity building for
  safeguards requirements.

  Revised Components

  At the additional financing in September 2016, the following component was added to the project to expand
  its geographical scope:

  D. Water Supply in Secondary Centers. (Appraisal cost: US$50.0 million; actual cost: US$43.38 million)

  The component had three subcomponents:

  D.1. Rehabilitation and expansion of water production, storage, and transmission: To increase water
  availability and improve water quality in six urban centers (Kita, Bougouni, Sélingué, Nioro du Sahel,
  Markala, and Gao), the project was to finance the rehabilitation of the existing and construction of new raw
  water intakes, water treatment plants, boreholes, storage tanks (including elevated water storage tanks) and
  transmission pipes.

  D.2. Increased access to safe water: This subcomponent was to finance the provision and installation of
  primary, secondary, and tertiary water distribution pipes and household water connections and standposts
  in the six urban centers.

  D.3. Support in supervision and safeguards: The subcomponent was to provide technical assistance and
  good and services to the project implementation entities for the supervision of the above-listed works and
  the implementation of the safeguards policies.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

                                                                                                 Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ML-Urban Water Supply Project (P122826)



   Project Cost: The project cost was originally estimated at US$80.0 million. At the time of additional
   financing, the estimated project cost was revised up to US$130.0 million. The project closed on December
   31, 2022, with an actual cost of US$139.51 million. The actual cost was higher than the revised project cost
   because of the exchange rate fluctuations between the Special Drawing Rights (the currency used in the
   financing agreements) and the United States dollar.

   Financing: At appraisal, the IDA credit amount was estimated at US$80.0 million that was to fully finance
   the estimated project cost. An amount equal to US$50.0 million was approved as additional financing. The
   project fully disbursed the total IDA credit.

   Borrower’s contribution: At appraisal, no borrower’s contribution was estimated, and none materialized at
   project closing.

   Additional Financing and Project Restructuring:

         Additional Financing (June 28, 2016): An additional financing of US$50 million was approved to
          expand the geographical scope of the project to six other urban centers, and the name of the project
          was changed from “Bamako Water Supply Project” to “Mali: Urban Water Supply Project.” The
          project objective was revised to read as “to increase sustainable access to water services in
          targeted urban areas in the Recipient’s territory,” and the targets of some indicators were revised up,
          and new indicators capturing the activities in these six urban centers were added to the results
          framework. Additionally, the project agreement was revised to allow procurement from United
          Nations agencies. The project closing date was extended by 36 months from December 31, 2018 to
          December 31, 2021 to allow time for the completion of the new activities added to the project scope.
          In addition to the three safeguards policies triggered at appraisal, the project triggered Physical
          Cultural Resources policy because of the possibility of chance finds during the excavations to lay
          new water transmission and distribution pipes in the six urban centers.
         Project Restructuring (November 29, 2021): The project was restructured to extend the project
          closing date by an additional 12 months from December 31, 2021 to December 31, 2022 to account
          for the project implementation delays because of the COVID-19 pandemic related restrictions and
          the sociopolitical unrest following the military coups of August 2020 and May 2021. Additionally, the
          legal covenant and the indicator related to the financial equilibrium of SOMAPEP were deleted
          because SOMAPEP had not satisfied the legal covenant by the project restructuring date. As the
          government was not expected to take a decision to adjust the tariffs in accordance with the
          commitments in the 2013 Sector Policy Letter, SOMAPEP was not expected to satisfy this legal
          covenant before the revised project closing date. Lastly, some targets of the indictors were revised
          up to reflect the impact of credit savings on investments.

   Dates: The project was approved on November 21, 2013 and became effective on June 3, 2014. The Mid-
   Term Review was conducted in April 2018. The original project closing date was December 31, 2018, but it
   was extended by 48 months because of time required for the completion of the activities added to the
   project scope at the time of the additional financing and the delays caused by the onset COVID-19
   pandemic and the military coups in 2020 and 2021. The project closed on December 31, 2022.




3. Relevance of Objectives


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      ML-Urban Water Supply Project (P122826)




               Rationale
               The project objective was highly aligned with the World Bank’s latest strategy as defined in the Country
               Partnership Framework (CPF) for Mali, FY2016-2019 (at the time of this review, the World Bank was
               preparing a Country Engagement Note for Mali). The project initially sought to address the development
               problem of insufficient availability of water in the capital city of Bamako through the construction of water
               supply infrastructure; the project scope was later expanded to include six other urban centers at the time of
               additional financing. The expansion of water supply was to directly contribute to the inclusion of a larger
               portion of the population in the provision of basic infrastructure services. The Systematic Country Diagnosis
               of 2015 for Mali identifies the absence of connectivity to basic infrastructure services as one of the main
               drivers of poverty and conflict in the country. The project was to supply water to more than one million
               people in seven urban centers. The project objective directly corresponds to the Focus Area 2 of the CPF,
               i.e., “Create Economic Opportunities” and supports the achievement of Objective 2.3. Improve infrastructure
               and connectivity for all Malians. The CPF identifies the sustainable expansion of access to water supply in
               Bamako and other urban areas as one of the main interventions for the achievement of this objective.

               The project objectives were highly relevant to the country context. Although the government capacity and
               fragility issues posed as high risks for the achievement of the project objective, the level at which the project
               objective was pitched was appropriate for the development status in the country. The focus of the project
               objective to the sustainability of water connections and water supply was sufficiently outcome-oriented in a
               fragility, conflict, and violence (FCV) context country. The project was to support capacity development and
               governance in the water sector through sector reform. The project objective was also aligned with the
               objectives of the Strategic Framework for Economic Recovery and Sustainable Development (2019-2023)
               of Mali to ensure universal access to drinking water (ICR, p.11).

               The project objective was sufficiently challenging for a water access project in an FCV context. The project
               benefited from the experience gained from the implementation of similar World-Bank financed projects in
               West Africa and other FCV countries. The project constituted a part of the larger Kabala Project—a
               comprehensive investment program funded by multiple international donors to support the urban water
               sector reform—and the project objective was in alignment with the objectives of the sector reform.

               Overall, the relevance of the project objective is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase access to sustainable water services in selected urban areas within the Recipient's territory.

                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ML-Urban Water Supply Project (P122826)




Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 1

The project inputs (IDA grant and technical assistance) were to be used to finance the construction of water
reservoirs, installation of water transfer pipes, extension of water distribution network, household connections
to water supply, construction of standpipes, development of information technologies (IT), a financial model,
audits and surveys, and trainings in water supply services for the water utilities. These activities were to result
in the following outputs: increased water storage capacity, water transfer and distribution networks built,
people gained access to water through household connections and standpipes, and IT and financial model
(including a tariff reform) developed for the water utilities in addition to the trainings delivered for capacity
building. Because of increased operational capacity and financial viability of the water utilities, the sustained
and enhanced access of people to water supply would have been expected to result in improved health, time
saved because of the elimination of water fetching (directly affecting women and girls), increased schooling
because of improved health and time saved (i.e., increased human capital), and increased economic activity.
The theory of change of the project was typical for a water access project of this size. The causal links from
project activities and outputs to expected outcomes were direct and valid, but the achievement of the project
objectives could be partially attributed to the project’s intervention because the availability of water supplied
by the project-financed infrastructure was contingent on the expansion of water treatment plant and pumping
station and the completion of a separate major transmission pipe financed by other donors under the larger
Kabala Project. Additionally, the achievement of the sustainability of water supply services depended on the
government’s decision to reform the water tariffs, which would have been expected to improve the financial
viability of the water utilities. The project was to support this through financial audits and the preparation of a
financial model including a tariff study.

Outputs

      Water production capacity installed under the project: The project financed the construction of
         water production infrastructure to abstract water from the Niger River or through boreholes. As a result
         of these activities, the water production capacity increased by 13,335 cubic meters per day as
         targeted.
        Water storage capacity constructed: As a result of the construction of the water storage tanks, an
         additional 48,700 cubic meters of water storage capacity was created. The revised target was 48,000
         cubic meters.
        Transmission pipes constructed: The project financed the construction of 20.4 km of transmission
         pipes. The revised target was 20 km.
        Distribution pipes constructed: The project financed the construction of 1,016 km of distribution
         pipes. The target was 1,000 km, but except Bamako, the project could not complete the construction
         of the distribution networks resulting in fewer people connecting to the water network than targeted in
         these cities (see the first outcome entry below).
        Improved community water points constructed or rehabilitated under the project: The project
         financed the construction or rehabilitation of a total of 710 community water points as targeted.
        New piped household water connections that are resulting from the project intervention: The
         project installed 59,000 household connections as targeted.
        Completion of technical audits: Technical audits of the water infrastructure built under the project
         were completed as planned.


                                                                                                     Page 6 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  ML-Urban Water Supply Project (P122826)




    A tariff study was completed under the project which was not captured by results framework. The
     World Bank presented the tariff study to the government in September 2021, but it was not
     implemented.

Outcomes

    Number of people in urban areas provided with access to Improved Water Sources under the
     project: As a result of the project activities, a total of 803,000 people (578,400 people in Bamako,
     45,000 in Kita, 25,000 in Nioro du Sahel, 49,000 in Bougouni, 44,600 in Markala, 36,000 in Sélingué,
     and 25,000 in Gao) gained access to water through new household connections and standposts
     against the revised target of 819,200. This was calculated with the assumption of 10 people per
     household (59,000 households times 10 people equaling 590,000 people) and 300 people per
     standpost (hence 710 standposts times 300 people equaling 213,000 people). The original target set
     at appraisal was 390,000 people for Bamako only. The target was revised up to 710,000 at the time of
     the additional financing because of the geographical expansion of the project scope. The target was
     further increased to 800,000 at the project restructuring to reflect the impact of credit savings on
     investments. However, these revised targets were miscalculated. As the World Bank project team
     confirmed, it was assumed that there were 8 people per household rather than 10. So, the revised
     target at additional financing and the project restructuring should have been 819,000 people. Overall,
     the project was successful in increasing access to water in Bamako, but the achievements in other
     cities, except Gao, fell short of the targets set at the time of additional financing because of the
     uncompleted distribution network investments in these cities and lower demand for household
     connections (The targets for each city were as follows: 80,000 in Kita, 32,000 in Nioro du Sahel,
     64,000 in Bougouni, 168,000 in Markala, 64,000 in Sélingué, and 21,200 in Gao). The project team
     commented that the demand in the urban centers for household connections was lower than
     expected. The possible causes are given as the high cost of connection fees (although the project
     provided subsidies to lower this cost) and the preference of women to collect water from standposts,
     which also create opportunities for socialization. The demand for household connections in Bamako
     was high; therefore, the household connections were transferred from the urban centers to Bamako to
     meet the demand.
    People with access to enhanced water supply services under the project: This indicator
     measures the number of pre-project connections that no longer experience low water pressure
     (defined as less than 1.5 bar pressure). The number of people was calculated with the assumption
     that there were 10 people per connection. The ICR reports that 491,310 people (hence 49,131
     household connections) no longer experience low water pressure. The original target set at appraisal
     was 220,000 people, which was revised up to 256,000 people at the time of the additional financing.
     The target was not revised at the project restructuring. The operation of the first phase of the Kabala
     water treatment plant in Bamako since June 2019 (financed by the French Development Agency, the
     European Union, and the European Investment Bank) contributed to the significant increase in the
     achievement of this indicator.
    Compliance with the financial equilibrium of the urban water supply sub-sector: This indicator
     was defined as “net cash balance (previous year plus net cash flow from operations minus debt
     service and variation of working capital requirements) positive or equal to zero”. Because the
     government did not implement the tariff reform, the water sector institutions could not achieve financial
     equilibrium through to the project restructuring in November 2021 when this indicator was deleted.




                                                                                                Page 7 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                ML-Urban Water Supply Project (P122826)



                            The project was successful in completing the water supply infrastructure. This resulted in increased
                            availability of water and a significantly high number of people connecting to the water supply network mostly
                            in Bamako and Gao. The project supported the reform of the water sector through the installation of IT and
                            preparation of studies including the tariff study. According to the survey conducted in 2022, the water users
                            were satisfied with the quality and reliability of water supply. However, the project fell short of ensuring the
                            sustainability of water supply services, which depended on the improved financial viability of the water sector
                            public entities, i.e., SOMAPEP and SOMAGEP. Because of the tariff freeze and rapidly increasing service
                            area of the water utility, the average water selling price had always been lower than the average water
                            production cost from 2015 onwards (ICR, p.13). The share of non-revenue water in water supply started to
                            gradually increase from around 25 percent between 2015 and 2018 to 35 percent in 2021. This is attributed to
                            poor collection rates and increased leaks in old transmission pipes following the increase in water pressure in
                            the system because of the new water treatment plant and transmission line investments. Overall, the risk to
                            the sustainability of the water supply service is high because of the poor financial viability of the water sector
                            public entities, which could adversely affect the operation and maintenance of the water supply network. The
                            follow-on World Bank-financed water supply projects in Mali are expected to address these shortcomings in
                            the sustainability of water supply services.

                            Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project to objective to increase access to electricity in the urban
                            centers of Mali is rated substantial but with significant shortcomings in the sustainability of water supply
                            services.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project was successful in increasing overall access to water in urban centers of Mali especially in
                            Bamako and Gao. The project had lower achievements in connecting households to water in other five urban
                            centers because of lower demand for connections than the estimations. According to the consumer survey
                            results, project improved the quality of water supply through the additional of new reservoirs and new
                            transmission and distribution pipes. However, the project fell short of improving the financial viability of the
                            water sector public entities because of the tariff freeze and rapidly increasing service area of the water utility;
                            this poses as a significant risk to the sustainability of water supply services. Overall, the project’s efficacy in
                            achieving the project objective to increase access to water in urban centers in an FCV context is rated
                            substantial but with significant shortcomings in the sustainability of water supply services.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



                                                                                                                                  Page 8 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ML-Urban Water Supply Project (P122826)




5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis

A cost-benefit analysis was conducted at appraisal to assess the economic viability of the project’s intervention
in increasing access to water in Bamako under the Kabala Project. The total US$199.0 million estimated cost of
the Kabala Project (consisting of water storage, transmission, and distribution investments) was included in the
analysis because the achievement of the project objectives was contingent upon the other critical water
infrastructure investments financed by other donors. The incremental operating costs and renewal costs were
also added to the analysis. The analysis period was 40 years, and 2013 prices were used excluding taxes and
financing costs. The quantifiable economic benefits of the project were identified as incremental revenues
generated by the water consumption of new water users and the existing customers because of fewer water
supply outages, and the consumer surplus stemming from the increased water consumption and lower water
prices shifting from vendors to standposts or household connections. The analysis did not include economic
benefits from time saved because of the elimination of water fetching, improved health, increased schooling
(because of improved health and time saved) and increased economic activity. Therefore, the analysis was
designed on conservative but realistic assumptions (see PAD pp.48-49). The calculations resulted in an
economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 10.5 percent and a net present value (NPV) of US$8.0 million at a
discount rate of 10 percent.

At the time of additional financing in June 2016, the cost-benefit analysis was updated by including the actual
implementation of the original project to that date and the expected impact of the activities proposed under the
additional financing. The same methodology at appraisal was used to undertake the cost-benefit analysis at
additional financing. The cost of the water infrastructure investments in the six urban centers added to the
project scope was included in the analysis along with the related quantifiable economic benefits listed in the
previous paragraph. The update of the cost-benefit analysis resulted in an EIRR of 11.4 and an NPV of US$22.9
million at a discount rate of 10 percent. The results are higher than those calculated at appraisal because of the
actual high outcomes of the implementation of the original project in Bamako although the estimated results in
the other urban centers were lower (Project Paper on a Proposed Additional Credit dated June7, 2016, p.36).

At project closing, same methodology was used to conduct a cost-benefit analysis with an expanded scope. In
addition to the quantifiable economic benefits used in the analyses at appraisal and additional financing, “the ex
post assessment used data from the satisfaction survey and other sources to factor in the alleviation of the time
burden associated with water fetching for women and girls” (ICR, p.37). The costs were taken as the actual
costs of the different subprojects under the Kabala Project and operation and maintenance costs. The ex-post
calculations resulted in an EIRR of 14.43 percent and an NPV of US$59.2 million at a discount rate of 10
percent. The ex-post results are slightly above the appraisal and additional financing calculations because of
lower project costs and increased economic benefits because of connecting more people to water and inclusion
of the additional economic benefit from the elimination of time for fetching water.

Financial Analysis

A “with project” and “without project” financial analysis was conducted at appraisal to assess the financial impact
of the project on SOMAPEP and SOMAGEP. The revenues the utilities were to generate from the incremental
increase in water sales because of the project and related costs were taken into consideration in the financial
analysis. The calculations included taxes but excluded non-cash generating benefits (i.e., the consumer
surplus), and resulted in a financial internal rate of return (FIRR) of 7.4 percent, which was higher than the
weighted average cost of capital of the water sector. The financial analysis was repeated at the time of the

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ML-Urban Water Supply Project (P122826)



additional financing using the same methodology at appraisal and resulted in an FIRR of 8.1 per cent. Lastly, the
financial analysis conducted at project closing using the same methodology yielded an FIRR of 9.79 percent.

Operational and Administrative Efficiency

Because of the FCV context in Mali, the project was faced with some operational and administrative
inefficiencies caused by the factors outside the control of the project implementation unit and the World Bank
project team such as the two military coups in August 2020 and May 2021, the increased armed conflict in the
northern parts of the country expanding into the central areas, and ECOWAS’ economic embargo for six months
following the military coups. These resulted in the suspension of disbursements slowing down project
implementation. Despite these obstacles, the project implementation unit established within SOMAPEP
implemented the project activities with continuous capacity building support from the project (hiring of
consultants in financial management, procurement, and safeguards) and the World Bank project team. The
commitment of the related ministries to the project was in general adequate, but the frequent changes of the
SOMAPEP managing director (because of the government changes—four in total in a nine-year project
implementation period) adversely affected decision-making and ensuring coordination in the implementation of
project activities. The presence of the two World Bank task team leaders (out of three) in Mali was critical in
maintaining a regular dialogue and engagement with the authorities, which contributed to efficient
implementation of the project by addressing the obstacles without significant delays. Occasional issues in the
implementation of safeguard policies affected the administrative and operational efficiency of the project such as
the long time needed to prepare the safeguard documents that delayed the implementation of the distribution
network works in the urban centers added to the project scope at the time of additional financing. The
insufficient procurement capacity of the project implementation unit resulted in a long procurement process, but
with the intervention of the senior management of the Ministry of Water and the SOMAPEP, procurement
performance of the project improved following the mid-term review of the project in 2018. The coordination
issues within the project implementation unit weakened the efficient implementation of the project (ISR No: 12,
p.3). Coordination within the project implementation unit improved following the reorganization of the SOMAPEP
and the project implementation unit (such as the reduction of the number of directorates from six to four and the
project implementation unit being embedded under the Directorate of Project implementation covering Bamako
and other urban centers for all externally financed projects), appointment of two coordinators each in charge of a
pool of donor-financed projects, and the hiring of more dedicated staff such as three engineers for contract
management and monitoring. The project also financed the training of the project implementation unit staff in
project management and monitoring and evaluation, which strengthened implementation capacity.

While there were some moderate shortcomings in the administrative and operational efficiency of the project,
which were mostly addressed during project implementation, the economic and financial analyses showed that
the project was economically viable; therefore, the project’s overall efficiency in achieving the project objective to
increase access to sustainable water services in selected urban areas in Mali is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:


                                                                                                       Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ML-Urban Water Supply Project (P122826)




                                Rate Available?               Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         100.00
Appraisal                                                     10.50
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         100.00
ICR Estimate                                                  14.43
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project objectives were highly aligned with the latest World Bank strategy for Mali and relevant to the FCV
context of the country because the project was designed to improve and increase the people’s access to piped
water increasing inclusion, especially so, after the expansion of the project scope to six urban centers. The
project was also successful in connecting a high number of households to the water supply network, but the
achievement of targets was considerably high in Bamako and Gao, but low in other five urban centers. The
project also fell short of ensuring the financial viability of the water sector public entities, which poses a high risk
to the sustainability of the water supply services. Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective
in an FCV context is rated substantial but with significant shortcoming in the sustainability of the water supply
services. The economic analyses conducted at appraisal, additional financing, and project closing confirm the
economic viability of the project with some moderate shortcomings in the operational and administrative
efficiency of the project that were mostly addressed during project implementation. Overall, the outcome of the
project is rated Moderately Satisfactory because of the underachievement in ensuring the sustainability of the
water supply services.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Political and Governance: The FCV context in Mali poses a major risk to the sustainability of the project
outcomes. The country has been facing political instability and governance issues for more than a decade
because of ongoing armed conflict in the northern parts of the country and frequent military interventions.
These could lead to insufficient government commitment to continue with the reform in the water sector and
adversely affect the operation of the water sector related government institutions resulting in poor operation
and maintenance of the water supply infrastructure constructed under this project and the larger Kabala
Project.

Financial viability of SOMAGEP: The water utility, SOMAGEP, is responsible for the operation and
maintenance of the water supply infrastructure developed under the project. However, SOMAGEP’s financial
viability is highly weak. The utility cannot cover the cost of water production with water sales. This poses a
high risk to the sustainability of the project outcomes because SOMAGEP has insufficient funds to maintain
the water infrastructure and implement necessary repairs and rehabilitation. The implementation of the tariff
reform would contribute to the improvement of the SOMAGEP’s financial viability along with additional

                                                                                                         Page 11 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ML-Urban Water Supply Project (P122826)



technical measures to reduce the amount of non-revenue water through the implementation of an efficient
water leak management system.

Technical: The commissioning of a new water treatment plant under the Kabala Project in 2018, resulted in
higher number of water leaks in older segments of the water network in Bamako because of increased water
pressure. The network efficiency dropped by six percent in the following year and continued to deteriorate
until project closing. This is reflected in the increased amount of the share of non-revenue water in water
supply increasing from 25 percent in 2017 to 35 percent in 2022. Unless a leak management system put in
place and implemented, the network efficiency could continue to deteriorate and adversely affect the
sustainability of water supply services.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The improvement and sustainability of water supply services in Bamako was of high strategic importance
  for the Government of Mali to improve the living conditions in the capital and address one of the main
  drivers of poverty and fragility in the country. The project constituted an integral part of the Kabala Project
  financed by multiple donors and were in line with the priorities of the government. The technical aspects
  of the project were sound; the water sector standards were to be used in the development of the water
  infrastructure. The economic and financial aspects of the project were adequately assessed showing the
  economic viability of the project with rather conservative assumptions. The project triggered the
  safeguards policies relevant to such water projects, but it triggered the Physical Cultural Resources policy
  with delay at the time of additional financing. The fiduciary aspects of the project were sufficient; most of
  the payments were to be made directly to the contractors. The project adequately assessed the risks to
  project implementation and the achievement of project objectives, and the mitigation measures were
  identified to the extent possible in the FCV context of Mali. The project implementation entities lacked
  sufficient capacity to implement the project in accordance with the World Bank policies and guidelines;
  therefore, the project was designed to strengthen the project implementation capacity of these entities.
  The M&E arrangements were sufficient to measure and assess the project’s results, but the Results
  Framework lacked indicators to better capture the sustainability of water supply services and the
  availability and quality of water. The project activities as defined in the project components were
  appropriate to achieve an increase in the number of people connected to the water network within the
  Kabala Project, but the sustainability of the water supply services was linked only to the financial
  equilibrium of the water sector to be achieved through a tariff reform. Although this was a necessary step
  towards sustainability of water services, other aspects of sustainability were not included in the project
  such as reduction in non-revenue water and implementation of an efficient water leak management.
  These are expected to be addressed in the follow-on water project.

  Overall, the quality at entry is rated satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ML-Urban Water Supply Project (P122826)




b. Quality of supervision
 The project team held regular in-person supervision missions twice a year until the onset of COVID-19
 pandemic, after which the supervision missions were held virtually. The presence of two Task Team
 Leaders in Mali (out of a total of three Task Team Leaders during the project implementation period)
 facilitated regular dialogue and engagement with the authorities. The project team’s close supervision and
 monitoring of the project implementation are adequately reflected in the ISRs and Aide Memoirs (AMs).
 These reports are highly detailed and provide a candid assessment of the project’s performance. The focus
 on the development impact of the project was high; the project team took various actions proactively to
 achieve the water sector reform. These actions included continuous dialogue with the authorities despite
 frequent changes in the government because of military coups, convening other donors (i.e., the African
 Development Bank, the French Development Agency, the European Investment Bank, and the European
 Union) to the meetings with the authorities, and consideration of including the implementation of the tariff
 reform as a prior action in a development policy operation. Faced with various obstacles in a high FCV
 context, the project team adequately supported the project implementation entities in financial
 management, procurement, safeguards implementation, and M&E (see sections 9 and 10 below). The
 project team also acted proactively to increase the development impact of the project by expanding its
 scope to six more urban centers under an additional financing and restructured the project to extend its
 closing date by one year to allow time for the completion of the project activities adversely affected by the
 onset of COVID-19, political instability in the country, and the ECOWAS embargo.

 Overall, the quality of supervision is rated substantial.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The causal chains from key activities and outputs to the outcomes expected from the project’s intervention
 were direct and valid, and this was adequately reflected in the results framework. The project objective was
 clearly specified and sufficiently outcome-oriented in an FCV context by focusing on the sustainability
 aspect of the water supply services. The project objective level indicators captured all immediate outcomes
 expected from the project’s interventions, but the sustainability of the water supply services was only
 monitored through the improvement in the financial viability of the water utility that relied on the
 implementation of a tariff reform developed under the project. The results framework did not include any
 indicator measuring the improvement in water supply services such as availability of water supply service
 (such as number and duration of outages) and the quality of water. The intermediate outcome indicators
 were adequate to capture the project’s outputs toward achieving the outcomes. All indicators were specific,
 measurable, achievable, relevant, and time-bound; baselines, targets, sources and data collection

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ML-Urban Water Supply Project (P122826)



 methodology were identified at appraisal. SOMAGEP and SOMAPEP were to collect and report the M&E
 data, and their capacities were assessed to be sufficient to implement M&E. The quality of the M&E data
 was to be reviewed and validated by a technical auditor and the Electricity and Water Regulatory
 Commission.



b. M&E Implementation
  As reported in the Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs), the project implementation unit,
  SOMAPEP, and SOMAGEP regularly collected data to measure and report the indicators included in the
  Results Framework. The project provided sufficient support to increase the M&E capacity of these entities
  through hiring of consultants. An independent technical auditor reviewed the operational performance of
  the urban water sector to assess the sustainability of water supply services. The project utilized the Geo-
  Enabling Initiative for Monitoring and Supervision tool for remote monitoring and geolocating the
  achievement of project outputs. The Results Framework did not require any revision to improve the
  quality of the M&E system because the indicators were sufficient to capture the immediate outcomes
  expected from the project. However, as noted in the M&E Design section above, the inclusion of
  indicators measuring the availability and quality of water would have been useful to monitor the
  improvements in the water supply services. Furthermore, the deletion of the indicator related to the
  financial equilibrium of the water sector just one year before project closing was unnecessary because
  regardless of the inclusion of such an indicator in the Results Framework, the assessment of water
  access projects should take the sustainability aspect of water supply services (including the financial
  viability of the water utility) into consideration when the project performance is assessed. Unless affected
  by a worsening of the political situation and governance in the country, the SOMAPEP and SOMAGEP
  are likely to maintain the M&E functions and processes developed under the project and use them in the
  successive World Bank or other donor-financed water sector projects.



c. M&E Utilization
  The findings were effectively communicated to the project stakeholders at the government level, World
  Bank and other donors financing the Kabala Project. The M&E findings resulted in the processing of an
  additional financing to expand the project scope to include six urban centers in addition to the capital,
  Bamako. The project team appropriately used the M&E data to assess the development impact of the
  project; these are reflected in the ISRs in detail. The M&E findings were critical in informing the
  subsequent World Bank-financed Bamako Urban Resilience Project and a second water project that is
  at the concept stage.



  While the M&E design could have included additional indicators to better capture the sustainability of
  water supply services, and the availability and quality of water, the M&E system as designed,
  implemented, and utilized was sufficient to assess the achievement of the objectives and test the links in
  the results chain. Overall, the M&E quality is rated substantial.




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ML-Urban Water Supply Project (P122826)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the project was classified as Category B under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and
   triggered the Involuntary Resettlement (4.12) and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
   safeguard policies. At the additional financing, the environmental category did not change, but the project
   additionally triggered the Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11).

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): At appraisal, the project was classified as Category B because
   of site-specific, temporary, and reversible environmental impacts of the project activities of water
   infrastructure construction. AS the project constituted a part of the larger Kabala Project, a comprehensive
   Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) had already been carried out for each investment
   identified at appraisal and at the time of additional financing. The ESIA was disclosed in-country and at the
   World Bank’s InfoShop on March 6 and February 13, 2013, respectively. The project provided training to the
   SOMAPEP staff on safeguards implementation in accordance with the World Bank requirements.
   SOMAPEP established a special environment department and appointed a focal point for safeguards
   implementation. The 129 grievances received during project implementation were resolved before project
   closing. However, two accidents with fatalities occurred. In the first accident, two workers died because of
   suffocation while inspecting a newly built manhole. It is reported that the workers did not adhere to the
   prerequisites for such an inspection (ICR, p.22). In the second accident, a driver died when his truck
   overturned. After each accident, the project followed the World Bank Environmental and Social Incident
   Tool Kit’s requirements to strengthen the implementation of the safeguard policy and compensate the
   relatives of the three deceased workers according to an action plan prepared.

   Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): At the additional financing, the project triggered this
   safeguard policy because of possible discoveries of physical cultural resources during the new excavations
   to lay water transmission and distribution pipes. Chance find procedures and clauses were inserted in each
   civil work contract in accordance with the requirements of this safeguard policy. No physical cultural
   resource was found during the construction of the water infrastructures.

   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): Although the project activities were not expected to result in any
   involuntary displacement of people or acquisition of land, the project triggered this safeguard policy
   because of the potential impact of the project activities in terms of income loss of the project-affected
   people, such as the permanent or temporary displacement of street retailers or occupants. A Resettlement
   Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared in accordance with the requirements of this safeguard policy and
   disclosed in-country and at the World Bank’s InfoShop on March 6, and June 12, 2013, respectively. For
   each subproject, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) approved by the World Bank was prepared. The RAPs
   were implemented prior to the start of the related civil works but with some difficulties and delays; for
   example, the distribution network construction works in the urban centers added to the project scope could
   not start because of the delay in the finalization of the safeguard documents (ISR No:9, p.18), and the
   contractors in Bamako could not be compensated for the cost of mobilization in certain project areas where
   activities were suspended because of the difficulties to implement the RAPS. Despite these challenges, all



                                                                                                  Page 15 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ML-Urban Water Supply Project (P122826)



  project-affected people had been compensated for their temporary loss of income because of the project
  activities by project closing.

  Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). The project triggered this safeguard policy because it
  was to result in additional water abstracted from the Niger River, which is an international waterway. The
  authorities informed the Niger Basin Authority about the impact of the project on the Niger River. On behalf
  of the riparian countries, the Niger Basin Authority gave a no-objection on November 1, 2011 to the
  abstraction of water from the Niger River.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  At appraisal, the SOMAPEP and SOMAGEP were assessed to have insufficient financial management
  capacity to implement a World Bank-financed project. The project and the World Bank project team
  provided technical assistance to these institutions and the project implementation unit established under
  SOMAGEP to increase their financial management capacity. Despite these efforts, the project
  implementation unit was slow in implementing the steps in an action plan prepared during the mid-term
  review such as the update of the project implementation manual and the strengthening of the internal audit
  function (ISR No:11, p.3). Financial management of the project improved following the hiring of an
  assistant accountant. According to the ISRs, the unaudited interim financial reports were submitted
  according to the schedule and acceptable to the World Bank; the opinions of the external auditor in the
  financial audit reports were unqualified (ISR No: 13, p.16). The majority of the payments to contractors
  were processed directly; there were no known issues of corruption or misuse of funds associated with the
  project. The project team confirmed that all project funds were accounted for at project closing.

  Procurement

  Procurement was implemented in accordance with the World Bank’s procurement policies and procedures
  but was slow because of the delays in the preparation of the subproject specific safeguard policies. As of
  December 2020, all contracts were procured despite the delays caused by the slow approval process of
  the national procurement agency. The project implementation unit initially lacked sufficient procurement
  capacity, but trainings and support of the consultants hired under the project were critical in building the
  procurement capacity and successful procurement of the contracts. The project implementation unit staff
  gradually developed sufficient expertise in using the STEP platform with the support of the World Bank
  project team, which improved project implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None.



d. Other

                                                                                                 Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ML-Urban Water Supply Project (P122826)



   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

This review has drawn three lessons based on the information in the ICR.

The FCV context in a project country can be a major barrier to basic infrastructure sector
reforms necessary for the sustainability of basic public services. The sustainability of the water
supply services developed under the project and the larger Kabala Project depended on the water
sector reform in Mali, which would have improved the financial equilibrium of the water sector. This
was to be achieved through a tariff reform under the project, but such a reform did not materialize
despite the significant efforts of the World Bank project team and the other donors. The main reason
was the frequent changes in the government because of the military coups and political instability in
the country. Therefore, conditioning the sustainability of project outcomes on sector reforms might
not be a feasible approach in FCV context countries.

The addition of secondary urban centers in the scope of water projects can increase the
development impact and increase inclusion in an FCV context country that would help
address one of the main drivers of poverty and fragility. The project was originally designed to
improve water supply services and increase access to water in Bamako, the capital of Mali.
Following the successful implementation of the original project and some credit savings, it was
decided to expand the project scope, under an additional financing, by adding six urban centers to
reduce the country’s regional disparities in access to water services that were exacerbated by the
FCV situation in the country (Project Paper on a Proposed Additional Credit, Report No: PAD1792,
p.4). While the demand for household connections in these urban centers materialized lower than
the level estimated at the time of additional financing, the project, nevertheless, achieved to connect
an estimated 224,600 people to piped water who would otherwise remain without access to water.
The consumer surveys conducted at project closing showed that people connected to water under
the project were satisfied with the reliability and quality of the water supply service.

The absence of a leak management system in a water infrastructure project connecting new
infrastructure with older segments of the existing network can adversely affect the
availability of water for the consumers and weaken the financial viability of the water utility.
After the commissioning of a new water treatment plant under the Kabala Project in 2018, the

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ML-Urban Water Supply Project (P122826)



network efficiency in the water supply network in Bamako dropped by six percent because of the
increased number of leaks in the older segments of the network caused by increased water
pressure. The deterioration in the network efficiency continued through to project closing resulting in
a 35 percent of non-revenue water. Same adverse results were witnessed in similar projects
implemented in West Africa (ICR, p.26). The poor connection of the new infrastructure built under
the project to the existing network contribute to higher number of leaks. Such leaks result in lower
availability of water for the existing customers and prevents the connection of new customers to the
network, while causing a significant financial loss to the water utility because of high amount of non-
revenue water. Therefore, the implementation of a leak management system under such water
projects could significantly contribute to the achievement and sustainability of the project outcomes.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is candid and provides a detailed overview of the project. The narrative is evaluative and focuses on
what occurred as a consequence of the project’s intervention. The report together with its annexes provides an
adequate evidence base to support the achievement of the project’s results and makes a sufficient attempt to
triangulate data to reach conclusions such as the financial viability assessment of the water sector based on the
Utility of the Future framework developed by the World Bank. In this regard, the ICR provides a detailed
explanation on why the water sector financial equilibrium could not be achieved and assesses the financial
viability of the utility based on other criteria. However, this underachievement is not sufficiently highlighted as
the reason for an overall outcome rating of moderately satisfactory although the ICR rates the project’s efficacy
and efficiency as substantial and the relevance of objectives as high (which would result in a satisfactory rating
for outcome). There is a logical linking and integration of the various parts of the report. The report mostly
follows and adequately responds to the Bank guidance and its Appendix L, Preparation of ICR in FCV Setting
for IPF Operations, but some sections could have included additional information reported in the ISRs such as
the sections on financial management, procurement, and safeguards. The entries in the “Lessons and
Recommendations” are based on the specific experiences of the project and linked to the ICR’s narrative.

Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 18 of 19
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
ML-Urban Water Supply Project (P122826)




                                                                       Page 19 of 19
