     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Energy Industry Development (P152653)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023813

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P152653                                    Sustainable Energy Industry Development

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Pacific Islands                            Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A1235,TF-A1342,TF-A1505                 31-Aug-2020                                          5,176,220.19

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Sep-2015                                28-Feb-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            5,660,000.00                                    5,660,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             5,589,579.90                                    5,176,220.19

 Actual                                         5,195,722.45                                    5,176,220.19




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Hassan Wally               Vibecke Dixon                 Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Regional Sustainable Energy Industry Development Project
   (SEIDP) as articulated in the Grant Agreement (GA, page 5) was identical to the one stated in the Project
   Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 30) and aimed to:




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Energy Industry Development (P152653)



   "Increase the data availability and capacity of power utilities of the Pacific Island Countries* (PICs)
   and Papua New Guinea (PNG) to enhance their ability to incorporate and manage renewable energy
   technologies and long-term disaster risk planning."

   *The World Bank Group’s 10 Pacific Island member countries are: Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji,
   Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Palau, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu.

   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on the following three objectives:

   1. To increase the data availability of power utilities of the PICs and PNG .

   2. To increase capacity of power utilities of the PICs and PNG to enhance their ability to incorporate and
   manage renewable energy technologies.

   3. To increase capacity of power utilities of the PICs and PNG for long-term disaster risk planning.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following three components:

   1. Renewable Energy Resource Mapping Phase 1 to 3 (appraisal cost: US$2.27 million, actual cost:
   US$1.69 million). This component funded solar and wind resource assessments/mapping across ten
   Pacific Islands Countries (PICs) in three phases: i) initial resource estimate at the country level using
   satellite atmospheric and meteorological data in phase 1, ii) solar and wind measurement campaigns to
   collect ground-based higher quality data in phase 2, and iii) the validation of collected data.

   2. Technical Assistance (appraisal cost: US$2.57 million, actual cost: US$2.55 million). This
   component supported several activities including: i) acquisition of power modeling software and consultancy
   services for renewable energy (RE) integration and capacity building, ii) development of an online
   benchmarking platform, iii) development of industry guidelines and competency standards, iv) training and
   workshops, v) development of utilities’ career development assessment plan, and vi) development of
   disaster-recovery/risk-reduction tools based on targeted country assessment.

   3. Project Implementation Support (appraisal cost: US$0.82 million, actual cost: US$0.952 million).
   This component provided the Pacific Power Association (PPA) with resources to conduct and manage the
   project, including: (a) hiring required expertise such as project implementation officers (PIOs) and
   procurement advisors, (b) acquiring office equipment, and (c) covering incremental operating costs.

   Revised Components. Component 1 was scaled down as part of the first restructuring, approved in
   December 2017. The scope adjustment consisted of transferring the satellite-based resource assessment
   (phase 1) and collected data validation (phase 3) from the PPA to the WB’s Energy Sector Management


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Sustainable Energy Industry Development (P152653)



  Assistance Program (ESMAP) and increasing the number of sites for ground-measurement (phase 2) to be
  led by PPA with the budget associated with the removal of two phases.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost was estimated at US$5.66 million. The actual cost according to the ICR
  (Data Sheet, page 2) was US$5.20 million or 91% of the appraisal estimate.

  Financing. The project was financed with a US$1.92 million Grant from South Pacific Regional
  Environment Programme (SREP), a US$3.47 million Grant from the Small Island Developing
  States Initiative (SIDS DOCK), and a US$0.27 million Grant from the Government of Japan under the
  Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR). The total financing was US$5.66 million. The
  actual amounts disbursed were US$0.2 million, US$3.47 million, and US$1.92 million for the GFDR, SIDS-
  DOCK, and SREP, respectively, totaling US$5.20 million.

  Borrower Contribution. The project was fully financed through the above-mentioned Grants with no
  Borrower contribution.

  Dates. The project was approved on September 29, 2015 and became effective six months later on March
  23, 2016. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on May 8, 2018. The PAD did not explicitly state a
  date for the MTR, but mentioned that it would be at the mid-point of implementation, which was
  approximately where the MTR was conducted in relation to the original closing date. The project closed on
  February 28, 2023, which was thirty months beyond the original closing date on August 21, 2020. Each TF
  had a different closing date, the closing date of the SIDS DOCK was extended four times, while that of the
  SREP was extended twice, and the GFDRR closing was extended once. The first and second closing date
  extensions of the SIDS DOCK were done due to mismatched closing dates of the SREP and the SIDS
  DOCK grant which was expected to close in December 2017. The subsequent two extensions of the grants
  were done to accommodate various delays according to the ICR (paragraph 16) that stemmed from more
  time needed to: "(i) select a firm to conduct the ground measurement campaigns, (ii) secure land to install
  equipment for on-ground measurements, (iii) replace defective wind measuring equipment - Light Detection
  and Ranging (LiDAR), and (iv) to deliver training/workshops delayed due to PICs’ border closing during the
  COVID-19 pandemic."

  The project was restructured four times all of which were Level 2 Restructuring as follows:

  1. On December 15, 2017, when the amount disbursed was US$0.62 million, in order
  to change components and cost, extend the Loan closing date of the SIDS DOCK Grant from December 31,
  2017 to December 30, 2019, and change the implementation schedule.

  2. On April 22, 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$2.71 million, in order to extend the Loan closing
  date of SIDS DOCK Grant to June 30, 2020, and change the implementation schedule.

  3. On June 29, 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$3.43 million, in order to extend the Loan closing
  dates of the SIDS DOCK and the SREP to February 28, 2022.




                                                                                                 Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Energy Industry Development (P152653)



   4. On February 16, 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$4.21 million, in order to revise the Results
   Framework (RF), and extend the Loan closing date of the SIDS DOCK and the SREP by twelve months
   from February 28, 2022 to February 28, 2023.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. The Pacific Islands Countries (PICs) and Papua New Guinea (PNG) continue to be
highly vulnerable to climate change impacts and natural disasters. Also, they are highly reliant on costly
imported fossil fuels for power generation, and have weak capacity of power utilities. The heavy reliance on
petroleum fuels contributed to very high retail electricity tariffs in some PICs, ranging from 18 to 79 US
cents per kilowatt hour (kWh). Also, PICs and PNG Governments have ambitious targets to increase the
share of renewable energy (RE) in their power generation mix. This project had a key objective to enhance
knowledge and capacity of Pacific power utilities for the integration and management of RE technologies
and disaster risk planning, with a regional implementation approach.

Previous Bank Experience. The project benefited from the Bank’s experience in designing and
implementing projects in other islands and PICs. There was a previous World Bank-supported regional
approach for RE resource mapping and disaster risk management (The Renewable Energy Resource
Mapping and Geospatial Planning Project - P145864) that was leveraged by the project. Also, the project
benefited from the World Bank’s Pacific Regional Data Repository for Sustainable Energy for All (PRDR-
P153190) as a basis for strengthening the availability, quality and comparability of energy data and
statistics in the region. The Bank also drew on the experience of other countries that were rapidly
transitioning to very high penetration of renewables, such as Tokelau (PV, batteries), Aruba (wind), and
Cape Verde (wind, PV). This project complemented existing work being undertaken by other development
partners in the sector as noted in the PAD (paragraph 20).

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the Bank’s twin goals of ending
extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity by facilitating PICs’ efforts to adopt cleaner and more
sustainable electricity in the medium term. The PDO was also in line with the Pacific Regional Framework
for Action on Disaster Risk Management (2005–2015) and with the Strategy for Climate and Disaster
Resilient Development in the Pacific (SRDP), where both documents identify the needs and priorities for
responding to the PICs’ extreme vulnerability to the effects of climate change and natural hazards.

At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with two focus areas reflected in the Bank's Regional
Partnership Framework for the Pacific Islands (RPF, FY2017-FY2021). Specifically, the RPF’s focus area 3
(Protecting Incomes and Livelihoods), objective 3.1: of strengthened preparedness and resilience to natural
disasters and climate change, where the SEIDP activities contributed to: (i) training PIC and PNG power
utilities to assess the impacts of potential natural disasters or climate change hazards on their infrastructure
and operations, and (ii) developing actions that can be incorporated to better prepare for natural
and climate hazards or/and implemented to enhance resilience. Also, under the RFP’s focus area 4
(Strengthening the Enablers of Growth Opportunities), the SEIDP supported objective 4.2: increased
access to basic services and improved connective infrastructure by mapping RE resources and training
power utility staff so that they can add RE generation to improve access to electricity in a cleaner and more
affordable manner (cheaper than the fossil fuel-based generation it displaces). Further, the RPF (page

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Sustainable Energy Industry Development (P152653)



               66) explicitly indicated that the SEIDP was one of the projects that supported the achievement of the
               objective 4.2. In addition, the RPF (pages 29, 62 and 97) emphasized that an appropriate balance of
               regional and country-specific approaches was needed across the PICs and highlighted the role of the PPA.
               Finally, at project closing, the extended FY22-23 RPF’s three objectives that are supported by the SEIDP
               remained relevant.

               Consistency with Country Strategies and Priorities. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the
               Framework for Action on Energy Security in the Pacific (FAESP) adopted at the 41st Pacific Islands Forum
               meeting in August 2010. The FAESP encompassed the leaders’ vision for an energy-secure Pacific where
               Pacific people at all times have access to sufficient sustainable sources of clean and affordable energy and
               services to enhance their social and economic well-being. The PDO was also in line with objective of PICs
               and PNG to increase energy security and lower energy usage costs. Governments were expected to
               accelerate investments in RE and energy efficiency (EE). The PICs were addressing these issues through
               the formulation of long-term energy policies and plans for implementing policy targets. At completion, the
               PDO continued to be in line with the PICs’ current development strategies that emphasized the need to
               scale up RE generation and adapt to climate change. At the 5th Pacific Regional Energy and Transport
               Ministers’ Meeting held from May 8 to 12, 2023 in Vanuatu, PICs energy ministers reaffirmed, in the
               outcome statement, the critical importance for a clear pathway for energy security, the urgent need for
               decarbonization of energy systems (moving away from fossil fuels-based power generation), and the need
               to address rising costs of fuel and knowledge gaps. The meeting outcome statement also highlighted that
               climate change continued to be an existential threat facing the PICs. In addition, updated country Nationally
               Determined Contribution (NDC) targets included objectives to transition to RE technologies. For example,
               Nauru committed to achieve 50% RE in its national grid system by 2030. While FSM, PNG and Tonga were
               set to move to more than 70% RE generation by 2030. Samoa also made a commitment for 100% RE by
               2025, and Fiji and Vanuatu set to reach 100% RE by 2030.

               Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. The PDO was ambitious. Specifically, the element of
               the PDO pertaining to disaster risk management was clearly challenging to achieve-given the limited
               funding designated to the disaster risk management activities. Also, the formulation of the PDO statement
               suggested that “increased data availability” could inform two separate objectives (one objective being data
               availability to support the deployment of RE technologies and another objective being data availability to
               support effective disaster risk planning). However, there were no PDO-level indicator(s) or intermediate
               results indicator(s) that referred to increased data availability to support disaster risk planning. Furthermore,
               the element of the PDO pertaining to increased technical and institutional capacity was not sufficiently
               monitorable. At completion, the PDO continued to be line with the Bank's FY17-21 RPF, as well as with the
               FY22-23 RPF. Also, the PDO continued to in line with the PICs energy and climate change mitigation and
               adaptation priorities. Therefore, Relevance of Objectives is rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                        Page 5 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sustainable Energy Industry Development (P152653)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To increase the data availability of power utilities of the Pacific Island Countries (PICs) and Papua New
Guinea (PNG) to enhance their ability to incorporate and manage renewable energy technologies.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported renewable energy (RE)
resource mapping assessment of solar and wind capacity across 10 PICs. This aimed to enhance the
awareness and knowledge among governments, utilities and the private sector about the resource potential
for renewable technologies (solar and wind), and to provide the governments with a spatial planning
framework to guide investment in the renewable energy sector. The project also provided technical
assistance to increase capacity within the utilities in 10 PICs and PNG on planning for and management of
the integration of variable RE in their systems, data collection and management, and knowledge sharing
across jurisdictions. The expected outputs included 8 data sets of solar resource mapping, 5 data sets of wind
resource mapping, organizing one workshop on resource mapping, developing an online benchmarking
platform, and preparing 7 benchmarking reports. The intermediate outcome was the availability of publicly
resource mapping assessments across the 10 PICs. The expected outcomes were increased data availability
on solar/wind resources potential in 13 sites across the 10 PICs, and 7 years of utilities' benchmarking data
including Key performance indicators (KPIs). All this would contribute to increasing the data availability of
power utilities of the Pacific Island Countries and Papua New Guinea to enhance their ability to incorporate
and manage renewable energy technologies. Anticipated long-term outcomes included enhancing the
capacity of PIC and PNG utilities to incorporate and manage RE technologies, which was expected to
contribute to affordable, reliable, and sustainable electricity service.

The achievement of this PDO was underpinned by the following critical assumptions: PPA has adequate
implementing capacity, utility staff has baseline capacity to utilize acquired knowledge, and no natural
disasters that would disrupt implementation.

Overall, the stated activities in the ToC were directly connected to the outputs, intermediate outcomes and
outcomes in a plausible causal chain. The critical assumptions were logical and realistic.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      Phase 1 (satellite based) resource mapping assessment of solar and/or wind capacity across 10 PICs
       to be completed and available. The project collected solar irradiation and other meteorological data at
       eight sites in the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), Nauru, Republic of the Marshall Islands
       (RMI), Palau, PNG, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu over 24 months, from February 2020 to
       March 2022. In addition. it installed wind monitoring stations with Light detection and ranging (LiDAR)
       and collected wind data at five sites in RMI, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga and Tuvalu over
       different periods. However, the ICR (Annex 1) noted that the phase 1 activity was transferred from the
       PPA to the World Bank's Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP) at the first
       restructuring in 2017, and was completed by ESMAP. This intermediate indicator should have been
       removed in the result framework.
      Phase 2 (ground measurements) resource mapping assessment of solar and/or wind capacity across
       10 PICs were completed and available. 13 solar and wind resource datasets in 9 PICs and PNG were



                                                                                                  Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sustainable Energy Industry Development (P152653)



       collected and available online on the open data platform, which could also be accessible through the
       PPA website (target achieved).
      Phase 3 (validation) resource mapping assessment of solar and/or wind capacity across 10 PICs
       completed and available. While the target of validation of resource mapping (phase3) was achieved,
       this activity was transferred from PPA to ESMAP at the first restructuring in 2017, and was completed
       by ESMAP. This intermediate indicator should have been removed (ICR, Annex 1).
      59 training courses/workshops were provided significantly exceeding the target of 6. The 11 face-to-
       face trainings on Power Factory, energy resilience assessment tools, Variable RE, power purchase
       agreement, and project management were carried out, and the 48 workshops including 32 workshops
       on industry guidelines on RE, storage and Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) were
       delivered.
      During the seven years of the project implementation, PPA surveyed all its power utility members,
       and compiled and shared yearly reports that provide data on the utilities’ governance, operational, and
       financial performance, captured through 46 key performance indicators (KPIs).

Outcome

      By project completion, the target of increasing public information on RE resources and
       variability (PDO outcome indicator) was achieved. Ground-measured resource data and the utilities'
       benchmarking data was made available on the PPA website including 13 ground-measured solar and
       wind resource data for nine PICs and PNG. Also, solar ground-measured data for 8 sites in FSM,
       Nauru, RMI, Palau, PNG, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu was collected over 24 months, and
       wind data for 5 sites in RMI, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga and Tuvalu was collected for a different
       period.
      The resource data was uploaded on the WB's open energy data platform had been viewed by 395
       users by June 2023, and was used to inform the site identification, the preparation and implementation
       of solar/wind power projects for the utilities.
      In addition, the online benchmarking platform improved the availability and accessibility of key
       performance data of power utilities. Seven benchmarking reports (intermediate outcome achieved)
       were released throughout the implementation in a timely manner. According to the ICR (annex 1) the
       online benchmarking data contributed to improving operations for many power utilities in Tonga,
       Vanuatu and Solomon Power, helping them to reduce system losses (by comparing the efficiency of
       their operations with their peers) and to address grid reliability issue through setting up a reliability
       committee. It also notable that Tonga Power Limited (TPL), the national power utility in Tonga,
       planned to share the wind data with the engineering, procurement, and contractor firm that is
       implementing the 2.25 MW wind project at the eastern side of Tonga Tapu, the main island of Tonga
       (ICR, paragraph 26).

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project supported renewable energy (RE) resource
mapping assessment of solar and wind capacity across 10 PICs in three phases. During implementation,
phase 1 and 3 were moved from under the project to be implemented by and achieved by ESMAP. Phase 2
was fully implemented and achieved under this project as noted above. The project achieved its outcome
indicator target and met all its intermediate outcomes and most outputs. It is therefore plausible to assume
that the improved accessibility to solar and wind data could have potentially increased PICs and PNG
governments’ and utilities' awareness of their RE potential. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective
was achieved is rated Substantial.


                                                                                                  Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sustainable Energy Industry Development (P152653)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase capacity of power utilities of the PICs and PNG to incorporate and manage RE technologies.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project provided technical assistance to
utilities including: the acquisition of a power modeling tool combined with capacity building, development of an
on-line benchmarking platform, development of industry guidelines and competency standards, support
training and workshops, and supporting a utility career development assessment plan. These activities aimed
to increase capacity within the utilities in 10 PICs and PNG on data collection and management, and
knowledge sharing across jurisdictions. The expected outputs included: establishing an online portal,
producing 7 bench marking reports, organizing 5 workshops, designing two power modeling tools with two
training sessions, and conducting a utility training need analysis. Intermediate outcomes included: reports on
industry guidelines and competency standards available through PPA. The expected outcomes included:
improved technical and institutional capacity of the Pacific Power Association (PPA) and utilities to monitor
grid key indicators, to develop in-house power analysis systems using power system modeling tools, to
design; install and operate RE storage systems, and to plan technical specifications for VRE integration. The
anticipated long-term outcomes included enhancing the capacity of PIC utilities to incorporate and manage
RE technologies, which was expected to contribute to affordable, reliable, and sustainable electricity service.

The achievement of this PDO was underpinned by the following critical assumptions: the PPA has adequate
implementing capacity, utility staff has baseline capacity to utilize acquired knowledge, increased capacities
are measurable to some extent, and no natural disasters that would disrupt implementation. Another
assumption emphasized by this Review is that training of staff will automatically lead to increased capacity
(which might not be the case). It is therefore important that the increased capacity is measured (in terms of
actual changed behavior/changed working practices).

Overall, the stated activities in the ToC were directly connected to the outputs, intermediate outcomes and
outcomes in a plausible causal chain. However, the ToC did not explicitly capture the improvement in the
technical capacity of utilities. While the critical assumptions were logical, the project should have included
some measure of improved capacity.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      59 training courses/workshops were provided exceeding the target of 6. These included 11 trainings
       on Power Factory, energy resilience assessment tools, Variable RE, power purchase agreement, and
       project management were carried out, and the 48 workshops including 32 workshops on industry
       guidelines on RE, storage and SCADA.


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sustainable Energy Industry Development (P152653)




      Planning tool was available (target achieved). The PPA purchased two power system modeling
       software, DigSilent's Power Factory and Homer, and the software was accessible through a
       designated link of the PPA webpage, allowing simultaneous access by two users. Also, two training
       sessions were provided to the utilities by DigSilent in 2017 and 2023 to help utilities to utilize the
       software. The DigSilent's Power Factory was used by at least 4 utilities including Solomon Power,
       Samoa EPC, Vanuatu's UNELCO and PUB of Kiribati.
      16 industry guidelines and competency standards were available through PPA (target achieved).
       The industry guidelines covered aspects of design/installation/maintenance of solar photovoltaic (PV),
       storage and SCADA were developed. Out of 16 guidelines, 4 were updated, and 12 were newly
       developed.
      Other notable achievements that were not part of the RF included a Bank-executed variable
       renewable energy (VRE) assessment. This was composed eight individual VRE assessments
       conducted by a private consulting firm from 2017 to 2019 for eight utilities in Samoa, FSM (Chuuk,
       Kosrae, Pohnpei, Yap), Tonga, RMI, and Tuvalu, and carried out workshops in February 2019 to
       disseminate the assessment findings. The assessment suggested the addition of battery energy
       storage system to optimize the expected output of a solar PV plant that was being procured for
       installation under an ADB -financed project for the Kosrae Utility Authority (KUA) in the state of
       Kosrae.

Outcome

      By project completion, two planning tools were available and training was provided to both PPA and
       utilities in the use of these tools (PDO outcome indicator, achieved). The PPA purchased two power
       system modeling software, DigSilent's Power Factory and Homer, and provided utilities with two
       training sessions in 2017 and 2023 in Fiji, attended by 44 utility staff. The DigSilent's Power Factory
       was used by at least 4 utilities including Solomon Power, EPC (Samoa's power utility), UNELCO
       (power utility in Vanuatu) and PUB (Kiribati's power utility). The online benchmarking platform was
       developed and improved the accessibility of technical, operational, and financial data among PICs and
       PNG utilities.
      Also, the project contributed to improved technical and institutional capacity of the PPA and power
       utilities (PDO outcome indicator, substantially achieved). The project identified training needs of PICs
       and PNG utilities and delivered 11 training and 48 workshops according to the identified needs.
       According to the ICR (Annex 1), these project-supported activities increased the in-house technical
       capacity of PICs and PNG power utilities "to design, install and maintain solar PV/storage/SCADA
       systems and informed the operation of power systems or its institutionalization like setting up and/or
       updating grid code." Specifically, the Electric Power Corporation (the power utility in Samoa) reported
       that the training empowered the utility engineers to address protection systems issues in the network.
       Vanuatu's UNELCO indicated that the training timely provided its recently recruited engineers with
       critical knowledge that enabled continuity of planning and design services in the utility. Also, Solomon
       Power was able to produce in-house conceptual designs of solar hybrid mini grid systems and to
       prepare technical specifications of bidding documents to select a contractor for procurement and
       construction. It is noted that the target value of implementation of the capacity-building plan, measured
       in percentage unit, would not be enough measurable and attributable to demonstrate improved
       technical and institutional capacity, as the plan did not specify training activities and their timeframe.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. While the RF lacked specific indicators to measure improvement in
capacity, the ICR provided evidence (as noted above) that this happened to some extent. For example, the

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sustainable Energy Industry Development (P152653)



project-supported training enabled power utility staff to do in-house design, such as the case of Solomon
Power, maintain solar home systems, and use knowledge and data provided to make improvements (case
with the benchmarking data). It is plausible to assume that the project contributed to increasing the capacity
of power utilities of the PICs and PNG to enhance their ability to incorporate and manage RE technologies.
This was possible through supporting training sessions, and establishing RE design, installation and
maintenance guidelines. These activities in combination with the Bank-executed VRE assessment contributed
to enhancing the ability of PICs and PNG power utility staff and contractors to design, incorporate, and
manage RE technologies. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial
with moderate shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To increase capacity of power utilities of the PICs and PNG for long-term disaster risk planning.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported disaster-recovery and risk-
reduction activities to support PICs power utilities’ efforts to improve their preparedness for responding to
natural hazards/climate shocks and to reduce economic losses when disasters occur. This included the
provision of advisory services to the utilities on the planning and prioritization of investments in resilience in
the power sector, as well as an emergency response window to assist utilities with post-disaster damage
assessment reports. Also, risk-reduction/adaptation measures included engineering (e.g., designing more
robust design specifications; relocating or retrofitting extremely vulnerable existing infrastructure; designing
new systems better able to capture the energy of increased wind speeds, flood protection, underground
distribution for protection against wind, high temperatures, corrosion, and flooding), and non-engineering
options (more robust O&M procedures, improved and better-coordinated land-use planning; for example,
rezoning land use so that future power infrastructure is located in less vulnerable areas). The expected
outputs were the development of two resilience tools with relevant training, and three resilience investments
plans. The expected outcome was increased in-house capacity of utilities to develop resilience plans.
Anticipated long-term outcome was enhancing the utilities' ability for long-term disaster risk planning.

The achievement of this PDO was underpinned by the following critical assumptions: The PPA has adequate
implementing capacity, utility staff has baseline capacity to utilize acquired knowledge, increased capacities
are measurable to some extent, and no natural disasters that would disrupt implementation.

Overall, the stated activities in the ToC were directly connected to the outputs, and outcome in a plausible
causal chain. The critical assumptions were logical, however, the project should have included some measure
of improved capacity.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      Post-disaster and/or disaster-risk reduction needs assessment was developed (target achieved). The
       project funded the development of energy resilience enhancement plans for three utilities: PNG,

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Sustainable Energy Industry Development (P152653)



                                    Samoa, and Tuvalu (representing large, medium and small size PICs power utilities) based on
                                    assessment of the vulnerabilities of their power infrastructure against climate change and extreme
                                    weather events. As the SEIDP’s resilience funding (GFDRR grant of US$270,000) was limited and
                                    given the fact that energy resilience is a relatively new concept for PICs that needs to be further
                                    demonstrated, the Bank team leveraged Bank-Executed Trust Funds from GFDRR (US$ 400,000)
                                    and funded the development of additional energy resilience enhancement plans for utilities in FSM
                                    and RMI as well as a prefeasibility study to set up a mutual disaster assistance fund in the Pacific,
                                    which together help build a stronger case to promote energy resilience in the Pacific.

                            Outcome

                                  The project increased planning capacity for disaster recovery and risk reduction for 9 utilities
                                    exceeding the target of 3.
                                  Investment plans on energy resilience for three utilities in Tuvalu, Samoa, and PNG, representing
                                   small, medium and large utility of PICs were developed. The project also delivered training on the
                                   tools to assess resilience of a utility's power system and viability of mitigation measures.
                                  Additionally, the Bank team leveraged Bank-executed TF from GFDRR, which developed energy
                                   resilience enhancement plans for six utilities in FSM and RMI.
                                  The SEIDP-funded activities influenced Tonga Power limited to improve its disaster recovery plan,
                                   which was focusing only on cyclones, to now incorporate various kinds of disasters like volcanic
                                   eruptions, and tsunami events.

                            Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The RF lacked specific indicators to measure improvement in capacity
                            of power utilities for long-term disaster risk planning. That said, to verify improved capacity the utilities need to
                            face a disaster to assess their increased capacity, which did not happen during the project implementation
                            duration. The project provided utilities with energy resilience assessment and enhancement tools, which were
                            expected to result in improving disaster management plans. The project exceeded its outcome indicator
                            target. It is worth noting that the disaster risk plans supported by the project were yet to be tested under an
                            real disaster situation. Overall, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial with
                            moderate shortcomings due to limited evidence on improved capacity.




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings, as two of the three objectives had limited
                            evidence for achievements at the outcome level. The project supported activities that resulted in
                            availing utility benchmarking data and ground-measured solar/wind data. This enabled utilities to use the data
                            for operational improvements as well as informing design of other donor-funded projects. In addition, and with

                                                                                                                                 Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Sustainable Energy Industry Development (P152653)



  the support of the project, some utility staff could plan/simulate RE integration using DigSilent Power Factory
  software. Further, utilities were trained on disaster risk management (energy resilience enhancement) tools
  and one utility (Tonga Power Limited) improved its disaster management plan. However, the project lacked
  adequate indicators to measure enhanced technical capacity, a core part of the PDO. The overall Efficacy
  rating is therefore Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

ex ante

     The PAD did not include a typical EFA and there was no overall economic rate of return (ERR) for the
      project investments, but it stated that "an economic analysis will be conducted prior to the midterm
      review for a minimum of two participating countries to gauze the economic benefits that could be derived
      through the proposed project (paragraph 59)."
     The economic benefits from component 1 could include among others, reduced cost, duplication,
      overlap, and / or inconsistencies from country specific RE resource mapping. While the economic
      benefits of component 2 would include costs saving due to: (i) development of local capacity for network
      planning and renewable energy integration; (ii) improved efficiency in producing the annual Power
      Benchmarking Report; (iii) improved network performance due to the availability of industry guidelines
      and standards; (iv) improved capability of utility staff (hiring fewer international consultants); and (v)
      improved preparedness, resilience and restoration capacity in the face of potential disasters.

ex post

     The ICR (paragraph 47) reported that no ground-based data sets were completed at the time of the MTR
      in mid-2018, and the anticipated economic analysis was not conducted at MTR. Further, the ICR
      highlighted that an economic analysis either at MTR or by closing was unrealistic, given the technical
      assistance nature of the project, which made it challenging to value data availability and enhanced
      capacity.
     Despite the lack of an economic analysis, there were evidence of key economic benefits achieved due to
      the project investment, which included: cost savings through enhanced capacity, operational
      improvements from use of benchmarking, identification of sites with strong RE potential and associated
      development cost savings, and increased power generation output from use of technical guidelines (ICR,
      paragraph 49).
     It is also worth noting that the regional nature of the project resulted in cost savings, for example, the two
      training sessions on DigSilent costed US$50,000 and was attended by 14 utilities from 10 countries
      compared to a cost of US$250,000 if each country conducted the training alone.



                                                                                                     Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Sustainable Energy Industry Development (P152653)



      In addition, there were notable cost savings under the project including saving US$ 200,000 by
       transferring two phases of the resource mapping to the ESMAP project and securing more wind sites for
       measurement campaigns with the saved budget. The project also saved US$10,000 by engaging the
       Bank gender experts instead of hiring a gender advisor (ICR, paragraph 51).
      Implementation Efficiency. The project closed on February 28, 2023, which was about thirty months
       beyond the original closing date on August 21, 2020. Four extensions were needed, the first two were to
       adjust the mismatched closing dates of the project and SIDS DOCK grant while the last two extensions
       were to accommodate implementation delays. There were implementation delays that stemmed from the
       procurement of solar and wind mapping activities, in addition to delays that resulted from the COVID-19
       restrictions.

Summary of Efficiency Analysis. The lack of an EFA at both the appraisal and completion stages of the
project makes assessing efficiency challenging. While the ICR (as noted above) cited several cost savings
achieved under the project, those were cost-savings of the project implementation budget, not of the project
outcomes. The project also experienced significant delays (30 months). Overall, efficiency is rated Modest, due
to the lack of economic analysis at either appraisal, MTR or at closure and a 30 months extension.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial with moderate
shortcomings. The project supported activities that resulted in availing utility benchmarking data and ground-
measured solar/wind data. The ICR also provided evidence that pointed to increased the capacity of power
utilities of the PICS and PNG to incorporate and manage renewable energy technologies. Utilities were also
trained on disaster risk management (energy resilience enhancement) tools and one utility (Tonga Power
Limited) improved its disaster management plan. However, improved capacity of utilities was not
comprehensively assessed due to M&E design shortcomings. Efficiency was rated Modest due to the lack of an
EFA at both the appraisal and completion stages and the substantial project delays.




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Sustainable Energy Industry Development (P152653)



Based on the assigned ratings for the three outcome criteria, Outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory due
to moderate shortcomings pertaining to the operation's efficacy, and Modest efficiency.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following risk could potentially impact the Development Outcome:

Institutional risk. The enhanced ability from some project-supported utilities materialized and is likely to be
sustained. Trained utility staff have been sharing their capacity with other utility staff and some practices (e.g:
using benchmarking to improve performance, setting up a reliability committee, and offering training courses)
are already established or almost mainstreamed. To support smaller utilities and improve their capacity, the
Bank team mobilized US$0.2 million to provide one-on-one assistance. In addition, the Asian Development
Bank (ADB) is funding a follow-on utility performance benchmarking reporting. Also, the Australian
Government’s Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade is considering funding follow-on training. These
follow-on initiatives will further reinforce and improve the capacity of Pacific Islands Country utilities (ICR,
paragraph 77).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic relevance and approach. The project was strategically relevant and in line with the
          goals of the PICs and PNG governments. The PDO was also in line with the Bank strategies (see
          section 3 for details).
         Technical, financial, and economic aspects. The project supported established technologies
          and practices on which substantial experience was already accumulated in past projects. The
          PAD lacked a typical economic and financial analysis, which could have provided a better
          justification of the project investment. The inclusion of the third objective "to enhance ability to
          incorporate and manage long term disaster risk planning" was overly ambitious and unrealistic
          given the limited funding available (only US$0.27 million) for disaster risk management. Overall,
          design suffered from three notable shortcomings, first, the limited funding for the disaster risk
          planning activities; second, a composite PDO statement that was open to more than one
          interpretation; and third, the lack of adequate indicators to capture the project outcome results.
         Poverty, gender, and social development aspects. The project was a TA operation that
          focused on capacity building and data availability. The PPA’s attention to gender mainstreaming
          in the PICs’ energy sector included work on the Pacific Power Utilities Benchmarking Report
          produced annually.
         Environmental and fiduciary aspects. Screening of environmental and social risks and issues
          was based on the preliminary information available on the proposed technical advisory studies

                                                                                                       Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Energy Industry Development (P152653)



         and the installation of wind and solar monitoring equipment. The Bank conducted a procurement
         capacity and financial management capacity assessment, and risk-mitigation actions were in
         place. The PPA prepared a procurement plan for the first 18 months of the project. However,
         procurement proved to be challenging during implementation and contributed to significant delays.
        Implementation arrangements. The PPA was in charge of the project implementation as it had
         experience in managing other donor projects. However, implementation readiness was not
         adequate at the approval in terms of staffing, identification of the resource mapping scope and
         needs assessment of utilities’ training (ICR, paragraph 61). Hiring a procurement advisor and an
         electrical engineer to start implementation took 12 months. Also, the utilities’ training needs
         assessment was not conducted during the preparation but was initiated in April 2017, a year after
         effectiveness.
        Risk assessment. Six main risks were identified at appraisal and the overall risk was rated
         moderate. The identified risks related to political and governance, technical design, institutional
         capacity for implementation and sustainability, fiduciary, environmental and social risks. However,
         inadequate utility staff baseline capacity and lack of coordination with national governments were
         two critical risks that were not adequately reflected at appraisal. Also, technical risk proved to be
         more challenging as technical staff from Tuvalu, RMI, and FSM faced challenges in using
         DigSilent software and applying other knowledge materials even after the training sessions.
        M&E arrangements. M&E design suffered notable shortcomings as the Results Frame work
         lacked indicators that measured increased technical and institutional capacity (See section 9 a for
         details).

  Summary of QAE Assessment. The project was strategically relevant, but the disaster risk planning
  element of the PDO was overly ambitious. The design lacked a typical economic and financial analysis,
  which made it challenging to assess efficiency at completion. While the design featured established
  technologies, it suffered from notable shortcomings as noted above. Environmental and fiduciary aspects
  were adequate, but procurement risk was not adequately mitigated. Implementation readiness was not
  adequate and contributed to delays. Risk assessment overlooked two risks (utility staff baseline capacity
  and lack of coordination with national governments) and technical risk was also underestimated. Also,
  M&E had notable design shortcomings. Overall, Quality at Entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory due to
  moderate shortcomings as noted.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The Bank conducted fourteen supervision missions, which according to the ICR (paragraph 75)
        were "teamed by necessary specialists." The project benefitted from continuity and consistency in
        supervision with three consecutive task team leaders (TTLs) during preparation and
        implementation.
       To support the PPA, the Bank team conducted on-site visits and provided trainings on the Bank’s
        fiduciary systems by financial and procurement staff.
       The Bank supervision team also made notable efforts in leveraging trust funds to complement the
        project activities. This included writing two proposals for GFDRR and ESMAP review and approvals,

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Energy Industry Development (P152653)



        recruiting consultant firms and supervising their work to carry out studies, engaging PPA and
        country stakeholders to ensure ownership, partnering with the EAP gender and energy team, and
        reporting on the activity outputs and outcomes to Bank management.
       The Bank also oversaw four restructurings that were necessary to extend the closing
        dates, adapt to implementation challenges, and improve the project efficiency, including through
        budget optimization.
       While the shortcomings in the RF persisted, the Bank team partially addressed these
        shortcomings by capturing achievements through surveys and interviews with beneficiaries.

 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. The Bank task team made commendable efforts in
 supporting the project implementation and leveraging trust funds to complement the project activities.
 However, RF shortcomings could been addressed to better assess the project outcomes. Overall, the
 Quality of Supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 Based on the assigned rating for QAE and Quality of Supervision, the overall Bank Performance is rated
 Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) since it was not yet required by the Bank at the
        time of appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR included a ToC that reflected the relationship between the
        project activities, outputs, outcomes and long-term impacts in a plausible causal chain. This Review
        reconstructed a ToC for each objective based on the detailed project description in the PAD.
       The PDO was composed of three objectives (see section 2). Those were assessed based on the
        following four PDO outcome indicators: (1) Increased availability of data on RE resources in
        targeted project areas (Objective 1); (2) Increased available planning tools and training to both PPA
        and PIC power utilities in the use of these tools (Objective 2); (3) Improved technical and
        institutional capacity of PPA and PIC power utilities (Objective 2); and (4) Increased planning
        capacity for disaster recovery and risk reduction within PIC power utilities (Objective 3).
       While the PDO outcome indicators appear relevant and connected to the stated objectives, the
        outcome indicator target values of “100% of capacity building plan implemented” and “investment
        plan on resilience available for at least three power utilities” for outcome indicators 2 and 4
        respectively, could not clearly and comprehensively capture the “improved technical and
        institutional capacity of PPA and PIC power utilities” and “increased planning capacity for disaster
        recovery and risk reduction within PIC power utilities” respectively. Implementing a capacity building
        plan and supporting a list of investments to be made on resilience could potentially contribute to
        increased capacity, but this needs to be verified through adequate indicators.

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Energy Industry Development (P152653)



       The Results Framework (RF) included 8 intermediate results indicators (IRIs) to track the progress
        of the different project activities. The IRIs were measurable, reflected reasonable targets, and were
        connected to the project activities. However, improved technical and institutional capacity of PPA
        and PIC power utilities was not clearly captured.
       Overall, M&E design suffered from notable shortcomings pertaining to the PDO outcome indicators
        and their corresponding targets. The inadequacy of the indicator target values led to PPA not
        recording outcomes from various activities, which made assessing the project outcomes at
        completion challenging.



b. M&E Implementation
       The PPA documented and reported values of M&E indicators during implementation through the
           submission of semi-annual progress reports.
        Despite four restructurings, the M&E design shortcomings persisted.



c. M&E Utilization
       Assessing the outcomes of the project was challenging due to inadequate indicators.
       The ICR (paragrap67) reported that "the Bank ICR team and PPA had to conduct surveys to
         assess outcomes."
        Despite M&E design shortcomings, the project experience was useful in informing other Bank-
         funded operations.

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. M&E design suffered notable shortcomings pertaining to the
  targets of the outcome indicators, these shortcomings persisted throughout implementation and were not
  rectified. Utilization was inadequate and the ICR relied on surveys to assess outcomes. Therefore, the
  Quality of M&E is rated Modest. Despite the Modest rating of the Quality of M&E, there was sufficient
  evidence to rate Efficacy Substantial with moderate shortcomings, due to the additional evidence
  provided by the extra surveys conducted by the Bank’s ICR team and the PPA.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
        The project was classified as a category B project because it focused on building capacity through
            technical studies and trainings and providing solar and wind maps. Two environmental and two
            social safeguard policies were triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) was triggered
            based on the screening process and the requirement for a safeguards instrument to manage

                                                                                                  Page 17 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Sustainable Energy Industry Development (P152653)



         potential impacts and ensure safeguards is mainstreamed into training materials; and Physical
         Cultural Resources (OP 4.11) was triggered on a precautionary basis because such resources may
         be identified through the site-selection screening process. Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12 ) was
         triggered because of the installation of temporary wind monitoring equipment; and Indigenous
         Peoples (OP 4.10) was triggered because the project was to be implemented in a number of
         countries where Indigenous Peoples reside.
        Compliance with Environmental and Social Safeguards. The ICR did not provide an explicit
         statement on the compliance of the project with the Bank's safeguard policies, but reported that
         "safeguards have been rated Satisfactory throughout the project implementation (ICR, paragraph
         69)." An environmental and social management framework (ESMF) was prepared in 2015, and
         a web-based GRM link was created at the PPA website in November 2018.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
        Financial Management (FM). The PPA oversaw FM which was implemented according to
         procedures and processes stipulated in the PPA’s “Accounts Policy and Procedures Manual”, with
         additional guidance included in the Project Operational Manual. According to the latest formal FM
         review conducted by the Bank (May 30, 2022), the project submitted all required audits and interim
         financial reports which were accepted with no major FM issues.
        Procurement. Procurement was challenging and resulted in significant implementation delays.
         Specifically, the resource mapping procurement took over two years to finalize bidding documents,
         which led to contract signature with a selected bidder in March 2019. Due to significant delays,
         procurement was rated as unsatisfactory from November 2016 to November 2019 due to significant
         delays and moderately unsatisfactory from November 2019 until the project closing (except two
         instances where the rating was moderately satisfactory in September 2020 and in October 2021).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None.



d. Other
  "SEIDP-funded industry guidelines informed the development of similar quality assurance instruments in
  Africa. The Global Sustainable Energy Solutions (GSES) used the industry guidelines to develop a solar
  system quality assurance framework for the Uganda Rural Electrification Authority, under a World Bank-
  financed project. Also, the industry guidelines and SEIAPI/PPA certification process are being used as basis
  to develop a technician certification program for the 15 of the Economic Community of West African States
  (ECOWAS) states in close collaboration with the Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency (ICR,
  paragraph 58)."




                                                                                                Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Energy Industry Development (P152653)



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                       IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               Efficacy had moderate
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   shortcomings and Efficiency was
                                                                               rated Modest.
                                                                               QAE had moderate
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               shortcomings.
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included three lessons which are emphasized below with some adaptation of language:

1. If regional technical assistance projects are well-designed and supported by adequate
follow-on support to embed and enhance the progress in utility capacity building, it is likely
that utility capacity will be enhanced in a cost-effective way. The project succeeded in
enhancing capacity of some utilities, informing the design of donor-funded projects, and leveraging
follow-on support. Despite limited funding, ambitious objectives, inadequate indicator target values,
and implementation challenges, SEIDP-funded trainings and data collection activities showed that a
regional approach saves costs compared to individual county training programs, fosters peer
learning (through sharing of challenges and implemented solutions), and can yield positive
outcomes. Key SEIDP success factors included the selection of a trusted regional champion as an
implementing agency, identification of relevant trainings based on good assessment of utility
capacity building needs, selection of a dedicated partner organization with strong links to the RE
industry, and inclusion of utility performance benchmarking which drives healthy competition that
leads to tangible improvements.

2. If a differentiated approach that addresses various capacity baseline levels is adopted, it is
likely that impacts of capacity building activities within a regional project will be maximized.
The efficacy assessment of the SEIDP highlighted outcomes mostly from relatively high to medium
size power utilities, while fewer substantial outcomes emerged from small utilities. These small
power utilities have weaker capacity than the medium to high size ones, as some of them do not
even have an electrical engineer. To address the differentiated capacity baseline levels, additional
one-on-one follow-on assistance in some areas such as DigSilent Power Factory training, energy
resilience enhancement tools training, and benchmarking reporting could be provided. The World
Bank plans to help remedy this by providing Bank-executed assistance that targets small utilities.

3. If additional provisions to ensure adoption by sector ministries and policy makers are in
place, it is likely that changes in country policies will be institutionalized. Power utilities often
do not have the mandate to develop and enforce country policies and regulations, so reaching out to
critical policy makers and regulators is key to institutionalize or sustain outputs from regional
technical assistance activities. Development agencies are encouraged to include support,
collaboration, or other mechanisms to facilitate adoption and/or enforcement of project outputs by

                                                                                                  Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Sustainable Energy Industry Development (P152653)



government officials. In the context of this project, greater impacts could be achieved if some of the
outputs—such as technical guidelines/grid codes, solar and wind resource data, recommendations
from VRE assessment—are adopted and enforced/promoted by Pacific Islands Country ministries in
charge of the energy sector, as in the case of Vanuatu, where the technical guidelines were adopted
and enforced by the Government, not the utilities.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. While the ICR provided an evidence base to support the achievements reported, it was
barely enough to assess the project outcomes due to M&E design shortcomings.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings to the extent possible
and used the evidence base to serve the arguments under the different sections. However, the inadequacy of
the outcome indicator targets undermined the assessment of the project outcomes.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Results Orientation. The ICR included an adequate discussion on the achievement of the three elements of
the PDO. The outcome discussion was balanced between reporting on the achievement of outcome indicators
and what the project actually achieved on the ground.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the available data to justify most of the assigned ratings.

Conciseness. The ICR was well written and provided adequate coverage of project activities
and candidly reported on most shortcomings in a concise form. However, some sections could have benefited
from further details including the sections on M&E implementation and Utilization.

 Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. The ICR’s assessment of outcomes was adequate, and the
lessons drawn by the ICR were relevant. Most sections were concise and reflected relevant
information. Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 20 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Sustainable Energy Industry Development (P152653)




                                                                                 Page 21 of 21
