     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Social Inclusion Project (P165267)



                                                                                      Report Number: ICRR0023803

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P165267                                      Social Inclusion Project

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Cabo Verde                                   Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-63550,IDA-68240                          31-Oct-2022                                             18,779,113.02

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Dec-2018                                  30-Apr-2023

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                         Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              10,000,000.00                                                  0.00

 Revised Commitment                               18,548,769.30                                                  0.00

 Actual                                           18,779,113.02                                                  0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Katharina Ferl               Salim J. Habayeb              Eduardo Fernandez                 IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                            Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p.1) and the Financing Agreement of February 13, 2019,
   (p.4) the objective of the project was “to support the Recipient's efforts in building an effective social protection
   system that promotes social and productive inclusion”.

   The PAD (p. 9) defined “effectiveness” as increased coverage. In January 2021, the project received AF in the
   amount of US$10.0 million to support the government’s respond to the COVID-19 pandemic and exclusively
   finance cash transfers to households in the two poorest quintiles and ensure continued support to regular

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Social Inclusion Project (P165267)



   cash transfer beneficiaries under the regular cash transfer program. Most of the associated outcome targets
   were revised upward, and the ICR Review will use these revised targets in its assessment.

   For the analysis in this ICRR, the PDO will be parsed as follows:

        1. To support the Recipient's efforts in building an effective social protection system
        2. To promote social inclusion and productive inclusion



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  21-Jan-2021

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included three components:

   Component 1: Strengthening the Recipient’s Social Protection Systems (appraisal estimate US$2.0
   million, at AF US$0.86 million, actual US$1.1 million): This component was to finance two sub-
   components:

   Sub-component 1.1: Building permanent systems to implement Social Protection programs: This sub-
   component was to establish the delivery systems required to effectively implement social protection
   programs and enhance the capacity of staff within the General Directorate for Social Inclusion (DGIS) and
   municipalities to manage these programs. This sub-component was to finance the further development of
   the following systems: targeting system, payment system, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system, the
   Management Information System (MIS) for the Social Income for Inclusion Program (RSI) program, a
   Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM), a communication system as well as a referral system for
   beneficiaries to access productive opportunities.

   Sub-component 1.2: Expanding the Unified Social Registry: This sub-component was to finance the
   expansion of the Unified Social Registry (USR) through defining its business processes, developing a
   communication strategy, collecting a range of information on categorial characteristics and socioeconomic
   factors, developing a software, and providing municipal grants to scale the USR up to include an additional
   8,000 families.

   Component 2: Expansion of the RSI Program (appraisal estimate US$7.7 million, at AF US$18.84
   million, actual US$17.37 million): This component was to finance two sub-components:



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Social Inclusion Project (P165267)



  Subcomponent 2.1: Cash transfers to poor households with children: This sub-component was to scale up
  the cash transfer to additional 4,000 families that were to be registered in the USR and were to be selected
  through a poverty index (Proxy Means Test, PMT) that was already developed by the DGIS with World
  Bank technical assistance.

  Subcomponent 2.2: Support to productive and social inclusion of RSI beneficiaries: This sub-component
  was to support RSI beneficiaries in achieving productive and social inclusion, and increase their access to
  the labor market, self-employment as well as providing access to care services for very poor families to
  facilitate their access to economic, employment, and/or training opportunities in nine out of 22
  municipalities.

  Beneficiary households in the USR were selected based on: a) being classified as poor, following the
  process of registration in the USR and the application of a poverty index; and b) having at least one child
  under the age of 15 at the time of enrollment in the RSI program.

  Component 3: Support Project Management (appraisal estimate US$0.3 million, actual US$0.29
  million):

  This component was to finance the costs associated with the fiduciary management of the project and the
  staff required to oversee coordination and Project M&E.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$10.0 million. Actual cost was US$18.7 million. On
  January 21, 2021, the project received Additional Financing (AF) through the Crisis Response Window to
  respond to the COVID-19 pandemic.

  Financing: The project was financed by two IDA credits, IDA-63550 in the amount of US$10.0 million of
  which US$9.09 million disbursed and IDA-68240 in the amount of US$10.0 million of which US$9.68 million
  disbursed.

  Borrower Contribution: It was not planned for the Borrower to make any contribution.

  Dates:

        On January 21, 2021, the project received AF in the amount of US$10.0 million to support the
           government’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic and exclusively finance cash transfers to
           households in the two poorest quintiles and ensure continued support to regular cash transfer
           beneficiaries under the regular cash transfer program. Specifically, the AF was to finance: i)
           additional emergency cash transfers for approximately 18,000 RSIE (Emergency Social Income for
           Inclusion Program) households over a period of six months; ii) emergency cash transfers to the
           existing 5,450 RSIE beneficiary households for six months; and iii) cash transfers to the regular
           4,500 RSI beneficiary households to ensure that they receive support for a total of 24 months as
           planned under the parent project.




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Social Inclusion Project (P165267)



         On December 13, 2022, the project was restructured to change the closing date by six months from
          October 31, 2022, to April 30, 2023, to allow for the completion of project activities.

   The project was approved on December 13, 2018, and became effective on May 13, 2019. The original
   closing date was October 31, 2022, and the actual closing date was April 30, 2023.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. According to the PAD (p. 7) Cabo Verde had been experiencing robust
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth and an important reduction in poverty during the last 10 years
before project appraisal. However, 35 percent of the population remained poor. With a Gross National
Income (GNI) per capita of US$3,290 Cabo Verde remained one the countries with the highest inequality in
West Africa. Overall unemployment was 12 percent in 2017 (32 percent among the youth).

Poverty was especially predominant among households headed by women and among households with
children. The government was especially concerned with the social and economic vulnerability of poor
children. Compared to other African countries, Cabo Verde had initiated the establishment of an adequate
social protection system. In 2017/2018, the government created a cash transfer program, the Rendimento
Social de Inclusão Program (RSI) with 1,700 households benefitting from the Program. The government
intended to support poor households through this newly created program that was to combine cash
transfers and access to productive and social inclusion.

According to the PAD (p. 10) the country’s social protection programs were very fragmented, and coverage
of the poor remained insufficient. Also, there was limited technical capacity within the municipalities to
implement social protection programs.

Alignment with the Government Strategy. The objective of the project supported the government’s new
Sustainable Development Strategic Plan (2022-2026) for Cabo Verde’s economic and social development
which emphasizes the importance of social protection as a key pillar for social inclusion and for reducing
inequalities. Furthermore, the objective of the project supported the National Strategy for the Eradication of
Extreme Poverty which identifies the following strategic actions that need to be implemented to address
extreme poverty: i) increasing coverage of the RSI and promoting productive inclusion programs; ii)
improving articulation between social policies, promoting integrated responses in the fight against poverty,
and focusing on extreme poverty; and iii) strengthening institutional, technical, as well as financial
capacities to enable the planned expansion and its M&E.

Alignment with the World Bank Strategy. The objective of the project was in line with the Bank’s most
recent Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (FY20-25), especially with the CPF’s Results Area 1
(“accelerate human capital for inclusive, service-led growth”) and objective 2 (“social protection and
productive inclusion”).

The objective of the project was pitched at an appropriate level to address a critical development problem.



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Social Inclusion Project (P165267)



               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To support the Recipient's efforts in building an effective social protection system

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change stated that project inputs/activities such as defining
                             processes, manuals, and a legal framework, fine tuning the targeting system, developing a Unified Social
                             Registry (USR) that was nascent and updating and expanding its data as well as improving the payment
                             system, and building government capacity at central and local level through training were to result in several
                             outputs. These outputs were to include processes, manuals and a legal framework being defined, the
                             targeting system being fine-tuned, households with completed information enrolled in the USR, and
                             government capacity built to design policies and programs and perform monitoring and evaluation of national
                             programs. These outputs were to result in the outcome of effectiveness of the national social protection
                             system being increased.

                             The theory of change was sound and logical.

                             Outputs:

                                        200 Ministry of Family and Social Inclusion (MFIS) and municipalities staff were trained to effectively
                                           monitor and implement social safety net programs, exceeding the target of 150 staff.
                                          The percentage of RSI cash transfer payments being completed by a formal payment agent, remained
                                           100 percent (as the baseline) achieving the target of 100 percent.
                                          94.70 percent of claims registered in the project’s GRM were addressed in a timely manner,
                                           exceeding the target of 80 percent.
                                          23,650 households benefitted from the emergency RSI cash transfers, exceeding the target of 20,000
                                           households.
                                          97 percent of RSI beneficiary households received cash transfers on time, exceeding the target of 80
                                           percent.
                                          99 percent of beneficiaries were satisfied with the support provided by the RSI program, exceeding
                                           the target of 70 percent.
                                          The USR was established and included data of 96,000 households from across the country or 77
                                           percent of the population as of January 2023.
                                          A beneficiaries’ targeting system was developed and improved.
                                          A payment system was built through a bank system.



                                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Social Inclusion Project (P165267)




        Links between the RSI platform and USR were established which allows for selecting and registering
         beneficiaries (according to pre-defined criteria) as well as making monthly payments to beneficiaries.

Outcomes:

        The percentage of beneficiary households of RSI in the first and second quintile of the income
         distribution increased from zero in 2018 to 100 percent in 2023, exceeding the original target of 50
         percent and the revised target of 90 percent.
        The percentage of beneficiaries of the RSI registered in the USR increased from 30 percent in 2018 to
         100 percent in 2023, achieving the target of 100 percent. In addition, 14 additional programs were
         utilizing the USR to identify potential beneficiaries, and information for 22,968 beneficiaries was
         updated.
        The project was able to increase the percentage of beneficiary households of RSI in the first and
         second quintile of income distribution as well as the percentage of beneficiaries of the RSI registered
         in the USR. Also, the project was able to exceed all of its output targets. Overall, the achievement of
         this objective was High.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To promote social inclusion and productive inclusion

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change stated that project activities/inputs such as providing cash
transfers to vulnerable households in all 22 municipalities and providing facilitated access to technical and
vocational trainings as well as employment or economic opportunities through municipal grants were to result
in outputs such as cash transfers to vulnerable households being provided, and technical and vocational
trainings as well as employment or economic opportunities through municipal grants being provided. These
outputs were to result in the outcome of social and productive inclusion of targeted poor and vulnerable
households being enhanced.

Outputs:

        The IP pilot program enrolled and delivered 87 trainings for entrepreneurship and small business
         management to 1,867 beneficiaries. Of those beneficiaries 1,756 beneficiaries received access to
         training and productive opportunities. The remaining 111 beneficiaries graduated out of poverty and
         were therefore not eligible anymore.
        1,633 kits for reinforcing/starting up businesses in different areas such as animal husbandry, farming,
         aesthetics, cookery, baking, sales, carpentry etc. According to the World Bank team (November 27,
         2023) the beneficiaries of productive inclusion activities were to receive either a) professional training
         or b) kits for income generating activities. A priori, there was no specific target for the kits since their
         delivery was to be determined based on the beneficiary selection between a) and b). In practice, out of

                                                                                                       Page 6 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Social Inclusion Project (P165267)



                                    1,867 beneficiaries of productive inclusion, 111 graduated out of poverty (and therefore lost eligibility),
                                    104 obtained professional training and 1,633 received kits. In some municipalities, given budget
                                    availability, some beneficiaries received both, professional training, and kits.
                                   4,515 RSI beneficiaries and 23,650 RSIE beneficiaries experienced a timely registry and delivery of
                                    cash transfers.
                                   More than US$16.5 million of cash transfers were delivered to RSI beneficiaries.

                            Outcome:

                                   150,964 beneficiaries benefitted from the social safety net programs, exceeding the original target of
                                    28,500 beneficiaries and the revised target of 120,000 beneficiaries. Of those beneficiaries, 79,407
                                    were female, exceeding the original target of 15,000 and the revised target of 63,600 being female.
                                   1,867 RSI beneficiary households benefitted from productive inclusion activities, just falling short of
                                    achieving the target of 2,000 households.
                                   In an email dated March 14, 2024, providing comments on the IEG ICRR draft, the team presented
                                    additional evidence from a follow-up survey conducted between September and November 2023. This
                                    survey included 1,604 pilot beneficiaries. According to the survey results, 81 percent of respondents
                                    reported engaging in income-generating activities between 3 and 6 months after receiving the kit.
                                    Additionally, 70 percent reported using the knowledge gained from training to enhance their business,
                                    and 74 percent reported increased profitability as a result of the project.

                            The project was able to exceed the target of beneficiaries benefitting from social safety net programs but was
                            not able to achieve the target of RSI beneficiary households benefitting from productive inclusion
                            activities. According to the survey mentioned above, productive inclusion activities supported by the project
                            likely positively affected incomes. Given this additional information, the efficacy rating for objective 2 is
                            considered Substantial, albeit only marginally, as the evidence presented is based on self-reported measures,
                            which are susceptible to bias, and income data is unavailable.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of the first objective was High, while the achievement of the second objective was
                            Substantial. The aggregation of achievements is indicative of a Substantial rating for overall efficacy, but with
                            caveats, as achievement for the second objective was substantial, albeit only marginally so.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating



                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Social Inclusion Project (P165267)



  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency:

The PAD (p. 26) provided an overview of the positive impacts of cash transfer programs, like the RSI, in other
countries around the world. For example, the PAD mentioned that a recent meta-evaluation of safety nets
programs in Africa showed that safety net programs significantly increased consumption among beneficiaries.
Per dollar transferred to beneficiary households, it was estimated that on average 74 cents went towards
consumption indicating that well-targeted programs can be effective at reducing inequity and alleviating extreme
poverty.

The ICR also provided an overview of the higher monetary value than costs the project provided. The National
Strategy for the Eradication of Extreme Poverty estimated that each monetary unit invested in social protection
in Cabo Verde can generate almost three times the gains in the economy.

Operational efficiency:

The ICR (para. 43) stated that the delivery of RSI cash transfers was performed at a minimal cost since there
was no direct cost for the project related to the electronic delivery of cash transfers. The project used the
National Center for Social Benefits (CNPS) infrastructure for the direct deposit from the Treasury into
beneficiaries’ individual bank accounts. Also, the ICR stated that compared to welfare-targeted cash transfer
programs, the RSI cash transfer program was implemented more efficiently than in other countries. The ICR
estimated that for the RSI, for each dollar invested in the program, US$0.92 went directly to the beneficiaries
while US$0.08 was the delivery cost.

There were moderate shortcomings in the implementation of the piloted productive inclusion activities (ICR, p.
23) and temporary delays in financial management between 2021 and 2022 (see section 10b) The project’s
implementation period was extended once by six months to allow for the completion of project activities which
had been delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and the electoral periods.

The project’s overall efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?           Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Social Inclusion Project (P165267)



                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objective was High given its alignment with the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) (FY20-25). Efficacy was rated Substantial, as aggregated objectives were almost fully
achieved (except for objective 2, which was partly achieved). Efficiency was rated Substantial given moderate
implementation shortcomings slightly affecting overall project efficiency. The overall outcome rating is
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

According to the ICR (para. 80) the government continues to remain committed to social protection as
demonstrated through the establishment of the RSI as a shock-responsive cash transfer program, the
institutionalization of the IP pilot and the use and updating of the only instrument for targeting social
protection assistance, the Unified Social Registry (USR). Also, the government took strong measures to
allocate sufficient financing to ensure the sustainability of achievements made under the project. For
example, the ENEPE strategy and the scale up of the RSI cash transfer to 5,000 new households in 2023
will be financed through an increase in the tourism tax. Furthermore, the government and the World Bank
continue to work together on scaling up and institutionalizing the programs supported under this project
through the Bank’s ongoing Human Capital Project (P 175828, financing in the amount of US$26.0 million).
In addition, other development partners such as the European Union (EU) approved a Euro 18 million budget
support for 2021-2024, which is conditioned on social protection measures, among others. The United
Nations’ Joint Office and ILO continue to provide financing and technical support to improve access and use
of modern essential social services and protection.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR (para. 58) the project built on lessons learned from earlier technical activity and the
  Systematic Country Diagnostic for Cabo Verde. These lessons learned included: i) productive and social
  inclusion activities should be completed by RSI to meet the immediate needs of the most vulnerable
  populations; ii) need to move to a more harmonized social protection systems by improving vertical and
  horizontal coordination, building effective delivery systems, and strengthening administrative and
  operational capacity for implementation at central and decentralized levels; iii) institutional strengthening

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Social Inclusion Project (P165267)



  and support for the MFIS and participating municipalities is needed for the implementation of social
  programs; iv) municipalities need to have technical and financial resources to lead the implementation of
  social programs; and v) gender imbalances need to be taken into account when targeting social services
  as well as productive and social inclusion activities.

  According to the PAD (p. 30) the World Bank team identified relevant risks. The fiduciary risk was rated
  Substantial due to the number of stakeholders involved in the project and the decentralized approach for
  some sub-components using municipal grants. Mitigation measures included fiduciary instruments being
  in place to ensure that municipalities used the funds and reported expenditures appropriately, a Municipal
  Grants Manual was developed, and an internal auditor was recruited. Mitigation measures were adequate
  and the project did not encounter any significant fiduciary issues.

  The project’s Results Framework was adequate (see section 9a for more details).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team conducted supervision missions on a bi-annual basis as well as technical mission,
 indicating that continuous implementation support was provided. When the government requested AF in
 2021, the World Bank team ensured that project funding was replenished quickly to address the impacts of
 the COVID-19 pandemic. Also, the World Bank team revised the Results Framework when the project
 received AF and extended the implementation period by six months to allow for the completion of project
 activities. The ICR (para. 78) stated that the World Bank team reached out across the World Bank to
 support Cabo Verde’s social protection and other sectors. Furthermore, the World Bank team filled
 adequate Implementation Support Reviews and Aide Memoires that included updated key indicators to
 monitor implementation progress.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objective of the project was clearly specified and the project’s theory of change and how key activities
 and outputs were to lead to the intended outcomes was sound and reflected in the Results Framework.



                                                                                                   Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Social Inclusion Project (P165267)



 The selected PDO indicators were appropriate and measurable. The intermediate outcome indicators were
 sufficiently specific and measurable. The intermediate outcome indicators were adequate to capture the
 contribution of the project’s component towards achieving the stated objectives.

 The Unit for Management of Special Projects (UGPE) at the Ministry of Finance was responsible for the
 project’s M&E activities.



b. M&E Implementation
  When the project received AF in 2021, the Results Framework was revised to reflect an increase in
  targets. Also, indicators were revised as well as added/dropped. The ICR (para. 70) stated that a process
  evaluation of the PAF/productive inclusion programs and final evaluation of the productive inclusion pilot
  activities was finalized in December 2022. Also, the project conducted a beneficiary satisfaction survey of
  the RSI/RSIE and Family Assistance Program (PAF) programs. Municipalities played a key role in
  registering households in the USR, implementing the RSI Program at the local level, identifying activities
  to promote productive inclusion of beneficiaries, and referring them.

  According to the World Bank team (November 27, 2023) ahead of every mission UGPE provided updates
  on all the results indicators where data were available (with the exception of indicators related to the
  beneficiary satisfaction which depended on the beneficiary satisfaction survey that had been delayed).
  Also, data were found to be reliable and of good quality. The M&E functions and processes established
  under the project such as the introduction of ICT technologies, and adoption of the Geo-Enabling initiative
  for Monitoring and Supervision (GEMS), remain with the UGPE and continue to be leveraged under the
  new operation Human Capital Project (P175828). Therefore, these M&E functions are likely to be
  sustained after project closing.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (para. 71) the project’s M&E data were used to track implementation progress
  towards the objective and identify implementation delays which resulted in the project restructuring in
  August 2022. However, even though the evaluations of the the PAF/productive inclusion programs and
  final evaluation of the productive inclusion pilot activities were carried out, the ICR lacked a discussion of
  these evaluations, indicating a major shortcoming in the utilization of M&E.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category C and did not trigger any of the Bank’s safeguard policies.




                                                                                                      Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Social Inclusion Project (P165267)



   The project established a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) and 357 requests were submitted which
   were all addressed by a central committee with representation from the CNPS, DGIS, and UGPE. All
   complaints were resolved by the time the project closed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management:

   According to the ICR (para. 75) during project appraisal several measures were identified to strengthen
   financial management including the recruitment of internal and external auditors. The ICR (para. 76) stated
   that throughout project implementation financial records were well maintained, the external auditor’s
   opinions were unqualified, and the internal control environment was considered adequate. Between 2021
   and 2022 the project’s financial management rating was Moderately Satisfactory due to challenges of
   submitting timely payment reconciliation reports due to delays in the financial service providers to provide
   these reports in a timely manner to the project.

   When the project closed, the project’s financial management performance was rated Satisfactory.

   Procurement:

   The UGPE was responsible for procurement activities related to goods and services under component 1.
   For expenses related to goods and services under municipal grants, the municipalities were responsible for
   following simplified procurement procedures. According to the ICR (para. 75) the UGPE was well staffed
   and had sufficient experience in the Bank’s procurement requirements and procedures. The ICR (para 76)
   stated that the project encountered one procurement related issues related to the purchase of kits to
   support the implementation of the productive inclusion program. There was a lack of suppliers on the local
   market and sometimes on the national market which resulted in challenges due to the condition to get
   three quotations for shopping. This issue was addressed by signing a service contract with NGOs which
   allowed for a direct purchase of goods and/or products.

   When the project closed, the procurement rating was Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings



                                                                                                  Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Social Inclusion Project (P165267)



                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                            ICR                IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                            Satisfactory       Satisfactory

Bank Performance                   Satisfactory       Satisfactory
                                                                                Even though evaluations of
                                                                                the PAF/productive inclusion
                                                                                programs and final evaluation of
Quality of M&E                     High               Substantial               the productive inclusion pilot
                                                                                activities were carried out, the
                                                                                ICR lacked a discussion of these
                                                                                evaluations.
Quality of ICR                     ---                Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 29) included several very useful lessons learned which were adapted by IEG:

        A clear government strategy and well-defined institutional responsibilities can
         positively impact project implementation during administration changes. In this project,
         a change in administration following elections and subsequent changes in project
         management did not impact implementation since the clear government’s strategy and
         institutional responsibilities ensured consistency and helped to create an environment of
         teamwork.
        When a World Bank project is the first in a country’s sector and counter parts are new
         to the World Bank, special measures can be taken into consideration to allow for
         smooth project implementation. In this project, the MFIS was responsible for project
         implementation while the UGPE took over fiduciary and safeguards management since it did
         have previous experience with World Bank financed projects. As a result of this arrangement,
         MFIS was able to focus almost exclusively on technical and sectoral issues. While fiduciary
         and safeguards management should be incorporated into an implementing agency’s regular
         operations in the long-term, this set up allowed the MFIS to get a gradual and effective
         introduction to the implementation of World Bank financed projects.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation and was internally
consistent, relatively concise and complied with the ICR guidelines. Also, the ICR included adequate evidence,

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Social Inclusion Project (P165267)



was sufficiently outcome oriented and provided useful lessons learned which can be applied to similar projects
in the future. However, the ICR did not provide a meaningful discussion of the productive inclusion pilot and did
not present any evidence of its efficacy. The overall quality of the ICR is deemed substantial, albeit only
marginally so due to the absence of a thorough discussion of the pilot.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 14
