     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ecosystem Conservation and Management (P156021)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023876

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P156021                                      Ecosystem Conservation and Management

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Sri Lanka                                    Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-57920                                    30-Jun-2021                                         34,624,592.42

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Apr-2016                                  31-May-2023

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              45,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                               34,999,999.68                                                 0.00

 Actual                                           34,624,592.42                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                    Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Shashidhara Laxman             J. W. van Holst             Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Kolavalli                      Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) was to improve the management of ecosystems in selected
   locations in Sri Lanka for conservation and community benefits (Legal agreement, p.5)

   For the analysis of efficacy in this ICRR, the PDO will be parsed into two objectives as follows:

          a. Objective 1: To improve the management of ecosystems in selected locations in Sri Lanka for
            conservation; and

                                                                                                       Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ecosystem Conservation and Management (P156021)



        b. Objective 2: To improve the management of ecosystems in selected locations in Sri Lanka for
           community benefits.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Pilot Landscape Planning and Management (Appraised cost: US$2.8 million - Actual
   cost: US$0.70).

         i. Provision of Cash for Work Program
        ii. Provision of support for piloting landscape planning and management involving all stakeholders in
           selected landscapes comprising contiguous areas with unique ecological, cultural, and
           socioeconomic characteristics, including the development and implementation of landscape plans
           and management models and provision of technical advisory services and facilitation of training.

   Component 2: Sustainable Use of Natural Resources and Human-Elephant Co-existence (Appraised
   cost: US$17.0 million - Actual cost: US$5.60).

         i. Provision of Cash for Work Program
        ii. Provision of support to government agencies and communities living in the buffer zones of Protected
           Areas and other sensitive ecosystems to:

        a. (i) identify and implement biodiversity-friendly and climate-smart existing or new livelihood options
           through participatory Community Action Plans; (ii) develop capacity for business development and
           management and facilitate linkages to existing financing mechanisms; and (iii) develop capacity and
           natural resources management, livelihood development, and co-management of forest and wildlife
           resources; and
        b. (i) scale up successful pilot models and implementation of other measures to address human
           elephant conflict, including: (A) implementation of the landscape conservation strategy aimed at
           allowing elephants to continue ranging outside Department of Wildlife conservation (DWC) protected
           areas (PAs) in other protected areas, while providing protection to farmers and village communities
           through protective solar electric fencing; and (B) management of elephants in elephant conservation
           areas and managed elephant ranges which are lands outside the DWC PAs network without transfer
           or change in land ownership through elephant compatible development; (ii) carry out a study to
           identify viable economic incentives for affected local communities, and development of policies,
           procedures, and mechanisms for provision of such economic incentives; and (iii) update the national
           master plan for mitigation of the human-elephant conflict, and development of human elephant
           coexistence models for other areas.


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Ecosystem Conservation and Management (P156021)



Component 3: Protected Area Management and Institutional Capacity (Appraised cost: US$24.2
million - Actual cost: US$27.13).

     i. Provision of Cash for Work Program.
    ii. Provision of support:

    a. Strengthen the effectiveness of PA conservation and management including the development and
       implementation of a PA management plan; such conservation management activities include: (i) the
       rehabilitation and development of water resources within being a yes for wildlife; (ii) habitat
       management, including control of invasive species, habitat creation, and habitat enrichment; (iii)
       rehabilitation and expansion of road network within PA for reducing tourism pressures and patrolling;
       (iv) improvements to park infrastructure for better management of forest and wildlife resources;(v)
       species monitoring and recovery programs;(vi) protection of inviolate areas for species conservation;
       (viii) strengthening enforcement through the introduction of Spatial Monitoring and reporting Tool
       (SMART) patrolling; and(ix) improving the mobility of PA staff for better enforcement.
    b. Enhance the quality of nature-based tourism (NBT) through planning of nature-based tourism and
       visitor services in PAs, including (i) carrying out of needs and capacity assessments, (ii)
       development and implementation of plans for enhancing nature-based tourism in selected PAs,
       including establishing the optimum number of visitors; (iii) development and renovation of visitor
       services infrastructure such as construction and renovation of visitor centers, comfort facilities, eco-
       friendly park bungalows and campsites, and development of infrastructure for new visitor
       experiences; (iv) construction of nature-based trails, wayside interpretation points, observation
       towers, wildlife hides, and canopy walks; and (v) improving nature interpretation facilities through the
       development of comprehensive accreditation systems for nature-based tourism services including
       related guidelines; And
    c. Strengthen the institutional and investment capacity of conservation agencies including (i)
       institutionalizing reforms such as decentralization of the decision-making process; (ii) improving
       skills and capacity for adaptive and effective management of PAs; (iii) enhancing capacity, including
       infrastructure development at the National Wildlife Research and Training Center and the Sri Lanka
       Forestry Institute and affiliated institutions; (iv) provision of support for developing monitoring and
       evaluation capabilities, targeted studies, technical assistance and equipment for long term
       monitoring of status of critical biodiversity and forest resources, setting up of the Project website and
       maintenance, monitoring and evaluation of Project results; and (v) development of capacity to co-
       manage wildlife and forest resources with communities and other stakeholders.

Component 4: Project Management (Appraised cost: US$1 million - Actual cost: US$1.57). Provision
of support for Project implementation and management, including (a) support in the areas of project
management, monitoring and evaluation, procurement, financial management, and environmental and
social safeguards; (b) facilitation of public awareness and communication; (c) provision of technical advisory
services and Incremental Operating Costs, facilitation of training, acquisition of goods and equipment.

Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response

Changes to components

Following restructuring in 2018, an amendment to the legal agreement added a subcomponent (Cash for
Work program) to each of the first three components above to utilize small-scale, labor-intensive works to


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Ecosystem Conservation and Management (P156021)



  create short-term employment, where community contracting was challenging. Component five was also
  added in 2018.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost

  Appraised: US$45,000,000; Revised: US$35,000,000; and Actual: 34,624,592

  Financing

  The project was financed through a US$45million International Development Association (IDA) Credit.

  Borrower contribution

  There was no planned or actual contribution from the Borrower.

  Dates:

  The project was approved in April 2016 and became effective in December 2016. Mid-term review (MTR)
  was conducted in October 2019. It was to close in June 2021 but closed in May 2023.

  The closing was extended twice for a total of one year and 11 months to complete civil work delayed by
  Covid-19 restrictions.

  Restructuring

  The project underwent five level-two restructurings and one partial credit cancellation:

        August 2018: to introduce incremental operating costs across all components, add a new
           disbursement category ‘Cash for Works,’
          April 2020: to revise and drop some activities under categories 1 and 2, add component 5 for
           contingency emergency response component (CERC); reallocate funds between activities (50
           percent of the funds from activity 1 and 2 were moved to add US$9 million to component 3,
           increasing it by 40 percent), and revise results framework indicator and targets at the PDO level
          May 2020: to partially cancel credit of US$10 million to support Covid-19 emergency priorities
          June 2020: to reallocate funds between components, revise one target at PDO level
          December 2020: to extend the project closing date by one year to complete civil works contracts
           delayed by Covid-19 movement restrictions
          May 2022: to extend closing date again by 11 months to complete delayed civil work contracts

     Split Rating

  The PDO remained the same, but some original PDO indicators were deleted or amended about three
  years before the project closed to better measure the project’s achievements. The changes were stated in
  Table 1 of the ICR. A more detailed summary of the changes is presented below.


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ecosystem Conservation and Management (P156021)



         Three PDO indicators defined in the PAD (paragraph 17) focused on: (i) Recording the number of
            direct beneficiaries; (ii) Number of villages and agriculture plots that were protected as a result of
            human-elephant co-existence activities; and (iii) People who gained access to income generating
            activities. They were replaced by one indicator that measured “The reduction in crop and property
            damage in areas of community fencing”.
           Another PDO indicator defined in paragraph 17 of the PAD as “Increased visitor revenue in selected
            PAs” was replaced by “Percentage of visitors who agree that investments and visitor management
            improvements enhanced the quality of nature-based tourism”.
           “Areas brought under enhanced biodiversity protection” also defined as a PDO indicator in
            paragraph 17 of the PAD remained unchanged.
           An intermediate results indicator defined in the PAD as “Percent of beneficiaries that agree project
            investments reflected their needs” was relabeled as a PDO indicator.
           Finally, three new PDO indicators were defined, namely: (i) “Number of local policies and/or
            measures influenced by integrated decision making”; (ii) “Number of trained staff demonstrating
            improved capacity for ecosystem management”; and (iii) “Percentage of beneficiaries that agree
            project investments reflected their needs”.

   The project restructuring reduced the project’s scope and its funding was also reduced by 25
   percent. Amendments to the PDO indicators focused more on measurable project achievements as well as
   on the assessments of the project’s efficacy and relevance to the needs by respectively tourists and
   farmers. With the addition of three new PDO indicators the project became marginally less ambitious but
   more accountable on the achievement of its institutional and capacity building dimensions. This review
   therefore concluded that there is no justification for a split rating of outcomes.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context

Sri Lanka adopted a development framework that committed it to develop sustainably, with attention to its
biodiversity, guided by the National Environmental Action Plan that it developed in 1992, followed by
several strategies that identified the ecosystems that required strategic conservation (ICR, para 1). Its
agriculture, non-timber forest products (NTFPs), and tourism depended on the services of well-functioning
ecosystems. Despite its efforts, the ecosystems had degraded over time. About one-fourth of the country's
area was designated as PAs, but approximately 30 percent of the dry zone forests were degraded. The
Government had enacted laws and developed strategies to manage its natural resources, but weak
coordination among various organizations with overlapping mandates and outdated institutional capacity
and financing models were hindering effective governance (ICR, para 2).

According to the ICR (para 3), harvesting of NTFPs, including game, medicinal plants, and food items,
extraction of firewood, and fodder for livestock from forests were important sources of livelihood and
income, especially for the largely poor communities around the PAs. Poorly managed, the dependency on
PAs reduced both conservation and livelihood benefits, calling for an integrated approach to increase
livelihood benefits for communities around PAs and to reduce pressure on PAs, to arrest the decline in the

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 20
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Ecosystem Conservation and Management (P156021)



carrying capacity, which was threatening several key species. The PAs were not adequate to support the
elephant population, which needed to continue to roam outside (ICR, para 4). But Human-Elephant Conflict
(HEC) imposed considerable burden on communities on the fringes of PAs and other ecologically sensitive
areas. It became clear that the management of forested ecosystems, which had focused on protection,
needed to take an integrated approach to address different interests (ICR para 7). The development of
Nature-based tourism (NBT), whose potential had been underutilized, offered an opportunity to align the
interests of conservation and those of neighboring communities.

PDO relevance to country strategy

The PDO was relevant to the updated National Determined Contribution (NDC) Plan that Sri Lanka
submitted in July 2021, committing to increase its forest cover from 29 percent to 32 percent by 2030 as
one of several means to achieving carbon neutrality by 2050 (ICR, para 31). The PDO was also relevant to
key national strategies and action plans, including (i) the Punarudaya, Sri Lanka’s environmental action
plan, which emphasized the conservation of the country’s natural resources, particularly forest and wildlife
resources, (ii) sectoral strategies on water, agriculture and energy, and (iii) and other Government of Sri
Lanka (GoSL) policies of increasing forest cover, harnessing of ecosystem benefits, developing
mechanisms for human-elephant co-existence, and improving the revenue generating capability of wildlife
and forest resources.

PDO relevance to World Bank assistance strategy

The PDOs were relevant to the World Bank's (WB) climate agenda, as ecosystems were important in both
climate change mitigation and adaptation. The WB’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) with Sri Lanka
for FY17-FY20, the previous Country Partnership Strategy FY13-FY16, supported the strategic themes of
improved living standards and social inclusion and improving resilience to climate and disaster risks. Pillar
3, 'Seizing green growth opportunities, improving environmental management, and enhancing adaptation
and mitigation potential,’ prioritized ecosystem management. The PDOs remain relevant to the WB’s new
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Sri Lanka for FY24-27 (ICR, para 30). It supports High-Level
Outcome Two on human and natural capital and Objective 5, "Maintain and Strengthen Natural and Human
Capital for Resilience and Livelihoods," while underpinning the cross-cutting theme of "enhancing
resilience".

Level at which PDO is pitched

The core of the PDO, to improve the management of the ecosystem, is pitched at an appropriate level to
simultaneously address the problem of degrading ecosystems and misalignment of the interests of
conservation and that of communities living around ecologically sensitive areas. However, PDO indicators
were amended, making them marginally less ambitious but more accountable for the achievement of the
important institutional and capacity-building dimensions.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

                                                                                                       Page 6 of 20
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Ecosystem Conservation and Management (P156021)




EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To improve the management of ecosystems in selected locations in Sri Lanka for conservation.

               Rationale
               Theory of change

               As indicated in Figure 1 of the ICR, in the context of a lack of integrated decision-making that balances
               conservation and development, the theory of change employed by the project postulated that project
               activities/inputs such as (i) introducing landscape level participatory planning framework to balance the
               need for conservation of sensitive ecosystem and local development; (ii) supporting implementation of
               management plans to improve habitat and increase protection in PAs; (iii) developing NBT to improve visitor
               experiences and increase revenues; and (iv) strengthening facilities and capacity at Department of Wildlife
               Conservation (DWC) and Forest Department (FD) would lead to outputs such as: (i) plans and reports
               developed and implemented; (ii) the area benefitting from improved habitat management and; (iii) training
               programs developed and staff trained which would contribute to the outcome of improved management of
               ecosystems for conservation.

               Outputs

                     2 landscape management plans for biodiversity-rich and environmentally sensitive forest ecosystems
                        completed, meeting the target of 2
                       2 conservation status & enforcement monitoring and reporting systems developed, meeting the target
                        of 2
                       7 protected area-level nature-based tourism plans developed, meeting the target of 7
                       2,027 staff trained, exceeding the target of 310
                       11 range-level PA management plans implemented
                       315,788 ha benefited from habitat improvement activities, falling short of the target of 350,000 ha
                       3 supportive infrastructure (facilities of National Wildlife Training and Research centre in Giritale, for
                        example) upgraded for long-term capacity building, meeting the target of 3
                       3 long term training programs for offering Diploma and Certificate degrees by DF and DWC updated,
                        exceeding the target of 2

               Outcomes

                     4 local policies and or measures relevant to conservation adopted as a result of integrated decision-
                        making, meeting the target of 4
                     493,675 ha brought under enhanced biodiversity protection, exceeding the target of 350,000 ha
                     85 percent of the visitors agreed that investments and visitor management improvements enhanced
                      the quality of nature-based tourism, exceeding the target of 50 percent
                     2 out of possible five of a measure of improved capacity for ecosystem management among trained
                      staff, meeting the target of 2.


                                                                                                                    Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Ecosystem Conservation and Management (P156021)



The results framework (RF) measured the outcomes in terms of the extent to which the methodology of
landscape-level planning has influenced local policies, improved capacities of the staff of Forest Department
(FD) and DWC, the area both inside PAs and in other ecologically sensitive areas that have benefited from
biodiversity protection measures, and visitor perceptions of the improvements on PAs.

The two landscape management plans developed were expected to influence the country’s apex planning
bodies to adopt a participatory landscape approach (ICR, para 35). The plans developed in the country
adopted the approach. Two of the four policies thus developed include the integrated landscape management
policy and the ten-year forestry sector master plan. The landscape planning approach was also introduced at
PA and community levels to improve management through integrated decision-making.

The improved capacity of those who received training in conservation management was measured by an
index. It was based on information collected from both trainees and their supervisors. Capacity was assumed
to have improved if at least 50 percent of them rated the content and quality of training as satisfactory. The
indicator is weak because only 7 and 31 percent of FD and DWC staff, respectively, participated in the survey
(ICR, Annex 1).

Close to half a million acres of land inside and outside participating PAs benefited from enhanced biodiversity
protection measures, which included the development of water resources and measures to improve patrolling.
They can be expected to increase the carrying capacity, but the indicator falls short of offering evidence of
improvement in conservation in terms of increased biodiversity, for example. the results framework had
suggested using the GEF Management Effectiveness Tracking tool (METT) to measure the benefits of
improved management, but the ICR notes that it was not done (para 44).

Visitor perceptions were captured from domestic repeat visitors, 85 percent of whom indicated that they
noticed an improvement in the quality of NBT facilities. The indicator suggests that facilities had improved,
potentially leading to higher visitor revenues, but falls short of offering evidence to indicate that conservation
had improved.

The theory of change sought to improve the management of ecosystems by influencing the way policies and
plans are prepared, developing the capacity of planners, and making the investments necessary to improve
the habitat and visitor experience. The project delivered the targeted outputs. The ICR presents evidence of
having influenced policies, but of having improved the capacity to manage is weak. The improvements made
in the habitats have the potential to enhance their carrying capacity but there is no evidence of it. Repeat
visitors, however, suggested that they noticed improvements in the investments made to improve NBT. As
conservation is likely to be achieved, but the evidence of it is weak, the achievement of this objective is
rated substantial with moderate shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the management of ecosystems in selected locations in Sri Lanka for community benefits.


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Ecosystem Conservation and Management (P156021)




Rationale
Theory of change

In the context of the degradation of protected area and the dependence of neighboring communities on
forests for their livelihoods, and to protect the communities from HEC, while continuing to let elephants roam
outside the PAs, the theory of change employed by the project postulated that, inputs/project activities such
as, (i) supporting government agencies and communities on the fringes of PAs to develop and implement
community action plans that generate biodiversity friendly and climate smart livelihood options, and
(ii0 piloting successful models to reduce human-elephant conflict, would lead to outputs such as:
(i) Community action plans prepared and implemented; (ii) Plans mainstreamed; (iii) Increased income
generating activities created; and (iv) Increased number of villages and crops protected. These outputs would
contribute towards the outcome of increased benefit for the communities in terms of livelihoods that helps
them use the resources sustainably and gain from reduced conflict with elephants.

Outputs

      60 community action plans prepared, meeting the target of 60
      8,105 persons gained access to income generating activities as a result of project interventions, falling
         short of the target of 12,000
        28,646 direct project beneficiaries, exceeding the target of 27,000
        53 percent of direct beneficiaries are women, exceeding the target of 30 percent
        13,839 had their assets protected, falling short of the target of 16,000
        31 villages and agricultural plots protected as a result of human-elephant coexistence activities, falling
         short of the target of 107
        3 knowledge products on elephant management in place, meeting the target of 3
        Institutional framework for sustainable management of fencing program in place


Outcomes

      77 percent of beneficiaries agree project investments reflected their priorities, exceeding the target of
       75 percent
      75 percent reduction in crop and property damages in areas of community fencing, exceeding the
       target of 45 percent

The RF measured the outcomes in terms of the extent to which the beneficiaries feel that the project
investment reflected their priorities and reduction in crop and property damage in communities protected with
community fencing.

Three quarters of the beneficiaries felt that project investments reflected their priorities, but it falls short of
suggesting that they benefited from livelihood options generated by the project. That is also confirmed by the
project falling short of the target number of people (by 25%) whose access to income generating activities are
increased.

Seventy five percent of the estimated beneficiaries of community fencing reported that their crops and
property were protected better or damage was lower. But the project built electric fences in less than a third of


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Ecosystem Conservation and Management (P156021)



                            the targeted communities because of lack of demand from communities, many of whom did not collectively
                            choose to have the fences because some would benefit more than others.

                            On the other hand, at project completion a community survey offered more evidence on outcomes. The
                            average monthly income of beneficiaries had increased by a modest 6 percent. It also showed that the
                            communities depended less on forests; firewood collection for commercial sale and domestic use was
                            reduced due to alternative livelihoods and more efficient stoves, and hunting and sandmining had decreased
                            (ICR, paras 49 and 50).

                            The theory of change assumed that assisting communities develop and implement plans would help them
                            identify and develop income generating activities that would benefit them while reducing their dependence on
                            forests. The indicators used to measure the outcome suggest that beneficiaries felt that project activities
                            reflected the priorities but not that the project activities had adequately generated livelihood options. However,
                            a community survey indicated that the communities had become less dependent on protected areas due to
                            the availability of alternative livelihoods. Beneficiaries of community and crop fences reported that the fences
                            had reduced damage from elephants, but the project succeeded in fencing only a third of the targeted
                            communities because of lack of demand. The project fell short of targets on two key outputs outcome
                            indicators and a community survey suggested that outcomes have been achieved; the overall achievement of
                            this objective is therefore rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project expected to improve the management of ecosystems for conservation and community benefits. It
                            introduced landscape level planning, trained the staff in implementing organizations to manage better and
                            invested in habitat improvement to enhance the carrying capacity of protected areas and improve visitor
                            experience. The new planning approaches introduced influenced policies and plans produced by the
                            country’s apex planning organizations. There is some evidence of improved capacity among staff but it is not
                            strong. Nevertheless, the investment in habitat improvement in PAs is likely to lead to natural resource
                            conservation. The visitors to protected areas reported that the investments had enhanced the quality of
                            tourism facilities. The achievement of conservation was marginally substantial. To achieve community
                            benefits, the communities were helped to develop and implement actions plan that would lead to income
                            generating opportunities and piloted measures that would reduce damage from human elephant conflict. The
                            beneficiaries felt that project investments reflected their priorities, but the project fell short of creating the
                            targeted number of income- generating opportunities. The beneficiaries of community fences felt that crop
                            and property damage was reduced, but the project protected only a third of the targeted villages with fences.
                            The achievement of benefits to communities was marginally substantial. Overall, the efficacy with which the
                            two objectives was achieved is therefore rated substantial but only marginally so.




                                                                                                                                Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ecosystem Conservation and Management (P156021)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
According to the ICR, the economic analysis at appraisal quantified a subset of the benefits that the project
activities were expected to provide. The benefits of the project were associated mostly with greater
sustainability, reduction in HEC, improvements in environmental flows, and the capacity to conserve and
manage ecosystems. As the environmental benefits did not translate into direct, measurable market benefits
and non-market valuation techniques were labor intensive, the analysis employed simpler approaches to
quantify the minimum level of benefits for project components that would render the project beneficial.

An earlier valuation of environmental services in Sri Lanka had shown that the total value of ecosystem services
ranged from US$2,128 per ha per year to US$622,845 per ha per year compared to an average global value of
US$3,274 per year for watershed benefits. For the components 3a and 3c, assuming the lower bound of
US$2,128 per ha, with a discount rate of 12 percent over 20 years, the analysis suggested that the activity
breaks even if it preserves only 975 ha with an ERR of 15.54 percent. Alternatively, they suggested that if the
goal of preserving 200,000 ha were achieved, the incremental value of land that needs to be achieved would be
only US$9 per ha per year (PAD, annex 5, para 15).

At completion, the ICR repeated the analysis of benefits from watershed improvement using actual
disbursements (3a and 3c), valuation of improved forest ecosystems, and cash flows from carbon emission
reduction benefits. The analysis is modeled around three scenarios to identify the break-even point to illustrate
that even a small incremental value added to ecosystem valuation can justify the investment. The
project (activity) breaks even when project value added to ecosystem valuation reaches US$5 per ha per year at
a discount rate of 12 percent. Based on the benchmark value of environmental services from a previous project
in Sri Lanka, this result indicates this project’s substantial economic efficiency, but the relevance of the
assumptions made in the ICR for this analysis is not robust.

The analysis at completion differed from the one at inception in two ways: the area considered at completion
was 315,000 ha that received investments in biodiversity conservation, habitat improvements, and improved PA
management, and carbon benefits were also included (ICR, Annex 4, p. 66). According to the World Bank
project team (based on an exchange with IEG on February 8, 2024, and a follow-up email) the reasons for lower
returns at completion were: i) actual costs were 27 percent higher than assumed at appraisal and (ii) the
analysis at appraisal assumed accrual of benefits beginning year one whereas the analysis at completion
assumes benefits accruing beginning year five.

Using the FAO EX-ACT tool and assumptions stated in Annex 4, estimated that GHG emissions sequestered
over a period of 20 years could be worth US$13.7 million.

Several factors influenced implementation efficiency.

Delays in staffing and low capacity to implement slowed project implementation in the beginning (ICR, para 62).
The technical review committee that was to assess the quality of proposals did not become functional for some



                                                                                                   Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ecosystem Conservation and Management (P156021)



time. The project steering committee did not meet in the first half of 2019. The high turnover of staff in key
positions was also a challenge the project faced.

In later stages, factors external to the project, including the pandemic, political changes, and sovereign default,
which led the country into a deep economic crisis, affected the project. While COVID-19-related restrictions
disrupted the work of contractors, rising inflation and devaluations following the fiscal crisis fueled shortages and
price escalations. Delays in approving price escalations led several contractors to abandon work until the issues
were resolved (ICR, para 83).

Although the PAD recognized that employing a Problem Elephant Rehabilitation and Holding Center (PERC) to
address problem elephants could jeopardize the survival of elephants (Annex 2, para 15), the project allocated
funds to build one. The work, which began after project approval, had to be stopped following concerns raised
by the environmental community through Grievance Redressal mechanisms (GRM).

Limited capacity to work with communities of the Department of Wildlife Conservation (DWC), one of two
implementing organizations, hampered the development of Community Action Plans (CAPs) (ICR, para 81). The
PAs were also required to develop demand-driven projects in consultation with communities. After considerable
delays, the project abandoned the approach to prepare a proposal based on the needs identified in their
strategies.

However, the project met the targeted outcomes with only 78 percent of the appraised costs with differing
efficiency across activities. While components one and two incurred lower costs, there were considerable cost
overruns in activity 3c.

Implementation efficiency was difficult to estimate because of inadequate data. The estimated returns involved
assumptions about watershed benefits, but there was little evidence of their flow. Annex 4 of the ICR noted that
25 percent of the credit was canceled, which included the abandonment of a Problem Elephant Rehabilitation
and Holding Center because of concerns about elephant survival. There was significant cost escalation for the
important Protected Area Management and Institutional Capacity component, but cost savings in other areas.
Overall, the project's implementation period was extended by 23 months to achieve much less than the original
objectives.

Summary: According to this review, the veracity of the project’s economic efficiency is undermined by doubts
about the relevance of the assumptions made in the ICR, and there were a number of shortcomings in the
project’s implementation efficiency. Overall, the project’s efficiency is therefore rated modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)



                                                                                                       Page 12 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ecosystem Conservation and Management (P156021)



                                                                                  41.00
Appraisal                                                15.54
                                                                                   Not Applicable
                                                                                  0
ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                   Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The PDO, to achieve conservation and community benefits from improved management of ecosystems, was
highly relevant to Sri Lanka given the environmental degradation that was taking place because of
uncoordinated development and the dependence of neighboring communities on forests, and the need to
reduce the costs of human-elephant conflicts borne by neighboring communities. The overall efficacy in
achieving those objectives was substantial, with moderate shortcomings because there was inadequate
evidence of conservation benefits. Efficiency was rated modest because the analysis of economic efficiency
had shortcomings, and there were implementation delays, cost overruns, and cancellation of some activities.
Based on the marginally substantial efficacy and modest efficiency, the project's achievements had moderate
shortcomings, and its overall outcome is therefore rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment risk: Convinced of the benefits from consultative landscape-level planning, the
Ministry of Finance issued a note to the cabinet recommending that the Ministry of Wildlife and Forest
Resources Conservation (MoWFRC) fund the continued implementation of major outputs from Ecosystem
Conservation and Management project (ESCSMP), including the Integrated Landscape Management Policy
(ILMP), the two Landscape Management plans, seven nature-based tourism plans. The fiscal uncertainties
that the government faces will test this commitment.

Public capacity risk: Even if the government remains committed, the ability of the implementing
organizations to scale up the new approaches piloted by the project is doubtful. During project
implementation, the government abandoned the attempts to mainstream the new approaches and went back
to preparing projects using traditional models.

Community capacity risk: The benefits from livelihood-generating activities that require collective action
and community fences that require maintenance are also at risk. Many communities did not come forward to
benefit from community fences because some benefitted from them more than others. Such differences in
benefits jeopardize collective action needed for maintenance.




                                                                                                 Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ecosystem Conservation and Management (P156021)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The PDOs were highly relevant to the country's strategies and the World Bank’s strategies to assist the
  country. The approach taken in the design to introduce new approaches to planning, build capacity to
  manage in implementing organizations, make the necessary investment in protected areas to improve the
  habitat, and pilot new ways to reduce elephant-human interactions – recognizing that elephants need to
  be able to roam outside the protected areas – was sound and based on lessons from previous projects.

  The activities/components identified by the project were adequate to achieve the objective, provided the
  capacity of the implementing organizations could be raised to the required level. The project failed to
  recognize that it may not be possible to build the required capacity to consult with stakeholders, an
  important aspect of improved planning processes that the project expected to mainstream in Sri Lanka.
  The new approach caused considerable delay in the early stages, and its use was later abandoned. The
  design also included the building of PERC despite being ambiguous about the benefits, and it had to be
  canceled because of objections from the conservation community.

  The project was rightly ambitious in aiming to influence approaches to managing the environment in the
  country and build the capacity to do so for lasting effect.

  At appraisal, the project's overall risk was assessed as moderate, with the limited capacity of
  implementing organizations as a substantial risk (ICR, para 76). The implementation arrangements were
  complex as departments (FD and DWC) from two different ministries were involved. Only one of them,
  the Ministry of Mahaweli Development and Environment (MoMDE), had the experience of implementing
  externally financed investments. The project attempted to mitigate the risk by establishing the Project
  Management Unit (PMU) in the MoMDE with staff experienced in implementing donor-financed projects.

  Although most project activities were based on lessons from previous operations, the project design
  failed to recognize the capacity limitations that would delay implementation and included an activity that
  was arguably ambiguous and had to be canceled. The project's quality at entry is therefore rated
  Moderately Satisfactory




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank project team provided adequate supervision with 15 missions over seven years of
 implementation.

 Following the MTR in October 2019, when the project lagged substantially in absorbing the funds, the WB
 team redesigned the implementation arrangements. Project implementation units were established in both


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ecosystem Conservation and Management (P156021)



 implementing ministries staffed with people who had extensive experience in implementing donor funded
 projects and expertise in forest and natural resources management.

 Focusing on outcomes and impact, at restructuring the project's results framework (RF) was strengthened
 through two consecutive restructurings, and the new project implementation structure was introduced with
 a dedicated M&E function in each of the implementing ministries (ICR, para 87).

 Supervision paid considerable attention to ensure compliance with safeguard policies. WB management
 temporarily halted implementation of project activities that proceeded with safeguards instruments that had
 not been approved by the Bank.

 The Bank team was proactive in elevating critical issues to bring them to the attention of secretaries and
 directors in the government of Sri Lanka (GoSL) (ICR, para 115). The risk of non-completion of major
 construction was one of them.

 Better public communication, including on social media platforms, on issues raised by a vocal conservation
 community could have helped mitigate negative coverage of some project activities.

 Prompt attention to poor project performance through restructuring and proactive interventions to ensure
 project completion made supervision performance satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The RF captured the dynamics implicit in the theory of change and the expected outcomes. The outcome
 indicators, however, did not adequately capture the benefits of conservation. The expected benefits were
 improved environmental flows. For good reasons, a value was attached to them based on information from
 previous studies. The results framework could have included some intermediate indicators so one doesn’t
 have to jump from “area that benefited from improved management” to “conservation.” The RF better
 captured the dynamics of change with regard to improved community benefits.

 The indicators were specific and measurable. No baseline survey was planned.



b. M&E Implementation
  The results framework was significantly changed during restructuring when the theory of change was also
  formally articulated. Of the five original PDO level indicators, one was revised, three were moved to


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ecosystem Conservation and Management (P156021)



  intermediate levels, and four new indicators were introduced, increasing the total to six. Some of the new
  indicators were less precise in measuring the outcome. For example, increased revenue from tourism,
  which would have reflected both conservation and improvements in facilities, was replaced by visitor
  perceptions of whether the investments had enhanced the quality of nature-based tourism. A new
  indicator captured the effect of introducing landscape-level planning on local policies, which wasn’t
  previously captured. The new set of indicators was more measurable and attributable to the project
  interventions, but they did not capture the outcomes relatively better than the previous set of indicators.
  Targets for five intermediate outcome indicators were also revised upwards.

  The ICR notes that the project did not use the management effectiveness tracking tool (METT) to
  measure improvements in the management of protected areas, as planned (Annex 1, page 37). It is not
  clear how else the area brought under enhanced biodiversity protection was determined. Increased
  patrolling appears to have been an important element of improved management. If so, it was not a
  departure from the protection based failed strategies of the past.

  End-of-project surveys and assessments – such as a tourism survey, a staff survey, and a community
  beneficiary survey – were completed to assess the outcomes.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data figured prominently in the communication products curated for broader audience to inform
  about project implementation.

  The results framework features prominently in restructuring which suggests that some of the changes
  made in implementation could be attributed to M&E.

  In summary, the M&E system, implementation, and use were generally sufficient to track the outputs, but
  inadequate to assess outcomes in terms of improved environmental flows or conservation particularly
  because of the failure to measure improvements in the management of PAs. Overall, M&E quality is,
  therefore, rated Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was categorized “category B” and triggered seven safeguards: OP 4.01 Environmental
   Assessment; OP 4.04 Natural Habitats; OP 4.36 Forests; OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources; OP 4.09
   Pest Management; OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement and OP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples.

   The project completed planned mitigation activities, including the preparation and disclosure of safeguards
   instruments. Environmental and social management plans were developed for 153 major activities. Minor



                                                                                                   Page 16 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Ecosystem Conservation and Management (P156021)



activities were carried out under the provisions of the Environment and Social Code of Conduct developed
by the PMU in accordance with national systems.

OP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples: An Indigenous People Planning Framework (IPPF) was prepared, which
subsequently led to an Indigenous Peoples Plan prepared in consultation with the indigenous peoples
(Vedda) community in Rathugala, who live adjacent to the Gal Oya National Park. A total of 123 IP families
were provided with a variety of livelihood interventions.

The Bank project team addressed and achieved safeguards compliance, including by temporarily halting
project activities when it found that a number of safeguards instruments had not been duly approved by the
WB. Some of the cases in which they addressed safeguard issues include the following (ICR, para 104 to
106):

      Lunugamvehera National Park was using mechanical methods to cut down on the thick growth of
       invasive species. The Bank team recommended more selective manual removal of invasive species
       to protect native species while providing income-earning opportunities for laborers. The DWC
       committed to completing the task by employing labor.
      Responding to a request in October 2019 for inspection of a complaint that the construction of the
       Kudawa Access Road to Sinharaja World Heritage Site (WHS) was harming endemic species of
       fauna and flora and was affecting local livelihoods, the WB Inspection Panel resolved it in February
       2020. The alleged adverse impact pertained to civil works that predated the project and were not
       approved by WB. The WB project team resolved the issue by consulting with local stakeholders,
       establishing a monitoring committee, making several design improvements in partnership with a
       local university, proposing additional mitigation measures, and organizing multiple consultations to
       inform and discuss the new measures with key stakeholders.
      Controversy arose over the construction of a water pipeline in Yala National Park, to recharge water
       holes during the dry season to meet the demand at the Park Head Quarters. NGOs objected to
       pipes being buried 10 meters from the road in scrub jungle. The corrective safeguards action plan
       developed included reducing the footprint of the trench, using smaller machines, restricting trenching
       to a few 100 meters at a time, and contractor training and monitoring. The WB team and PMU
       recommended the DWC to consult with the NGOs.

Several safeguard issues and health & safety risks were observed at sites with incomplete construction
(SLFI Nuwarala-Eliya, Giritale National Wildlife Research and Training Institute, NBT infrastructure &
dormitory in Knuckles and Ticketing Centre in Sinharaja) due to suspension of contracts owing to price
escalation. However, risks associated with these sites were managed using site-specific Environmental
Management Plans by the PMU before project closure and safeguard compliance was achieved.

GRMs were established at all project sites, with conflict resolution, relationship building, and promotion of
gender equity and equality considered under social development aspects. At project closing, the total
cumulative complaints tallied 198, with two outstanding complaints to be resolved (FD received and
resolved 135 complaints, and DWC received 63 complaints).

The overall safeguards was rated as Moderately Satisfactory at project closing.




                                                                                                 Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ecosystem Conservation and Management (P156021)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement: Project procurement was an issue throughout implementation. Procurement performance
   was rated Moderately Satisfactory for most of the implementation period. Due to limited capacity at the
   implementing agencies, the Bank's procurement management system, STEP, was not regularly updated
   (ICR, para 110). Nevertheless, the project remained in compliance with Bank procurement policies and
   procedures.

   Financial Management: Based on a Financial Management (FM) capacity assessments carried out at
   preparation, FM risk was assessed as “Substantial” because of the implementation agency’s lack of
   experience with WB operations, limited FM capacity, decentralized fund flow, and weak payment and
   reporting structures (ICR, para 111). To mitigate the risk, the primary responsibility for FM and oversight
   was placed with the PMU under the MoMDE, who had experience with several donor financed operations,
   including familiarity with procedures of WB projects, and who had dedicated full-time FM staff.

   Annual audit reports were timely submitted and the project's FM performance rating was assessed in the
   satisfactory range throughout implementation. However, external audit reports of the PMU's accounts
   carried out annually by the Auditor General of Sri Lanka included qualified opinions every year from 2019
   to 2022 (including). According to the ICR (para 112) the WB team was proactive in following up with the
   PMU to address and resolve the concerns raised.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                Shortcoming in assessing the
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Modest                    improvements in the
                                                                                management of protected areas.
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR identified several lessons. Two of them that stood out as potentially useful to other similar
projects are restated here with some editing as follows:


                                                                                                   Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Ecosystem Conservation and Management (P156021)



Communicating with stakeholders proactively on the platforms in which they raise issues – a
meeting where the issues emerge – can diminish the chances of the issues escalating into
major public relations challenges. The conservation community in Sri Lanka objected to three
project activities (PERC at Lunugamvehera NP, the Kudawa access road in Sinharaja WHS, and the
pipelinein Yala NP). The Bank project team, addressing the issue through conventional channels,
such as consultation, news articles, and publicity material, failed to quickly assuage the concerns.

The chances of effectively making project activities demand-driven can be enhanced by
building capabilities for carrying out consultative processes in implementing organizations.
Low institutional capacity was flagged as a risk. Despite the support, officials from FD and DWC
faced difficulties developing integrated proposals based on the needs and demands of affected
communities. They reverted to identifying investment activities from a list of needs in existing PA
management plans. Centralizing decision-making, they prioritized infrastructure development and
mechanical interventions over soft interventions, such as grassland management and manual
maintenance, that communities would have preferred.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project’s design and implementation, including several
restructurings that took place and their implication for implementation. It does so in a logical manner that clearly
lays out how the changes affected activities, outputs, and outcomes. The report conforms to the guidelines, is
adequately detailed, and information is appropriately referenced and presented in several annexes, which
include information on capacity development activities and links to communication products of the project. The
report is outcome-oriented, with analysis using information from the results framework and surveys
implemented at the end of the project. The analysis is logical, and the results are presented concisely. The
analysis is also internally consistent and candid in noting how deficiencies in some aspects influenced other
aspects of the project. The lessons drawn from the project in the ICR were to some extent useful and based on
evidence from the project, although, as noted below, the lessons had some shortcomings.

However, there were some limitations. The ICR does not provide adequate information on the parameters of
the survey implemented at the end of the project. It could also have discussed the implications of the revisions
to PDO indicators on the assessment of the project’s outcomes.

On balance, the quality of the ICR is rated substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 19 of 20
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Ecosystem Conservation and Management (P156021)




                                                                               Page 20 of 20
