     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nepal: Grid Solar & Energy Efficiency (P146344)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023780

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P146344                                     Nepal: Grid Solar & Energy Efficiency

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Nepal                                       Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-55660                                   31-Dec-2020                                            98,207,279.29

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Dec-2014                                 15-Dec-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            130,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                             107,386,528.00                                                 0.00

 Actual                                          98,207,279.29                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Ridwan Bolaji Bello         Joel J. Maweni                Ramachandra Jammi                IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the financing agreement dated 20 February 2015 (p. 5), the project development objectives
   (PDO) are to: (i) increase the solar photovoltaic generated electricity to supply to the Nepal Electricity
   Authority (NEA) grid; and (ii) reduce NEA’s distribution losses in selected distribution centers. The articulation
   of the project’s objective is the same in the financing agreement and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD).




                                                                                                      Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nepal: Grid Solar & Energy Efficiency (P146344)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component #1: Grid-connected Solar PV Farms Development (Estimated cost: IDA USD54.0 million; actual
   cost: IDA USD30.28 million).

   This component was to finance four parts: (a) Design, supply, construction, commissioning, operation and
   maintenance of grid-connected solar farms to supply electricity directly to NEA’s distribution network, (b)
   Provision of technical advisory services to assist NEA with the procurement and supervision of the
   engineering, procurement, and construction contract for the solar farms, and (c) Provision of capacity
   building activities to assist NEA with, inter alia, independent bid evaluation, project management, contract
   execution, and operation and maintenance of the solar farms.

   Component #2: Distribution System Planning Loss Reduction (estimated cost: IDA USD 84.0 million; actual
   cost: IDA USD75.26 million).

   This component was to support three parts: (a) preparation of a distribution master plan, (b) preparation of a
   system loss reduction master plan, (c) carrying out a set of activities in system loss reduction in selected
   NEA’s distribution centers, including: (i) replacing conductors of distribution feeders or building distributions
   lines to reduce line losses; (ii) adding or replacing distribution transformers to maintain voltage levels and
   reduce transformer losses; and (iii) adding capacitor banks to compensate reactive power to manage
   voltage levels, and (d) building the capacity of NEA in distribution system planning and management,
   including: (i) provision of equipment, software, and training for distribution system loss identification and
   reduction planning; and (ii) development of a geographic information system database.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost and financing: According to the ICR, the project cost was originally estimated to be USD138
   million, comprising a USD130 million IDA Credit and USD8 million from the Government of Nepal (GON).
   Additional information provided by the project team showed that at the time of signing of the financing
   agremeent the IDA Credit was equivalent to USD116.7 million due to appreciation of the USD out of which
   USD94.2 million was disbursed and USD22.4 million was undisbursed and eventually cancelled.

   Due to exchange rate differences the disbursed amount of USD94.2 million reported by the project
   team was lower than the USD98.2 million shown in the ICR and data sheet by USD4 million. The reason for
   this discrepancy is that disbursements took place at different SDR/USD exchange rates throughout the
   course of project implementation resulting in an overall gain of US$4 million due to the appreciation of the
   USD.

   Dates: The project was approved on 22 December 2014, the financing agreement was signed on 20
   February 2015, and the project became effective on 14 June 2016. The mid-term review was conducted



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nepal: Grid Solar & Energy Efficiency (P146344)



   on 7 May 2018. The original closing date was 31 December 2020 but, after three restructurings, the project
   closed on 15 December 2022, about 24 months behind schedule.

         The first restructuring (Level 2 – 30 November 2020) extended the project closing date by 12 months
          from 31 December 2020 to 31 December 2021.
         The second restructuring (Level 2 – 2 December 2021) further extended the project closing date by
          11.5 months to 15 December 2022, and extended the submission timeline for the external audit
          report by three months.
         Third restructuring (Level 2 – 13 December 2022) was for the cancellation of USD15 million of
          unused funds from the Project. In addition to this unused funds, the ICR noted that an undisbursed
          balance of SDR5,674,194.90 (equivalent to USD7 million) was cancelled on 24 April 2023.

   According to ICR (p.5), the first and second restructuring were needed to allow for additional time to
   complete the ongoing project activities that had been hindered due to delays in contract implementation
   caused by the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020-2022. The third restructuring was to cancel the USD15
   million that was unused by the project. All three restructurings were requested by Nepal’s Ministry of
   Finance (MOF). All three restructuring had no impact on the project’s Theory of Change (TOC) and
   expected outcomes.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objectives are aligned with the World Bank’s strategy in Nepal, as highlighted in the Country
Partnership Framework for FY2019-23 (CPF) for Nepal. The World Bank strategy for Nepal focuses on
private sector-led jobs and growth (Focus Area 1), and the CPF notes that gaps in energy infrastructure and
access remain a “significant constraint against increased private sector investment, productivity and
livelihoods in Nepal” (CPF, p.14). Furthermore, objective 2.1 of the CPF aims to support improved power
generation capacity and access to electricity. Both objectives of the Grid Solar & Energy Efficiency Project
(GSEEP) resonate with the Bank’s strategy in Nepal. The first objective sought to directly increase power
generation through the construction and operation of solar farms that add up to 25 MW to the national grid.
The second objective sought to increase electricity supply by reducing distribution losses.

The project's objectives were consistent with the Nepal government’s vision and strategy for the power
sector, as detailed in the 2013 National Energy Strategy of Nepal and referenced in the PAD. According to
the PAD, the government’s vision for the power sector is to address the country’s energy crises and
eventually achieve reliable, affordable, and sustainable electricity supply in Nepal. To reach this vision, the
government’s strategy is to: (a) reduce load shedding by adding generation capacity that can be quickly
installed in the short term and by reducing system losses; (b) reach supply demand balance in the medium
term through the commissioning of hydropower and importing power from India; and (c) develop more of its
hydropower resources and integrate into the regional power market to earn export revenues and sustain
domestic growth in the long term (PAD, p.3). The objectives of the GSEEP align with item (a) of the
government’s strategy.




                                                                                                     Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Nepal: Grid Solar & Energy Efficiency (P146344)



               The project objectives were appropriately pitched to the development status and capacity of the country.
               The project involved installation of the first large-scale grid-connected solar plants in Nepal and, as such,
               the borrower had limited capacity to prepare, operate, and manage the project. Thus, the project sought to
               mitigate capacity and implementation risks by adopting a build-operate-manage-and-transfer approach. The
               solar plants were constructed by competitively selected contractors whose responsibility included managing
               the plants for their first five years while training NEA staff on project operation and management to prepare
               NEA for the eventual take-over of the plants. Project implementation was also cognizant of potential land
               access issues that commonly arise in fragile countries like Nepal. Hence, to avoid land access risks that
               can potentially put achievement of project objectives at risk, the project sought to avoid installation of
               project components on private land and instead limited construction to land already owned by NEA.

               Overall, the project’s objectives align strongly with World Bank strategy, government strategy and country
               context. Hence, the relevance of objectives is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase the solar photovoltaic generated electricity to supply to the NEA grid.

                             Rationale
                             Although objectives #1 and #2 of the GSEEP are both aimed at contributing to the long-term outcomes of
                             providing efficient, reliable, affordable, and sustainable electricity supply, each objective has distinct result
                             chains (as shown in Figure 1 of the ICR). Hence, this section discusses the efficacy of each objective
                             separately.

                             At appraisal, the GSEEP planned to support the design, supply, construction, operation, and maintenance of
                             grid-connected solar farms. Project activities include the provision of finance and technical support to assist
                             NEA in the procurement and supervision of the construction of the solar farms as well as capacity building
                             activities to assist NEA with operation and maintenance of the solar farms.

                             According to the TOC, the expected output from these activities was the commissioning of 25 MWp of total
                             solar power generation capacity. The intermediate outcome was the generation of 33GWh of electricity
                             annually from the newly constructed solar power plants, which was expected to lead to the PDO outcome of
                             increasing solar PV-generated electricity to the NEA network. Overall, the linkages between the project
                             activities, outputs and outcomes were clear and convincing.

                             As of project closing date, solar PV power plants were successfully installed across seven sites, all of which
                             had a collective capacity of 25MWp. The first site commenced operations in January 2021 and the final site

                                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Nepal: Grid Solar & Energy Efficiency (P146344)



became operational in August 2022. The ICR (p.6) reported that data from NEA shows that the new
solar plants generated an output of 33.02GWh in the year between September 2022 and August 2023,
slightly exceeding the annual target of 33GWh.

Overall, given that these solar plants were the first large-scale grid-connected solar PVs in Nepal (ICR p.9)
and electricity generation from power plants is easily measurable through metering, the electricity output
reported in the ICR met its targets and is attributable to the installation and operation of the new solar plants.
Therefore, it is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Reduce NEA’s distribution losses in selected distribution centers.

Rationale
At appraisal, project activities planned under objective #2 included the preparation of a distribution master
plan (DMP) and a distribution loss reduction master plan (DLRMP); installation of infrastructure necessary for
system loss reductions in several distribution centers based on the recommendations of the DLRMP; and
capacity building of NEA for distribution loss management through the provision of instruments, software, and
training for distribution system loss identification and reduction planning.

As presented in Figure 1 of the ICR, the TOC for this objective was that the project activities would lead to the
development of a DMP and a DLRMP, as well as the construction of 3,000 kilometers of distribution lines —
these are the project outputs. The intermediate outcome anticipated from these outputs was a 15% reduction
in distribution loss in selected areas, which was then expected to lead the PDO indicator of reducing
distribution loss in selected areas. This TOC is however misleading. The TOC suggests that the development
of the master plans and construction of the distribution lines are unconnected activities to be implemented in
parallel. However, additional details presented in other sections of the ICR and provided by the project team
revealed that the completion of the master plans was intended to precede and inform the construction of the
distribution lines. Furthermore, Figure 1 of the ICR presents 15% reduction in losses in selected distribution
areas as an intermediate outcome. However, the four intermediate indicators presented in the text of the PAD
and ICR do not include 15% reduction in distribution losses. Thus, the loss reductions are shown as both
intermediate and PDO outcomes in the TOC.

At completion, the project completed the proposed project activities, but not in the right order. The ICR (p.6)
notes that preparation of the master plans was significantly delayed due to “challenges in collecting
distributions system data” and “COVID-19 related restrictions”. Hence, the World Bank and NEA agreed to
proceed with implementing the planned investments for system loss reductions based on NEA’s previous
internal assessment of the distribution centers in need of immediate improvement, rather than based on
recommendations from the DMP and DLRMP. The preparation of the distribution master plans was
conducted in parallel with, rather than in advance of, these investments. Nevertheless, upon completion, the
DLRMP validated the choice of the distribution centers chosen for loss reduction improvements.


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Nepal: Grid Solar & Energy Efficiency (P146344)



                            The ICR presented evidence that all three intermediate indicators for this objective were met, but it did not
                            present sufficient evidence that the PDO indicator for this objective was achieved. The DMP was completed
                            in 2019 and the DLRMP in 2022 – this confirms that the latter could not have informed the selection of
                            distribution investments since it was available less than a year before project closing date. The ICR reports
                            that by project closure, both the DMP and DLRMP had been adopted by the NEA as the core strategy and
                            roadmap for the expansion and rehabilitation of its distribution network. The third intermediate indicator,
                            length of distribution network rehabilitated was also achieved because the total length of 3,608 km of
                            distribution lines constructed/rehabilitated exceeded the target of 3,000km set at appraisal.

                            The extent to which the distribution network improvements led to distribution loss reduction in the selected
                            centers is unclear. The ICR notes that because NEA lacked the capability to measure losses for individual
                            lines and transformers, the team had to rely on NEA’s measurement of country-wide distribution losses.
                            Additional information requested from the project team revealed that NEA’s country-wide distribution losses
                            reduced from 25.78 % in FY2015/16 to 15.38 % in FY2021/22. The ICR claimed that project activities under
                            this objective played a part in achieving this reduction, but that estimating the precise loss reduction
                            attributable to this project was impossible given the limitation in measuring distribution loss data for individual
                            distribution centers.

                            Furthermore, the construction of the distribution network involved nine contracts, seven of which were
                            procured through International Competitive Bidding (ICB) and two through National Competitive Bidding
                            (NCB). By the project closing date, four ICB contracts and two NCB contracts had been completed. Three
                            ICB contracts (ICB-2, ICB-8, and ICB-9) were affected due to COVID-19 restrictions and delays in land
                            clearance process, and were still under implementation, with completion expected by December 2023. The
                            outstanding activities under these uncompleted contracts relate to the installation of 33kV transformers.

                            Overall, project activities under objective #2 would have contributed to system loss reduction in the selected
                            areas because of the nature of the investments, although the level of contribution could not be quantitatively
                            determined. In addition, the project would have strengthened the network for additional loss reductions in
                            future because of the completion of the following: 1) rehabilitation and construction of the targeted length of
                            distribution lines; 2) adoption of the completed DMP and DLRMP by NEA; and 3) training activities to build
                            NEA’s capacity to identify and manage distribution loss reductions. However, because there is insufficient
                            evidence to demonstrate that these network improvements did deliver the targeted reduction in distribution
                            losses as at project closing date, the efficacy rating for this objective is Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project achieved all intermediate outcomes set at appraisal. The project also achieved its first PDO
                            outcome. However, there is insufficient evidence that the second PDO outcome was achieved as at the



                                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Nepal: Grid Solar & Energy Efficiency (P146344)



  project closing date. Hence, based on the evidence available, the project only partly achieved its objectives.
  Therefore, the overall efficacy rating for the project is Modest.



  Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
  Modest                                                     Insufficient evidence


5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis

While the GSEEP comprises two project components, at appraisal, an economic analysis was conducted for
component #1 only. The economic benefit of the activities under this component was defined as the avoided
cost of generating the same targeted amount of electricity from alternative energy sources, which was assumed
to be a diesel power plant. The cost of electricity generation from diesel was estimated to be USD31.6/kWh,
compared to an estimated USD14.9 cents/kWh from solar PV. It was also assumed that the economic life of a
diesel plant is 20 years, so an additional diesel generator would need to be installed after the first diesel
generator is retired in 20 years. Assuming the solar farms have a lifespan of 25 years, the net present value
(NPV) of solar farms over the diesel plant computed at the discount rate of 10% was estimated to be USD44.0
million and the Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was 50.7 %. Hence electricity generation from the
GSEEP was adjudged to be more cost-efficient than from an equivalent diesel plant. Additional environmental
benefits of the GSEEP were not captured in this economic analysis.

Estimates of the economic benefit of the project were lower at completion than at appraisal. At the time of
project evaluation, an economic analysis was conducted for Components #1 and #2. This economic analysis
computed the EIRR and net present value (NPV) based on the energy generated from Component #1,
estimated loss reduction from Component #2, actual project costs adjusted for changes in macroeconomic
conditions, and international fossil fuel market prices. At project evaluation, the NPV for the project overall was
USD380.4 million at project evaluation and the EIRR was 26%. Including climate benefits, the aggregate EIRR
and NPV of the project at completion were estimated to be 28% and USD410 million, respectively. For
Component #1 alone, the NPV was USD30.5 million at project evaluation compared to USD44.0 million at
project appraisal.

At project completion, the capital costs of the project were also lower than had been expected at appraisal.
Including contingencies, the total capital costs at appraisal were estimated to be USD126 million (at constant
2013 prices). At project closing, the actual economic construction costs of the project (still at constant 2013
prices) stood at USD105.54 million, 16% lower than appraisal estimates. The ICR attributes these savings to
lower solar PV investment costs, thanks to the maturity of the technology (p.8). Notwithstanding these cost
savings, economic returns at completion declined due to the decrease in forecasted international energy prices
at project completion in 2023 compared to the prices forecasted during the appraisal in 2013 (ICR p.8).

Despite downward revisions of the economic benefits of the project at project completion, the economic analysis
adjudged the project to be economically viable and financially efficient. The EIRR of 28% exceeds the 10%
discount rate, indicating that the project is economically viable. The NPV of USD410 million also exceeds the
project cost of USD105 million, indicating that the net cashflow from the project over its lifetime is expected to
exceed the project’s costs.


                                                                                                       Page 7 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Nepal: Grid Solar & Energy Efficiency (P146344)



Administrative and Operational Efficiency

Project completion was delayed by 24 months due predominantly to insufficient staffing levels with the Project
Management Unit that required substantial support from the World Bank to ensure compliance with fiduciary
requirements (ICR, p.8). The ICR claims that despite this delay, the total project cost was lower than expected,
and the extension in the closing date did not affect the project’s efficiency. This argument, however, does not
account for the opportunity cost of the staff time. The time that the World Bank staff spent to fulfill the additional
administrative and reporting obligations created by the extension is time that could have been expended on
other projects in Nepal. This opportunity cost undermines the project’s operational efficiency.

Overall, despite downward revisions in the estimated economic benefits of the project and delays in project
completion, the project cost less at completion than was expected at appraisal. The estimated net benefits from
the project also exceeds the net benefits from a second-best electricity generation alternative—i.e., a diesel
plant. Hence, the project’s efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         35.38
 Appraisal                                                    50.70
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         100.00
 ICR Estimate                                                 26.00
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s objectives aligned strongly with World Bank strategy, government strategy and country context,
and the relevance of the PDOs is rated High. The project’s efficacy is rated Modest because, while the
outcome indicator for PDO#1 (energy generation from solar development farms) met its targets, there is
insufficient evidence that the 15% loss reduction target for PDO#2 was achieved in the selected distribution
areas. The project’s efficiency was rated Substantial because its net benefits remained significantly above the
hurdle cost of capital of 10% and, apart from the opportunity cost of staff time due to delayed implementation,
there were no other significant administrative inefficiencies. The net benefits were lower at completion than at
appraisal because, despite the lower capital costs resulting from decreases in international prices of solar
components, forecasted international energy prices were also lower at project completion.

Overall, the project’s outcome is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory in accordance with Bank guidance (p. 38).



                                                                                                         Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Nepal: Grid Solar & Energy Efficiency (P146344)



a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The construction of the seven solar PV plants was procured under a single Engineering, Procurement, and
Construction (EPC) contract. After construction, the contractor is responsible for operating and maintaining
the plants for five years while training NEA staff to take over afterwards. Given the novel nature of large-
scale grid-connected solar PV in Nepal, this O&M model should enable NEA to acquire the technical
expertise required to operate and maintain the plants. However, it also presents risks for the long-term
sustainability of the development objectives already achieved by the project. Possible sources of risks
include, but are not limited to, incomplete knowledge transfer from the contractor to NEA by the end of the
five-year period, labor market churning that can result in NEA’s inability to retain already trained staff, as well
as uncertainties about NEA’s financial viability.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Adding electricity generation capacity and reducing system losses are of high strategic relevance to the
  Nepal government’s objective of increasing electricity access. The project’s activities and design were
  sufficiently appropriate to support the achievement of this objective. The construction of the solar farms
  (Component #1) was relevant for adding generation capacity and the preparation of distribution plan and
  reinforcement of distribution lines in selected areas and (Component #2) was relevant for reducing
  system losses. The technical preparation for project activities under Component #1 was adequate for the
  successful construction of the solar farms. However, significant limitations in collecting data on
  distribution losses hindered the project’s ability to implement and track impact of activities under
  Component #2 as planned and the project failed to anticipate or plan for these limitations at appraisal.

  The project design benefited from the experience gained and lessons learned in implementing earlier
  power projects in Nepal. The project made efforts to avoid land acquisition issues that had delayed the
  implementation of earlier donor-funded transmission line projects in Nepal. Additionally, project design
  recognized the pioneering nature of the project for large-scale solar farms in Nepal, and the associated
  limitation in implementation capacity for solar projects in the country. To address this capacity limitation,
  the project was designed to engage external expertise to assist NEA in procurement, construction,
  supervision, testing, operation, and management of the solar farms, and to build the capacity of NEA to
  undertake these activities.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory



                                                                                                        Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nepal: Grid Solar & Energy Efficiency (P146344)




b. Quality of supervision
 The task team provided support to the client on a range of issues such as procurement and contract
 management; social and environmental safeguard compliance; legal covenant compliance; as well as
 technical guidance. The Project was regularly monitored through implementation support missions,
 documented in Aide Memoires and Management Letters. Reporting was done through regular
 Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs). During each mission, the task team conducted a
 detailed assessment of the Project status and identified challenges. The task teams also conducted site
 visits, with a particular focus on the most challenging subprojects that needed the World Bank’s support.
 Ratings from ISRs were actively shared with the client, serving as performance signals for NEA. When the
 client requested project closing date extensions, the World Bank team required the Borrower to provide
 implementation action plans as evidence of realistic expectations for completion of activities within the
 proposed new closing dates.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The TOC was valid in objective #1 but had shortcomings for objective #2. For objective #1, the linkages
 between the construction of the power plant, the supply of solar PV electricity to the NEA grid and,
 ultimately, to the long-term outcomes were clear and plausible. For the objective #2, the TOC failed to
 show that the completion of the master plans was supposed to precede and inform the construction of the
 distribution lines, thereby obfuscating the causal links between project activities and outcomes.

 Similarly, the PDO indicator for objective #1 was measurable, achievable, relevant, time-bound, and
 specific, but the PDO indicator for objective #2 was not. At appraisal, the PDO indicator for objective #2 –
 namely distribution loss reduced in selected distribution centers (%) – was not measurable as NEA lacked
 the capacity to measure distribution loss reduction for individual distribution centers. This indicator was also
 not specific as it was unclear whether the target was to reduce distribution losses by 15% or to 15%.



b. M&E Implementation
  The quality of the project’s M&E implementation was insufficient to provide reliable evidence of result
  achievement for objective #2 of the project. The failure of the M&E design to anticipate the difficulty in
  measuring also hindered the assessment of the second PDO indicator. Because NEA did not have
  systems and procedures to directly measure the losses for each distribution center, the reduction in
  distribution losses could not be measured at a center-specific level. Furthermore, there is a misalignment
  between the M&E design and implementation, as the evidence presented in the M&E implementation

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nepal: Grid Solar & Energy Efficiency (P146344)



  does not match the target set in the M&E design. On p.2, the ICR notes that the anticipated outcome for
  the component 2 was “reduction of distribution losses by 15 % in the targeted distribution network under
  the Project”. However, on p.7, the evidence of result achievement presented is that “by the time of project
  closing, country-wide system losses were reduced to 15%.”.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (p.12) notes that the data on progress were collected regularly and were utilized effectively to
  inform the management on key decision to be taken. However, the document did not specify the key
  decisions that were made based on the progress.

  Overall, there were significant shortcomings in the M&E design and implementation, and the utility of the
  M&E outputs was unspecified in the ICR. Therefore, the M&E quality is rated Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental safeguards

   At appraisal, the Project was classified as category ‘B’ and three environmental safeguard policies, OP/BP
   4.01 - Environmental Assessment, OP/BP 4.36 - Forests, and OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources,
   were triggered. The project was expected to have limited adverse environmental and social impacts, which
   were site specific, reversible and could be readily addressed through good engineering practices and
   mitigation measures. The potential adverse issues/impacts were associated with site clearing (shrub
   vegetation removal) & excavation, waste management, and management of labor camps. Most of the
   impacts were temporary in nature and limited to the construction phase. Except for the visual quality, the
   footprint of operational phase impacts of the Project was expected to be negligible. Potential environmental
   concerns of the solar farms during the operational stage included wastes that may contain glasses, chips,
   and photo-voltaic cells. Specific issues related to Component 2 are PCB (Poly Chlorinated Biphenyl) in the
   transformer and dismantling of the existing conductors. For this reason, the project noted that PCB based
   transformer and capacitor banks will not be used under the Project. The ESMF prepared for the Project also
   acknowledged these issues and included measures for addressing them in the project implementation
   process, such as provision for safe management of the existing conductors and transformers that will be
   removed/dismantled.

   The ICR (p.13) reported that during implementation, the project hired an Environmental and Social Study
   Division (ESSD) and NEA Engineering Company to ensure that work on the solar plants and the distribution
   substations complied with relevant Environmental and Social (E&S) requirements. E&S requirement was
   fulfilled by the NEA project site engineers and project components managers in consultation with the World
   Bank team. The Project avoided tree cutting where possible along the distribution line route. Wherever tree
   cutting was required, the community forest user group’s consent was taken during the Project

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Nepal: Grid Solar & Energy Efficiency (P146344)



  implementation, complying with OP/BP 4.36 - Forests. The Project’s environmental safeguard planning and
  implementation were ensured through the preparation of E&S screening and Environmental and Social
  Management Plan (ESMPs) in line with the Project-specific Environmental and Social Management
  Framework (ESMF) in compliance with OP/BP 4.01 - Environmental Assessment. The Project activities
  avoided the impact on physical cultural resources and followed the principle of avoidance, minimization, and
  mitigation hierarchy for environmental risk management through the application of techniques, which
  included alignment of distribution line routes to avoid impact on government and community forest areas,
  mitigation of vulnerable slope instability/erosion, spoil disposal, and water logging issues of the substations.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  The project experienced financial management issues during implementation. In the initial years of
  implementation, the project maintained an acceptable level of financial management (FM) and was rated
  ‘Moderately Satisfactory’. However, after August 2020, this rating was downgraded to ‘Moderately
  Unsatisfactory’ because of unresolved audit qualification and other identified internal control issues. The
  major reasons for the ‘Moderately Unsatisfactory’ rating are (a) lack of timely and quality of financial
  reports, (b) unreconciled internal balances, (c) delays and irregular internal audit of the Project, (d)
  compliance gaps in ensuring timeline of insurance and bank guarantee contracts clauses, and (e) absence
  of physical verification for capital work in progress. Despite regular follow-ups from the World Bank team
  on the action plan for the Project to improve overall FM, the progress was not satisfactory, as reflected in
  the Aide Memoires issued by the World Bank since August 2020. The high turnover of finance staff in the
  Project also affected the FM performance of the Project, which required constant handholding from the
  World Bank FM team to maintain quality of FM reports and capacity of the incumbent finance staff to
  ensure adequate FM arrangements are in place. Overall, FM performance of the Project remained
  Moderately Unsatisfactory at closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None



d. Other
  Gender

  The GSEEP was not a gender-tagged project. However, during preparation and implementation of the
  Project, NEA conducted several consultations with Project beneficiaries, both male and female. The Project
  also supported community activities including drinking water supply systems for communities around the
  solar power plants and provision of computer lab for schools. These efforts benefited the communities, but
  the project did not particularly measure the benefits to women and girls

  Institutional Strengthening



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Nepal: Grid Solar & Energy Efficiency (P146344)



   The Project trained 50 participants in various stages of preparation of the DLRMP. The training program
   mainly covered the relevant definitions and classifications of the distribution system losses and methods of
   system loss reduction and planning. The master plan is also considered as a useful guide, which identified
   distribution losses and system weak points and recommended necessary modifications required in the
   system. In addition, seven participants received international training in Vietnam on appropriate tools and
   methodology on system loss reduction techniques. During their visit to a factory, they also gained an
   understanding of the manufacturing process and maintenance procedures for smart energy meters and
   acquired knowledge about quality control.

   Mobilizing Private Sector Financing

   The GSEEP did not directly mobilize private financing, but investments made under Component 1 of the
   Project encouraged the IPP investors to enter the solar power PV generation systems in Nepal. The
   implementation of the GSEEP can potentially has positive demonstration effects in Nepal’s energy sector.
   This is because the project was Nepal’s first large-scale grid-connected solar PV system and demonstrated
   the feasibility of implementing such large-scale solar plant in the country.

   Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity

   The ICR noted that lack of electricity is one of the major obstacles for doing business in Nepal. The GSEEP
   enhanced both the generation capacity and the distribution networks, which contributed to improving the
   power supply quality and reliability. However, no specific analysis was conducted to demonstrate Project’s
   direct impact on poverty reduction.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                                 Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

This review draws two lessons based on the information in the ICR.

Future projects on loss reduction should focus on developing capacity for measuring loss
reduction. Ensuring that the implementing agency has the technical ability to accurately measure
distribution losses is critical for tracking the impact of investments targeted at reducing system
losses. Although the investments and distribution centers prioritized by the DMP and DLRMP turned
out to be valid for loss reduction, the absence of appropriate tools and systems for data collection on
losses in those areas resulted in an inability to assess the impact of the project on loss reduction in

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Nepal: Grid Solar & Energy Efficiency (P146344)



the selected areas. Hence, future project teams should establish that the capacity to assess loss
reduction is put in place prior to undertaking further investments.

Like the GSEEP, projects in fragile country settings should pay attention to land access
issues. In fragile countries like Nepal, property rights are often poorly defined or weakly enforced.
For this reason, project implementation involving land acquisition from private landowners are at risk
of delay or derailment if ownership rights for such lands are disputed or if implementing agencies
face difficult negotiations with private landowners. To avoid these issues, project teams should
consider limiting project activities to publicly owned lands. However, the process of securing
approval from public authorities for the use of public land can be lengthy. Hence, the process to
obtain government approval should begin well in advance to avoid delays in land acquisition and
project implementation.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The report mostly follows and responds to the Bank’s ICR guidance, and the narrative is concise. Including its
annexes, the ICR presents a substantial level of detail about project activities that have or have not occurred as
planned at appraisal. Although some of the claims made in the ICR are substantiated by weak evidence, the
report is candid about those limitations. The economic analysis is detailed but the scope of the cost-benefit
analysis differed at completion versus at appraisal, making a pre-project and post-project comparison of EIRR
difficult. The presentation of the TOC for objective #2 in the ICR was misleading and inconsistent with the PAD.
The disbursement and cancellation amounts reported in the ICR was inconsistent with those reported directly
by the project team and the ICR did not explain the reasons for the discrepancy. Overall, the quality of the ICR
is rated Modest.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Nepal: Grid Solar & Energy Efficiency (P146344)




                                                                               Page 15 of 15
