     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Supporting Edu Reform in Targeted Circui (P152096)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023627

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P152096                                    Supporting Edu Reform in Targeted Circui

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Ecuador                                    Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-85420                                 31-Dec-2020                                       116,014,616.15

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 14-Oct-2015                                31-Dec-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           178,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            125,300,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                        116,014,616.15                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Salim J. Habayeb            Eduardo Fernandez            Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                             Maldonado                    Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objectives of the project were to increase enrollment in Early Education and improve the persistence rate
   in Lower Secondary Education and Upper Secondary Education in the Targeted Circuits (Loan Agreement,
   dated January 28, 2016).

   During implementation, applicable revisions associated with updated baselines marginally reduced the
   outcome target for 4-year-olds enrollment (from 7,710 to 7474 students), and for persistence from lower to
   upper secondary from 78.11 percent to 77.29 percent (ICR, p. 32). Both original and revised targets were met.

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Supporting Edu Reform in Targeted Circui (P152096)



   Therefore, this ICR Review does not apply a split rating methodology, as it would be inconsequential to the
   assessment of efficacy.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component I. Improving school services in targeted circuits (Total: US$196.8 million, World Bank:
   US$174.5 million; Actual: US$103.4 million). The component aimed at improving the quality of education
   services and increasing enrollment and graduation from early childhood to upper secondary education, and
   to enable a more efficient allocation of existing physical and human resources. The four key policies to
   improve the quality of education services to be financed by the component were: (i) the reorganization of
   school supply, by consolidation of schools into “hubs”, and upgrading the infrastructure and facilities; (ii) in-
   service and master level training of teachers and master level training for principals; (iii) the implementation
   of 'Online Educational Community' activities at the school level and; (iv) the enhancement of special
   education and programs for children with disabilities, with the latter contributing to increased inclusion.

   Sub-Component 1.1. Infrastructure, Equipment and Furniture for Schools Hubs. This sub-component would
   finance the technical design, construction, acquisition of equipment and furniture and supervision of school
   hubs in the targeted circuits, including the construction of new schools called Millennium Schools, and
   renovations and expansions of existing schools. School hubs would encompass the Ministry of Education
   (MINEDUC) standards for integrated school hubs, including: infrastructure facilities to accommodate
   students throughout the full education cycle, from early education to upper secondary; physics and
   chemistry labs, language classrooms, pedagogic Information and Communications Technologies (ICT)
   equipment, school cafeterias, sports fields and facilities for school faculty and teachers. Transportation of
   students to hubs (to be financed by the government) would be based on MINEDUC’s criteria on distance,
   travel time, and safety standards. Annual Transportation Reviews would be conducted to verify compliance
   with the arrangements for school transportation for each school hub built under the Project. It was expected
   that around 45 percent of the students belonging to the targeted circuits (and about 70 percent of upper
   secondary students) would benefit from the new high-quality facilities that foster retention and graduation by
   improving children’s daily experience at school and by providing skills that are demanded by the labor
   market. The reorganization of the school supply into hubs would be expected to result in efficiency gains
   driven by the reduction of small schools and better utilization of physical and human resources, and
   contributing to improved service delivery.

   Sub-Component 1.2. Professional Development for Teachers and Principals. This sub-component would
   finance: (i) in-service teacher training in the targeted circuits to be provided by selected accredited
   institutions; (ii) enrollment of teachers in graduate degrees in selected programs (priority subjects for the

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Supporting Edu Reform in Targeted Circui (P152096)



upper secondary level would include mathematics, physics and biology), special education studies, and
bilingual and intercultural education; (iii) enrollment of principals and school management staff in graduate
programs in school management to be provided by selected accredited institutions.

Sub-Component 1.3. Academic Management System at School Level - Online Education Community. This
sub-component would finance the implementation of online education in all schools in the targeted circuits,
including the provision of computers, internet connectivity, and training of public school teachers.

Sub-Component 1.4. Services for Students with disabilities and Special Education. The sub-component
would finance: (i) the provision of technical, didactic, and disability-specific materials to educational facilities;
(ii) teacher training in areas focusing on educational needs that arise in the course of a student´s individual
development; and (iii) implementation of campaigns to raise awareness of the community to promote the
enrollment of children with disabilities.

Component II. Strengthening Planning, Management and Evaluation Capacity at MINEDUC (Total:
US$4.1 million; World Bank: US$3.5 million; Actual: US$6.7 million). The component aimed at
strengthening MINEDUC’s planning, management and evaluation capacity, including: (i) the development of
modules for the management information system: (ii) the enhancement of management capacities of the
Millennium Schools Management Unit and Work Contracting Service (SECOB); and (iii) carrying out of two
impact evaluations on program outcomes.

Sub-Component 2.1. Management and Information Systems. This sub-component would partially support
the completion and implementation of a fully integrated Education Management Information System (EMIS).
Specifically, it would finance the development and implementation of four modules: (i) institutional school
management; (ii) school supply management; (iii) project management; and (iv) business intelligence.

Sub-component 2.2. Management, Monitoring and Specific Studies / Impact Evaluation. This sub-
component would finance: (i) the technical and administrative management of the project, including the
hiring of specialists in financial management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation, social management
and other technical temporary staff needed during Project implementation; (ii) carrying out of project
external audits and Transportation Reviews; (iii) financing operating costs related to project activities; and
(iv) carrying out of two specific studies: a quasi-experimental evaluation of the impact of the in-service
training program for teachers on student learning; and the development of an analytical model to measure
the direct and indirect effects of the consolidation of schools on education outcomes (dropout, retention,
and graduation; quality/learning assessments; equity; and efficiency gains on allocation of resources) and
potential spillover effects on neighboring schools. Both studies would be led by the National Institute for
Educational Assessment (INEVAL) in coordination with MINEDUC.

Scope of targeted circuits in the context of parallel involvement of other development agencies: The
project was in line with the ongoing national reform efforts for consolidation and integration that were
financed in high poverty education circuits through several other complementary sources, including the
Inter-American Development Bank and the Andean Development Bank. The World Bank-supported project
selected 23 targeted education circuits out of a country-wide total of 1,134 education circuits, belonging to
nine school districts (ICR, p. 9). Education circuits were selected based on a combination of criteria that
would enable piloting and evaluation in different contexts (ICR, p. 23). Circuits were territorial administrative
units that underwent frequent changes, both in their boundaries and in the number of schools within




                                                                                                       Page 3 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Supporting Edu Reform in Targeted Circui (P152096)



them, while parishes constituted the next largest and established territorial disaggregation or administrative
units in the country (over 1,500 parishes country-wide).

The project planned to finance interventions in circuits with different levels of poverty with the expectation of
reducing inequalities. Of these, all except one circuit had higher levels of poverty than the national average
of 60 percent. The poverty headcount in project areas ranged from 70 to 90 percent in seven districts and
above 90 percent in four districts. The targeted circuits reflected a variety of contexts, including urban and
rural environments and different indigenous populations. The selection also considered those circuits that
faced high imbalances between demand and adequacy of supply in education services.

Revised Components

First restructuring (December 17, 2019): The rationale for changes of the first restructuring was to
respond to the Client requests to:

     i. Cancel loan funds due to significant fiscal constraints and to reduce debt levels in the context of the
          Extended Fund Facility program of the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
    ii.   Directly oversee infrastructure works, notably rehabilitation, to expedite implementation since
          SECOB was going through a restructuring process and faced capacity constraints.
   iii.   Shift more attention towards teacher development, provision of technical assistance (TA) to schools
          with underperforming students and teachers, and the use of computer-assisted learning to support
          students with acute learning gaps.
    iv.   Have access to TA for a set of schools in marginalized locations with low performance in
          standardized tests that required the application of student evaluations by INEVAL.
    v.    Adjust the focus of teacher training from targeted circuits to one that targeted teachers that
          displayed the most acute cognitive gaps based on the results of the Ser Maestro assessment, a
          standardized test applied to all teachers in service, capable to identify the cognitive gaps that
          teachers display in topics they taught.
    vi.   The use of parish, rather than circuit, would allow a more established and time-invariant definition of
          the geographic unit used for targeting and monitoring purposes.
   vii.   Revise the results framework to adjust issues identified in the definitions, methodology for
          calculation, and calibration of indicators.

The first restructuring changed the name of Component 1 from “Improving school services in targeted
circuits” to “Improving school services in targeted parishes,” in line with the revised methodology for the
targeting unit. It also adjusted the budget allocation across categories of eligible expenditures to reflect
several modifications among project components and subcomponents, as follows:

     i. Component 1, Subcomponent 1.1: The number of schools to be constructed and renovated was
        reduced from 31 to 17 schools.
    ii. Component 1, Subcomponent 1.2: MINEDUC would prioritize in-service teacher training for teachers
        from multi-level schools (generally small, rural schools in disadvantaged areas) and teachers from
        technical upper secondary education schools, both nationally as opposed to geographically within
        Parishes, and evaluate these training programs.
   iii. Component 2, Subcomponent 2.1: The EMIS to be developed would be more comprehensive and
        ambitious.
   iv. Component 2, Subcomponent 2.2: In addition to the evaluations included in the Project’s original
        design, financing would be provided for data collection and evaluations of: (i) effect of in-service

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Supporting Edu Reform in Targeted Circui (P152096)



       teacher training on teachers; (ii) effects of school hubs on student outcomes; and (iii) implementation
       of the Academic Management System at the school level. MINEDUC would also conduct
       evaluations of the following interventions: (i) use of an adaptive computer-assisted learning program
       (pilot in at least 100 schools); and (ii) technical assistance for the development of school-based
       development plans (pilot in at least 70 schools).

The first restructuring also: (i) cancelled US$40 million from the loan amount; (ii) modified the institutional
arrangements to reflect that MINEDUC would become the implementing agency for the remaining school
renovations/rehabilitations under Subcomponent 1.1, and that INEVAL would become the co-executor for
selected activities under Subcomponent 2.2; (iii) introduced a new disbursement category associated with
INEVAL expenditures; (iv) adjusted disbursement arrangements and estimates; (v) increased the project’s
overall risk rating; and (vi) amended legal covenants.

Second restructuring (March 19, 2020) did not involve component revisions and was related to
challenging macro-economic aspects. In an effort to optimize the use of financial resources and avoid
implementation delays in development projects due to the lack of liquidity, the Government of Ecuador
requested the amendment of their full portfolio of Loan Agreements to allow the financing of Value Added
Tax (VAT) with loan proceeds (Restructuring Paper, March 19, 2020, p. 4).

Third restructuring (August 31, 2020): Its rationale was to reflect the government request to:

     i. Cancel loan funds due to fiscal constraints and the need to reduce debt levels in the context of the
        IMF Article IV program.
    ii. Adjust the project to provide support to address the COVID-19 pandemic impact by including
        response activities.
   iii. Reflect an Executive Decree that transferred the functions and competencies of SECOB to
        MINEDUC.
   iv. Adjust the implementation schedule and targets to reflect implementation delays caused by the
        COVID-19 pandemic

The restructuring reduced the scope of infrastructure under Subcomponent 1.1 from 17 to 15 schools, with
the following disaggregation: (i) six new schools (of which four had been completed at the time of
restructuring); and (ii) nine school rehabilitations. It also increased the allocation (from US$0.6 to US$1.6
million) of Subcomponent 1.4 to fund the purchase of equipment, development, and broadcasting of
educational content for television and radio, and to fund two new consultancies to: (i) develop quality
standards for the delivery of special education, and (ii) redesign the offer of available technical secondary
education. US$1.0 million was reallocated to Subcomponent 2.1 to finance activities related to the COVID-
19 emergency response. To cover related expenditures, the school supply module of EMIS was to be
developed in-house (as opposed to Project-financed) and US$0.52 million was reassigned from
Subcomponent 2.2 resources originally allocated to conduct the (i) baseline for the impact evaluation of
teacher training; (ii) qualitative evaluation of training provided to technological Baccalaureate teachers; and
(iii) evaluation of online education. The restructuring also changed the name of Subcomponent 1.4 from
“Services for students with disabilities and special education” to “Strengthening government capacity to
provide more inclusive education contents”.

The third restructuring also: (i) cancelled US$12.7 million from the loan amount; (ii) modified the institutional
arrangements to reflect that the Ministry of Transportation and Civil Works would become the implementing
agency for school renovations/rehabilitations; (iii) reallocated resources across components and

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Supporting Edu Reform in Targeted Circui (P152096)



   disbursement categories; (iv) adjusted the implementation schedule and extended the closing date by one
   year to December 31, 2021; (v) updated disbursement estimates in line with the revised implementation
   schedule; and (vi) amended legal covenants to reflect agreed changes.

   Fourth restructuring (December 2, 2021): The rationale for changes was to reflect the government
   request to:

        i. Respond to some of the challenges posed by school reopening in the context of COVID-19 by
           rehabilitating schools that had been closed. Only this fourth restructuring had some implications on
           the TOC by adding a new activity (the reopening of schools).
       ii. Provide additional time to complete activities and cancel others that were not expected to be
           completed within the planned timeframe.

   The restructuring adjusted the project to finance, under Subcomponent 2.1, the rehabilitation of 36 schools
   that had been long closed with funds that were previously allocated to the following activities that were
   dropped: (i) school improvement plans, an evaluation of the school improvement plans, an evaluation of a
   graduate level training and some INEVAL assessments; (ii) two of the original infrastructure rehabilitations
   for which the bidding processes had failed; and (iii) some of the activities to develop the EMIS (institutional
   school management, supply management, project management and students’ academic performance).
   Resources originally allocated for teacher training activities (US$2.3 million) were reallocated to equipment
   and furniture for these 36 schools, and the production of episodes for radio and television was canceled and
   resources allocated to a new “First Public School in Distance Modality.”

   The fourth restructuring also: (i) reallocated resources across components and disbursement categories; (ii)
   adjusted the implementation schedule and extended the Closing Date by another year to December 31,
   2022; and (iii) updated disbursement estimates in line with the revised implementation schedule.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Cost and financing: At appraisal, the total cost of the project was estimated at US$201 million consisting
   of an IBRD loan of US$178 million and a planned Borrower contribution of US$23 million. The loan
   instrument was an Investment Project Financing. Two partial loan cancellations aggregating at US$52.7
   million were associated with the IMF debt reduction program. The actual cost of Bank financing was
   US$116 million.

   Dates: The project was approved on October 14, 2014 and became effective on February 9, 2016. The
   project underwent four restructurings, including project extensions aggregating at two years. The project
   closed on December 31, 2022.

   Restructurings: Project restructurings were discussed in section 2d in the context of
   component revisions.




3. Relevance of Objectives



                                                                                                     Page 6 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Supporting Edu Reform in Targeted Circui (P152096)



Rationale
During the decade prior to appraisal, Ecuador witnessed substantial improvements in education that were
facilitated by increased budgetary allocations. Improvements were made in both coverage and learning
outcomes. Gender parity in enrollment in early education was achieved. The government launched several
reforms aimed at addressing quality issues. These included the Reorganization Model for the Supply of
Education, also known as the “Millennium School Initiative” that was launched in 2012 aiming to absorb or
consolidate existing institutions from preschool to upper secondary into “hub” schools. These “integrated
schools” were expected to improve the quality of educational opportunities along with more efficient
allocation of physical and human resources. The government planned to reduce the number of 18,400
institutions to about 5,000 “hubs” or “integrated schools,” including the development of new “hubs,”
expansions, and renovations. The government introduced new criteria for the selection, promotion and
training of teachers and school authorities, along with a comprehensive new strategy for school principals
and authorities that aimed at strengthening managerial skills for handling the larger school hubs. The
government introduced a conditional cash transfer program to families in the poorest quintile, national radio
and television communication campaigns to emphasize the value of education, and developed the “Online
Learning Community”, a school-level portal where education management was streamlined through the
access and use of system-wide services available to all educational community members.

At the same time, significant challenges remained in terms of enrollment, equity and quality. These
challenges included very low levels of enrollment in early childhood education with only 23 percent of
children aged 3 and 4 enrolled; significant dropout rates, starting from the 8th grade of basic education
through the end of upper secondary, and which were far from the national goal of increasing the net
attendance rate for upper secondary education to 75 percent; differences in learning outcomes and school
growth trajectories in Ecuador across different socioeconomic levels; significant urban-rural gaps in upper
secondary education attendance; differences in education coverage for early education, lower secondary
and upper secondary across geographic areas and income levels; and significant differences in learning
outcomes across provinces. Both the supply side (infrastructure and teacher quality) and demand side
(family resources, lack of interest often associated with the poor quality of education, and lack of
information on returns to education) were factors contributing to the persistence of inequality in education
outcomes. Hence, the project intended to respond to the above constraints by increasing school access
with a focus on early education, and to address the quality of school services that would contribute to
reducing school dropout and promoting demand.

At entry, the country and the World Bank were in an early stage of re-engagement. The FY14-FY15 Interim
Strategy Note (ISN) provided an opportunity to re-initiate the dialogue with the country and to develop
analytical work and lending operations in limited areas of engagement, including for the improvement of
service delivery. Project objectives were in general consistency with the ISN, the subsequent FY16-FY17
Country Engagement Note, and with the systemic Country Diagnostic that highlighted the improvement of
the quality of education under the pillar of expanding economic opportunities.

At project closing, objectives were consistent with Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Ecuador for
the Period FY2019-FY2023. Specifically, objectives were responsive to CPF Results Area II (Boosting
Human Capital and Protecting the Vulnerable). The ICR (p. 16) noted that Objective 4 (Improve access to
demand-driven technical education) highlighted the project merits as contributing to the expansion of
teachers and principals training, strengthening of school management, and evaluating the impacts of
education reform that focused on five main outcomes: (i) coverage/graduation; (ii) inclusion of vulnerable
school-age children; (iii) quality of learning; (iv) equity implications; and (v) efficiency in the allocation of


                                                                                                         Page 7 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Supporting Edu Reform in Targeted Circui (P152096)



               resources. In addition, objectives were consistent with the government’s plan for the Creation of
               Opportunities (2021-2025) for promoting an inclusive education system of quality.

               The project also retained its relevance to significant changes in country circumstances, notably with arising
               macroeconomic and fiscal challenges, and the advent of the COVID-19 pandemic. The project adjusted its
               operations on two occasions that resulted in partial loan cancellations to facilitate Ecuador’s compliance
               with fiscal measures under the IMF’s Extended Fund Facility, and prioritized activities that could be
               implemented within a reduced budget allocation. The project supported the government response to the
               COVID-19 impact on education and the enablement of a safe return to schools.

               Notwithstanding the above alignment elements, the intended development change for increasing enrollment
               in early education was very marginal, and remained minimal throughout the operation’s lifetime, thus raising
               doubts about its relevance as a potential solution to the development problem.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Increase enrollment in early education in the targeted parishes

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change held that strengthening physical infrastructure through the construction of school
                             hubs, renovation and expansion of existing schools, provision of transportations to children, and preventive
                             and corrective maintenance would collectively contribute to increased school access and improved school
                             environment, plausibly contributing to increased enrollment in early education in targeted parishes.

                             Outputs and intermediate results

                             The project financed the construction and equipping of four new schools, seven school rehabilitations (9 out
                             of 11 with early childhood education), and 24 school rehabilitations for reopening school following the COVID-
                             19 pandemic.

                             The proportion of students in project-supported parishes benefitting from infrastructure improvements and
                             transportation reached 17.2 percent.

                             Two surveys on beneficiary communities’ satisfaction with government financed school transportation were
                             carried out, but the ICR did not offer information about the results.



                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Supporting Edu Reform in Targeted Circui (P152096)



Training outputs are noted under Objective 2, below.

Outcomes

The ICR reported that enrollment in early education of 4-year-old children in the targeted parishes increased
from a baseline of 7,396 children in 2017 to 8,667 children in 2023, meeting both the original target of 7,710
children and the revised target of 7,474 children (ICR, p. 32). The significance of the marginal numerical
increase in enrollment of 4-year-olds is unknown, as no information on proportions was offered by the ICR.
There is no evidence that the share of 4-year-olds enrolled in early education increased over time. The
Project Team noted in the region’s communication #1 (January 19, 2024) that proportions were never meant
to be part of the analysis in the ICR. However, a follow-up communication #2 from the region (March 11,
2024) explained that the share of 4-year-olds enrolled in early education was not calculated in the ICR as
disaggregation levels for population statistics in Ecuador do not reach the “parish” level, as they stop at one
level up, i.e., the “canton”, which is a combination of parishes.

(Note: For 3-year-olds, enrollment results were taken out of the measurement of the PDO indicator and
moved to an intermediate results indicator. The baseline for 3-year-olds was 5,265 children in 2017. The
actual achieved was 3,667 children in 2023, exceeding the original target of 2,351 and the revised target of
2,175, while also noting that there was an overall regression at project completion in 2023 from the baseline
of 5,265 children in 2017).

This ICR Review took into consideration the lack of denominators (explained above) which would have
allowed the estimation of the share of 4-year-olds enrollment in early education. Therefore, the achievement
of this objective is assessed as Substantial, but with a borderline achievement.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the persistence rate in Lower and Upper Secondary Education in targeted parishes

Rationale
The theory of change held that, in addition to infrastructure activities and maintenance contributing to
improved school environment and increased school access described under Objective 1, the provision of
equipment and science laboratories, professional development of teachers, and professional development
and managerial practices of school principals would contribute to increased relevance of secondary
education, improved teaching practices, and improved school management, all plausibly contributing to
increased persistence from lower through upper secondary education.

Outputs and intermediate results

The number of teachers who received in-service training was 23,136 teachers, exceeding the target of 2,103
teachers. The impact of in-service teacher training was not evaluated.


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Supporting Edu Reform in Targeted Circui (P152096)



For teachers displaying cognitive gaps, two in-service teacher training programs were developed
(Mathematics, language and soft skills), and 4,223 teachers received training against a target of 2,627
teachers.

The number of teachers who completed graduate-level studies in selected subjects was 463 teachers,
achieving the target.

Students benefiting from direct interventions to enhance learning increased from a baseline of zero in 2017 to
25,387 students in 2023, exceeding both the original target of 6,783 students and the revised target of 21,624
students.

The number of public schools that offered adaptive computer-assisted learning to their students was 227
schools.

All teachers in the project-targeted parishes were provided with 6,798 ICT kits. The ICR reported that these
were used regularly to communicate with students and to share materials.

The project distributed 457 kits of didactic and disability-specific materials to educational facilities and
teachers were trained on their application.

The project supported students’ access to online learning and digital resources, which has likely contributed
to the persistence rate, as more students could remain engaged with the education system during school
closings.

The ICR did not provide information on the professional development in managerial practices for school
principals, vice-principals, and inspectors.

 The ICR (p. 19) reported that several activities aimed at strengthening MINEDUC’s planning, management,
and evaluation capacity fell short of expectations. The business intelligence module for EMIS was completed
and supported the analysis of performance indicators. Activities related to the implementation of school
improvement plans and related evaluation, and the assessment of a graduate-level teacher training and
standardized assessments under INEVAL were canceled due to delays in contracting and reallocations to
support post-COVID-19 school reopening.

Outcomes

The persistence rate from lower secondary through upper secondary education increased from a baseline of
75.7 percent in 2015 to 85.2 in 2023, exceeding the original target of 78.1 percent and the revised target of
77.3 percent. The intended outcome was measured through a persistence rate measuring students enrolled
in grade 8 of lower secondary education graduating from the third grade of upper secondary education,
following a cohort approach, as a measurement of survival through lower and upper secondary education.
The objective was assessed as almost fully achieved, given the shortcomings reported above, information
gaps, and non-completion of planned surveys and evaluations which would have permitted a more
comprehensive evaluation, according to the ICR (p. 27).




                                                                                                     Page 10 of 19
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Supporting Edu Reform in Targeted Circui (P152096)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The objective to increase enrollment in Early Education was rated Substantial with a marginal achievement.
                            The objective to improve the persistence rate in Lower Secondary Education and Upper Secondary Education
                            in targeted parishes was almost fully achieved and rated Substantial. The aggregation of achievements is
                            consistent with a Substantial rating for overall efficacy.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The economic and financial analysis at appraisal (PAD, pp. 52-62) used a conventional cost-benefit analysis
   measuring the benefits of the program as the additional earnings of graduates from secondary education
   alongside the additional costs. The analysis was based on data from the Master Archive of Educational
   Institutions and graduation projections. It took into account income premiums of completing lower and upper
   secondary schooling, based on official data regarding average salaries by level of education. The analysis
   estimated that 11,600 students in lower secondary and 8,400 upper secondary students who would have
   dropped out of school in the targeted circuits would remain in school over the next 10 years. Using a discount
   rate of 5 percent, the cost-benefit analysis estimated a Net Present Value at US$268.5 million with an Internal
   Rate of Return of 11.2 percent.

   In addition, the economic analysis suggested that the “Hub” consolidation approach would result in savings and
   efficiency gains in resource utilization due to the consolidation of smaller schools that serve fewer students and
   that register low levels of internal and external efficiency. The analysis also estimated that the consolidation of
   laboratory infrastructure and equipment required only 121 laboratories instead of 179 laboratories without the
   project, for the same coverage.

   The ICR’s economic analysis (pp. 44-45) also considered that the main benefits would derive from an increase
   in the number of years of education. It assumed that the infrastructure would lead to an increase of 0.12 years of
   education. Since the income premium for an additional year of education in Ecuador was estimated at 6.5
   percent, the wage increase due to the improved infrastructure was equal to 0.78 percent. The analysis
   reasonably assumed that every child would start to work at the age of 20, continue to work, and would retire at
   the age of 65. The reference average yearly labor income was equal to US$6,816. It was adjusted to inflation
   and a discount rate of 5 percent was applied. The ex-post analysis yielded an estimated Internal Rate of Return



                                                                                                                         Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Supporting Edu Reform in Targeted Circui (P152096)



of 9.72 percent. The ICR reported that other investments were likely to have enhanced overall benefits and the
efficiency of the project, including quality improvement aspects, but their contribution was difficult to quantify.

At the same time, there were considerable negative aspects of implementation that significantly reduced overall
efficiency, and led the ICR to conclude that project implementation was not efficient (ICR, p. 20). Project
activities were hampered by the challenges described in section 2d and suffered significant delays during three
administrative changes associated with shifting priorities, complex processes in allocating annual budgets for
the project, failed migration of contracted infrastructure works from SECOB to MINEDUC, and frequent staff
changes. In addition, the Loan had two partial cancellations aggregating at US$52.7 million due to serious
constraints imposed by Ecuador’s macroeconomic stabilization program. In spite of two extensions of the
closing date that would allow the completion of activities, an amount of US$14.9 million remained undisbursed at
closing.




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       100.00
 Appraisal                                                  11.20
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       100.00
 ICR Estimate                                               9.70
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The objective to increase enrollment in Early Education was rated Substantial with a marginal achievement. The
objective to improve the persistence rate in Lower Secondary Education and Upper Secondary Education in
targeted parishes was almost fully achieved and rated Substantial. The aggregation of achievements is
consistent with a Substantial rating for overall efficacy




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                      Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Supporting Edu Reform in Targeted Circui (P152096)



7. Risk to Development Outcome

The main risk that development outcomes may not be maintained relates to macroeconomic prospects,
given that Ecuador remains highly dependent on oil revenues, and fluctuations in oil prices may continue to
impact fiscal sustainability. Ecuador also continues to face challenges in improving the capacity of the public
education system at subnational levels and in addressing regional disparities.

However, the project directions remain in congruence with the government development plan for creating
opportunities (2021-2025) that prioritizes the objective to “develop the capacity of citizens and promote
innovative, inclusive, and quality education at all levels”. It is unlikely that an eventual change in
administration would not prioritize such an objective. The risk related to the lack of maintenance of the
schools is mitigated by the implementation of a maintenance plan that MINEDUC has in place. Also, the risk
arising from the impact of potential natural disasters on infrastructure is at least partly mitigated by anti-
seismic measures that were included in the construction guidelines. Importantly, the World Bank and the
government are collaborating in preparing a follow-on operation (ICR, p. 30) that would facilitate the
continuity of activities and sustaining some of the achieved outcomes, such as in the improved persistence
rate in secondary education in targeted parishes.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project preparation proceeded under difficult circumstances, as the World Bank was reengaging in
  development lending to Ecuador after a long hiatus, and government counterparts had limited familiarity
  or experience in working with the Bank in development operations. The ICR (p. 29) reported that, in
  retrospect, the overall risks were underestimated, including political risks, macroeconomic risks, and
  institutional capacity risks, also encompassing fiduciary and safeguard risks. While it would have been
  difficult to mitigate these risks entirely, such risks should have suggested caution in designing the project
  that was characterized by the ICR as ‘over-dimensioned’. In the context of the recent reengagement at
  the time of preparation, there was limited knowledge of the country’s institutional environment (e.g.,
  circuits and parishes) and responsibilities and capacities (e.g., INEVAL), and which subsequently
  necessitated revisions in implementation arrangements.

  With no previous local lessons or insights that could facilitate the preparation process, the project built on
  the existing government strategy for education reform and consolidation that constituted a flagship policy
  owned by the government. The preparation team held extensive consultations with community leaders,
  students, and parents in targeted areas, including indigenous communities, to inform preparation and to
  help mitigate potential opposition of families to school consolidation.

  The design considered recent track record of domestic interventions, under which a total of 53 “hub”
  schools have already been built and functioning. The teacher development framework was in place, and
  some teachers had received in-service training. INEVAL Institute had successfully carried out
  standardized assessments of student learning outcomes and teacher quality. Parallelly, preparation was

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Supporting Edu Reform in Targeted Circui (P152096)



  informed by international experience and best practices for improving learning outcomes, including for
  improving infrastructure aspects, textbooks, pedagogical material, pre-service and in-service teacher
  training that would contribute to better teaching and better teaching career paths.

  MINEDUC would be responsible for project implementation, and the Millennium Schools Management
  Unit would be responsible for fiduciary management, except for construction under Subcomponent 1.1,
  whose execution and fiduciary management would be delegated to SECOB under a subsidiary
  agreement establishing its responsibilities for civil works and their supervision. The Millennium Schools
  Management Unit would be supported by designated staff for financial management, procurement, and
  M&E. It would coordinate activities with the technical units in each of MINEDUC’s administrative zones
  covered by the project and which would have supervision responsibilities in their respective zones (ICR,
  p. 23). The coordinator for M&E was assigned to be the interlocutor with the World Bank.

  Preparation included adequate arrangements for safeguard policies (see section 10a), including the
  preparation of an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and an Indigenous
  Peoples Planning Framework. There were M&E design shortcomings (see section 9a).




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank supervision and implementation support team navigated through a challenging environment to
 fulfill their role. A major economic crisis precipitated by the fall in oil prices and the global COVID-19
 pandemic impacted both project implementation and beneficiaries. The macroeconomic situation resulted
 in strict expenditure control measures during the early phase of the project. There were two major changes
 in administration associated with Presidential and Parliamentary elections in 2017 and 2021, with
 consequent impacts on implementation priorities and approaches, institutional changes, and turnover in
 ministerial and project staffing. Senior-level staff and counterpart rotation affected investment decisions,
 and implementation. Circuits were territorial administrative units (circuits), whose boundaries were modified
 year after year at the discretion of the Minister of Education, challenging the project in dealing with stable
 baselines, targets, and indicators.

 The Bank Team was proactive in identifying and resolving threats to the achievement of development
 outcomes and the Bank’s fiduciary role through intensive implementation support and by facilitating four
 successive project restructurings that were needed to right-size and adjust the project to the country’s
 evolving realities, while seeking to maintain coherence in project activities and the pursuit of intended
 outcomes. The Team facilitated partial funding cancellations that were responsive to the government needs
 in meeting IMF’s provisions for debt reduction. Monitoring of fiduciary aspects and compliance with
 safeguards was satisfactory. Three Task Team Leaders were involved in leading supervision and
 implementation support during the implementation period. The Team undertook 13 formal supervision
 missions followed by quality reporting. The Team was also responsive to emerging country needs at the



                                                                                                   Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Supporting Edu Reform in Targeted Circui (P152096)



 advent of the COVID-19 pandemic and facilitated the design and financing that supported the related
 response to the pandemic's impact.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Objectives were clearly stated and reflected by outcome indicators, with a concise results framework that
 had 11 intermediate results measuring outputs along the results chain. Indicators had baselines and
 targets, and clear guidance on measurement methodology, data sources, frequency, and responsibility for
 collection (ICR, p. 26). Nevertheless, there were several issues with the definition of indicators, their
 respective baselines, availability of enrollment percentages, and ability to monitor indicators. The results
 chain and framework could have been more developed to provide additional evidence. At a minimum, the
 number of new ECE classrooms and the new capacity created with enrollment numbers could have been
 provided. Appraisal noted special attention for disability and indigenous groups, and disaggregated data
 would have shown the extent to which interventions were benefitting these groups. There was insufficient
 information on transportation barriers.

 The Millennium Schools Management Unit was responsible for collecting and compiling data on all
 indicators and for sharing Biannual Progress Reports with World Bank. The unit was also expected to
 continue working closely with the National Coordination of Planning Body through the National Directorate
 of Analysis of Education Information that would provide administrative data.



b. M&E Implementation
  Throughout implementation, the project submitted regular semi-annual reports to monitor and assess
  progress (ICR, p. 27). However, the ICR reported that, during early implementation, it became clear that it
  was difficult to monitor progress for many indicators in the results framework. The first project
  restructuring introduced important changes in the results framework to address issues in the definition,
  methodology for calculation, and data provided to calibrate most indicators. There were several
  subsequent adjustments to the results framework, including introduction and elimination of indicators,
  adjustment of baselines and targets, and changing measurement metrics that made monitoring
  challenging.

  Difficulties were notably encountered after the change from targeted circuits to parishes (affecting the
  calculation of indicators, baselines and targets), the COVID-19 pandemic, and partial loan cancellations.

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Supporting Edu Reform in Targeted Circui (P152096)



  Reference to the percentage of girls in indicators were dropped, as Ecuador had already achieved
  gender parity in enrollment rates.

  The ICR reported that many planned studies were not completed, including the quasi-experimental
  evaluation of the impact of the in-service training program for teachers on student learning, and the
  development of an analytical model to measure the direct and indirect effects of consolidation of schools
  on education outcomes and spillover effects on neighboring schools.



c. M&E Utilization
  Monitoring data and findings were used for regular project monitoring. The ICR noted that M&E findings
  were used for recalibrating the scale and scope of the project through its successive restructurings, and
  in guiding project adaptation to fiscal constraints. M&E data were also used for prioritizing school
  selection for rehabilitation in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.

  Since the ICR lacked additional evidence, the validation of the enrollment objective has been
  challenging to assess the magnitude of new ECE enrollment. In addition to the shortcomings noted in a
  and b, and as noted in section 4, the ICR (p. 27) reported that the surveys and evaluations, which were
  not carried out, would have permitted a more comprehensive evaluation. Overall M&E quality is rated as
  Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified under Environmental Category B and it triggered the following safeguard policies:

        i. Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) in view of civil works related to the construction of new
           schools and renovation of existing ones.
       ii. Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) in view of the presence of indigenous communities among project
           beneficiaries in both rural and urban areas, raising risks related to social and cultural impacts,
           including concerns about sending children to schools outside of their communities and the
           availability of safe and reliable transport.
      iii. Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) since civil works at some schools may require minor
           excavations in Andean areas of the Bolivar Province where chance finds could occur.
      iv. Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) since land acquisition could potentially be necessary for the
           development of some hub schools.

   SECOB was responsible for environmental safeguards, and MINEDUC was responsible for compliance with
   social safeguards. According to the ICR (p. 28), the government prepared an Environmental and Social
   Management Framework (ESMF) and an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) documenting
   project risks, impacts, opportunities, and procedures to be followed for social assessment, consultation, and

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 19
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Supporting Edu Reform in Targeted Circui (P152096)



   development of social management plans. A Resettlement Policy Framework was also prepared in the
   event that land acquisition became necessary. The ESMF provided procedures to be followed for
   environmental impact assessment once the exact location of schools was identified, including institutional
   arrangements for supervision. Although land acquisition was expected to be minimal, a Resettlement Policy
   Framework was prepared in the event that land acquisition became necessary. All safeguard arrangements
   were disclosed. MINEDUC established, operationalized, and disseminated the Project’s Grievance Redress
   Mechanism, with three publicly accessible channels for filing complaints and suggestions: online; by phone;
   and by email. No complaints were filed.

   Throughout implementation, compliance was adequate and no issues were reported. Safeguard ratings
   were satisfactory (ICR, p. 28), as also recorded in the Operations Portal.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management performance was rated moderately satisfactory during implementation. Moderate
   shortcomings in financial management were identified, largely in timeliness, but they did not prevent the
   provision of reliable information required to manage and monitor project implementation, including
   contracting of auditors and delivery of audit reports. No audit qualifications were reported by the ICR. The
   assignment of INEVAL as co-executor of management and monitoring activities generated complexities,
   including budget allocation processes and difficulties in consolidating financial information in a timely
   manner. These were addressed by the introduction of mitigation measures that specified responsibilities,
   updated the operations manual, and assigned a team for close monitoring.

   Procurement performance during project implementation was mostly rated satisfactory. Given that
   MINEDUC had no recent experience in procurement under World Bank-financed projects, the World Bank
   provided consistent hands-on training on procurement procedures. There were delays in launching
   procurement processes for civil works contracting, and the project introduced mitigating measures by hiring
   staff with knowledge of World Bank procurement guidelines, staff training, and conducting procurement
   supervision missions.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   --



11. Ratings



                                                                                                   Page 17 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Supporting Edu Reform in Targeted Circui (P152096)



                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                      IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 30-31) offered several lessons and recommendations, and the following lessons were
re-stated by this ICR Review:

Working closely with project implementing agencies to ensure understanding of the World
Bank’s policies and procedures facilitates the World Bank re-engagement with the country in
development lending. The project was one of the first operations approved when the World Bank
began reengaging with Ecuador after a lending hiatus. Although the preparation team considered
lessons from similar projects in other countries, it had limited country experience, and the Client also
had limited familiarity with World Bank policies and procedures. Hence, the project required
adjustments and close implementation support to pursue its objectives.

A thorough identification and anticipation of macroeconomic and political risks at the
preparation stage can help in ensuring a simple project design. Ecuador’s economy is highly
dependent on oil revenues. At the time the loan was approved, oil prices started plummeting, going
from US$106 per barrel in July 2014 to US$30 per barrel in January 2016, and the GDP stagnated.
This led to partial loan cancellations to assist the country’s stabilization efforts. Also, the project was
prepared at a time when Ecuador had witnessed relative continuity in policy priorities and staffing
under the previous administration that lasted 10 years. Elections were scheduled for 2017, and
changes were likely. While little could be done to mitigate these risks that are beyond the control of
the project, they should have suggested greater caution and simplicity in the initial project design.

Market research that identifies the best approach for managing civil works and the use of
unit prices instead of lump sums can facilitate the implementation of projects with a large
number of contracts related to infrastructure rehabilitation. In the specific context of this
operation, helping the implementing agency to manage infrastructure rehabilitation instead of hiring
a third party was found to be an effective option. ‘Hands-On Expanded Implementation Support’
was provided to the implementing agency to speed up the launch and award of procurement
processes. The project significantly improved civil works execution once MINEDUC became the only
executing agency for infrastructure development.



13. Assessment Recommended?



                                                                                                        Page 18 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Supporting Edu Reform in Targeted Circui (P152096)



  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well organized and results-oriented. It was candid and internally consistent. The results chain was
not sufficiently developed. The quality of available evidence and ICR analysis was mixed. The ICR linked its
narrative to the evidence. The ICR derived lessons anchored in project experience. The ICR’s reporting on
successive restructurings was thorough, but the application of a split rating was moot, as the ratings for
applicable revisions were similar, and the split included two phases during which there were zero disbursement
weights, hence, they caried no consequence. The ICR had lapses in clarity, incomplete information on core
project outputs and shifting target population, and the ICR was moderately lengthy. The overall quality of the
ICR is rated substantial at a marginal level.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 19 of 19
