     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shaanxi Poor Rural Areas Community Dev (P153541)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023905

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P153541                                  Shaanxi Poor Rural Areas Community Dev

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                    Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-86840                               31-Dec-2022                                         99,506,993.44

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 09-Feb-2017                              30-Jun-2023

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                        100,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           99,506,993.44                                              0.00

 Actual                                       99,506,993.44                                              0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally              Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of Shaanxi Poor Rural Areas Community Development Project as
   articulated in the Loan Agreement (LA, page 5) was identical to the one stated in the Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD, paragraph 14) and aimed to:

   "Increase incomes of targeted beneficiaries in selected poor counties of Shaanxi."



                                                                                                Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shaanxi Poor Rural Areas Community Dev (P153541)



   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on one objective:

   To increase incomes of targeted beneficiaries in selected poor counties of Shaanxi.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  06-Aug-2021

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following four components:

   1. Farmer Cooperative and Value Chain Development (appraisal cost: US$93.41 million, actual cost:
   US$94.85 million). This component supported the improvement of value chains for selected agricultural
   products with local competitive advantage, establishing new farmer cooperatives or strengthening existing
   ones to become effective business entities, and strengthening forward and backward linkages. It
   included two sub-components:

   1.1. Cooperative Development. This sub-component provided conditional grants to support business
   operations of eligible new or existing farmer cooperatives by enabling them to acquire new production
   systems, improved seedlings and breeding stock, facilities for processing agricultural products, storage and
   marketing facilities, and technical and advisory services for market analysis and development. The funds
   would also facilitate upgrading quality standards, improving labeling, acquiring certification, undertaking
   branding, improving logistics, investing in food safety, and carrying out other investments at the cooperative
   level. In addition, the project supported improving management facilities and basic office equipment and
   facilitate training in cooperative management and business operations, financial management, technical
   knowhow, and other training related to the establishment or improvement of farmer cooperatives.

   2.2. Competitive Grants for Enterprises. This sub-component provided matching grants to finance eligible
   investments by enterprises that establish partnerships with beneficiary cooperatives with clear market
   linkages and benefit sharing arrangements with poor farming households. Grants were to focus on the
   investments that ensure markets for agricultural products and increase their value, extending activities
   either upstream or downstream in the value chain and creating income-generating opportunities for poor
   farmers.

   2. Economic Infrastructure and Services Support (appraisal cost: US$35.84 million, actual cost:
   US$35.14 million). This component focused on improving economic infrastructure, including (a) improving
   intra-village and inter-village road connectivity, as well as road linkages between villages and central small
   towns and (b) upgrading production infrastructure, including construction and rehabilitation of irrigation and

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Shaanxi Poor Rural Areas Community Dev (P153541)



  drainage infrastructure; establishment of communications and information infrastructure; and provision of
  cold storage and other post-harvest handling facilities and market facilities, among others.

  3. Technical Assistance and Capacity Building Support (appraisal cost: US$4.17 million, actual cost:
  US$4.96 million). This component supported both technical and institutional capacity building for
  participating farmers, village committee members, community economic groups, farmer cooperatives and
  advisers, agricultural technicians, and agro-enterprises and companies, among others. This was to be
  achieved through training, extension services, study tours, skills development programs, consultations and
  project awareness raising campaigns, and dissemination of project lessons. The component included
  recruitment of cooperative facilitators and support for the Technical Advisory Groups to review and improve
  Cooperative Investment Plans. Applied research and analysis were also to be carried out under this
  component.

  4. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) (appraisal cost: US$4.39 million, actual
  cost: US$3.35 million). This component supported strengthening and developing the administrative and
  technical capacity of the Project Management Office (PMO) staff through: (a) capacity building for the
  provincial, municipal, and county PMOs to strengthen project management and (b) development of a
  management information system (MIS) and an M&E system for project activities, which included monitoring
  physical project progress, compliance with environmental and social safeguards, and project impact
  monitoring.

  Revised Components. While the component structure and activities remained unchanged, adjustments
  were made to the appraisal cost estimates at MTR. Also, sub-component 1.2 was renamed to ‘Value Chains
  Extension Grants for Enterprises’ after the April 2021 restructuring to make the grants’ purpose clearer.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost was estimated at US$150.04 million. This amount was revised at the
  Mid-Term Review (MTR) to US$139.12 million. The actual cost according to the ICR (Data Sheet, page 2)
  was US$140.30 million.

  Financing. The project was financed by an IBRD loan, extended as an Investment Project Financing (IPF),
  in the amount of US$100.00 million. This amount was revised at the Mid-Term Review (MTR) to US$99.51
  million. The revised amount was fully disbursed (ICR Data Sheet, page 2).

  Borrower Contribution. The Government was expected to provide US$50.04 million of counterpart
  financing. This amount was revised at the Mid-Term Review (MTR) to US$39.61 million. The actual amount
  contributed was US$40.79 million. In a further communication, the project team explained that the
  Government counterpart financing was reduced as a result of the slow traction of the 'Competitive Grants
  for Enterprises' sub-component which triggered a recalibration of the likely number of enterprises that would
  participate during MTR, hence a corresponding reduction in the anticipated level of matching grant support
  from the project.

  Dates. The project was approved on February 9, 2017 and became effective six months later on August 17,
  2017. The MTR was conducted on April 18, 2021 which was about ten months later than the date stated in
  the PAD on June 30, 2020. The project closed on June 30, 2023 which was six months later than the
  original closing date of December 31, 2022. According to the ICR (paragraph 21) this extension was

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shaanxi Poor Rural Areas Community Dev (P153541)



   needed to "to facilitate completion of project activities whose implementation had been disrupted by the
   COVID-19 pandemic."

   The project had two level 2 restructurings as follows:

   1. On August 6, 2021, when the amount disbursed was US$52.77 million, in order to revise the Results
   Framework and change components and costs. One PDO indicator target was revised where the target for
   the ‘share of project cooperatives making profits’ was reduced from 60% to 40%. Also, four intermediate
   targets were modified where three targets were decreased and one was increased. Despite these revisions,
   the project met or exceeded the original and revised targets. A split evaluation will not be applied because
   the PDO was not revised and the changes to the indicator targets did not impact the ambition or the Theory
   of Change.

   2. On December 14, 2022, when the amount disbursed was US$86.76 million, in order to extend the loan
   closing date by six months from December 31, 2022 to June 30, 2023, adjust the dates for project targets in
   the Results Framework to the new closing date, and update the implementation schedule in view of the
   extended timeline.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. At the time of project appraisal in 2016, Shaanxi province had a rural poor
population of about 4.6 million mostly engaged in agriculture. It was one of the provinces with significantly
high levels of extreme poverty. The province included numerous unorganized household farms that were
characterized by low productivity and primary products of sub-standard quality. This hindered their
participation in modern value chains, which were increasingly demanding in terms of quality and food
safety. While Shaanxi had 36,500 registered cooperatives with 1,950,000 members, most were poorly
managed, and only about 15% of them were functioning well and effectively serving their members. This
project aimed at enabling smallholder farmers to participate in modern value chains and improve their
access to markets through investment in the development of pro-poor farmer cooperatives and by entering
into strategic partnerships with agro-enterprises. The project would also help improve economic
infrastructure such as intra- and inter-village roads, irrigation and drainage infrastructure, cold storage, and
other post-harvest handling facilities.

Previous Bank Experience. This project was the fifth in a series of World Bank-supported poverty
reduction projects in China (Southwest Poverty Reduction Project (P003639), Shanxi Poverty Alleviation
Project (P003649), Qinba Mountains Poverty Reduction Project (P003590), and Gansu Inner Mongolia
Poverty Reduction Project (P046564)), which focused on poverty reduction through an agriculture
industrialization approach. This project built on lessons from the previous five projects, which put the Bank
in a strong position to address emerging development challenges.

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the World Bank Group's
Country Partnership Strategy for China (CPS, FY2013-FY2016). The CPS focused on two strategic themes:
support greener growth and promote more inclusive development. The project supported the CPS theme
two: promoting more inclusive development by focusing on lagging regions and small towns and by

                                                                                                       Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Shaanxi Poor Rural Areas Community Dev (P153541)



               supporting policies and demonstration projects that address inequalities. It contributed to two outcomes:
               enhancing opportunities in rural areas and small towns, and improving transport connectivity for more
               balanced regional development. The PDO was also aligned with the World Bank Group's twin goals of
               ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity. At completion, the PDO continued to be in
               line World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Framework for China (CPF, FY2020–FY2025), specifically
               Objective 2.3 (Demonstrating sustainable agriculture practices and improving food system quality and
               safety). The project-supported activities that strengthened the institutions needed to transform the
               agriculture and food production systems such as developing farmer cooperatives, fostering partnerships
               between some of the farmer cooperatives and agribusinesses. The project also supported expanding
               support to strengthen agriculture product quality and food safety systems.

               Consistency with Government Strategies and Priorities. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with China’s
               13th Five Year Plan and the poverty alleviation goals proposed during the fifth plenary session of the 18th
               Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC). The project assisted the Government of
               China in its efforts to end extreme poverty for vulnerable groups, address rural-urban disparity and boost
               shared prosperity in the selected project areas. At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with China’s
               current 14th FYP (2021–2025), especially its theme on the value chain development approach to greening
               the agricultural modernization and rural revitalization to increase rural incomes.

               Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. The PDO statement was clear, focused and pitched
               at an adequate level of ambition relative to the Bank's experience in China. The PDO continued to be in line
               with the Bank Strategies and the Government priorities at completion. Therefore, Relevance of Objectives
               is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase incomes of targeted beneficiaries in selected poor counties of Shaanxi.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported the following activities: (a) to
                             address the low participation of the poor farmers in cooperatives: the project facilitated poor
                             farmers cooperative membership; to address weak cooperatives, the project provided cooperative
                             management and training and supplied cooperatives with equipment, seeds and new varieties; (b) to address
                             poor linkages between cooperatives and agro-enterprises: the project supported incentivizing agro-
                             enterprises linkages with cooperatives; to address inadequate supportive infrastructure, the project supported
                             infrastructure investments including roads, cold storage facilities, and irrigation and drainage infrastructure.
                             The outputs of the supported activities were: an increase in the number of the poor participating in

                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Shaanxi Poor Rural Areas Community Dev (P153541)



cooperatives, an increase in the number of cooperative staff trained and number of assets acquired, an
increase in the number of participating agro-enterprises, number of facilities constructed, length of roads in
km constructed/rehabilitated. The expected intermediate outcomes were: an increase in the number of poor
farmers receiving revenue from cooperatives (sale, dividends, wages, and rent); meeting market standards
and enhanced cooperatives profitability; increased agro-enterprise transactions with cooperatives; and a
reduction in post-harvest losses and increased value added. This would all contribute to increasing the
incomes of targeted beneficiaries in selected poor counties of Shaanxi (PDO). The anticipated long-term
impact was improved well-being of the poor.

The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following four critical assumptions: (a)
successful integration of the poor into cooperatives that are prone to elite capture; (b) transformation of
cooperatives into profitable entities; (c) adoption of the project-promoted improved technologies and practices
by smallholder farmers, including the poor and vulnerable ones; and (d) product quality enhancement and
improved market linkages.

Overall, the ToC reflected relevant activities that were directly connected to the outputs, intermediate
outcomes and to the PDO in a plausible causal chain. Also, the stated critical assumptions were logical and
realistic.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      83 cooperatives were supported by the project (71 farmer cooperatives and 12 enterprises) exceeding
         both the original target of 80 and the revised target of 70
        12 enterprises received competitive grants which met the revised target of 12 but was below the
         original target of 20. In a further communication, the project team explained that this activity faced
         implementation delays that stemmed from the reluctance of Government officials to extend public
         financing to private enterprises, and enterprises were also reluctant to establish businesses in poor
         communities. The team also explained that with direct cooperative support and linkage with
         enterprises the decrease in the number of participating enterprises did not adversely impact the PDO.
        63.59% of poor households were participating in the farmer cooperatives slightly exceeding the
         revised target of 60% and substantially achieving the original target of 70%.
        68 agro-products certificates and brand names were obtained under the project significantly
         exceeding the target of 25. The project team explained that "the certified and branded agro-products
         are highly welcomed by the high end consumers, as they are green or organic products, trustworthy,
         safety ensured, thus they can easily find markets and enjoy high marketing prices."
        Cooperative management effectiveness reached 52.41 (METT) exceeding the target of 50, baseline
         was 29.33.
        2,156 person months of advisory or facilitation services were provided to cooperatives under the
         project (cumulative) exceeding the target of 1,800.
        10 analytical studies were completed and disseminated exceeding the target of 5.
        21,233 cooperative management staff were trained exceeding the original target of 3,800 and the
         revised target of 7,700.
        16,749 training (person-days) in project management were completed by PMO staff at all levels
         (cumulative) exceeding the target of 7,000.
        97.6% of direct project beneficiaries were satisfied with access to economic infrastructure and
         services provision exceeding the target of 80%.


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Shaanxi Poor Rural Areas Community Dev (P153541)




    Improving connectivity was achieved through the construction of 467 km of roads and 68 bridges (no
     targets provided).
    Upgrading production infrastructure was achieved through land leveling of 225 ha; establishing river
     embankments on 4,394 m3; providing 63 pumps; digging 78 km of ditches; and construction of 381
     water pools (no targets provided).
    Upgrading farming facilities was achieved through supporting drip irrigation facilities on 300 ha
     farmland; constructing 1,333 greenhouses; providing anti-hail nets for 430 ha farmland (hails are
     frequently natural disaster occurrences with around 20-30% probability and are unpredictable-source:
     project team); and holders in 400 ha orchard (no targets provided). In a further communication, the
     project team explained that "holders are supporters/pillars for apple, grape, Kiwi orchards with the
     function to support structures (brackets) which are needed to maintain a good growth and fruiting state
     of the tree and maintain a certain tree shape. Reasonably distribute branches and leaves in space,
     create good ventilation conditions for the orchard, provide sufficient sunlight for the tree body, and
     facilitate agricultural operations in the orchards."

Outcomes

    Increasing incomes of targeted beneficiaries in selected poor counties of Shaanxi referred to
     increasing the income of those members of participating cooperatives who were assessed in the 2015
     poverty assessment as being below the prevailing national poverty line which, at the time, was CNY
     2,300 (ICR, paragraph 24). It is worth noting that concerted efforts by the Government to eradicate
     extreme poverty by 2020 through concurrent multiple programs resulted in changing the poverty
     landscape during project implementation. The project targeted 40,000 poor beneficiaries who
     were characterized as poor in 2015. By 2017, some of those beneficiaries were already above the
     poverty line, but needed to be sustained lest they fall back. By project completion, 45,512 individuals
     were placed or firmly sustained their position (if they had already surpassed the prevailing poverty line
     by the time of the baseline survey) above the poverty threshold (PDO indicator 2). This number
     represented about 21% of the population of the target communities.
    A survey was carried out among project participants and non-project participants to asses whether
     increases in income were attributable to the project. A sample of 2,337 households was used, of
     which 1,651 were members of farmer cooperatives supported by this project and 686 were not
     (sampling methods included control for sample bias). Through a difference-in-difference approach, the
     increase in income for farmer cooperative members was 100.4% higher than the increase in income
     for non-members, clearly demonstrating that the increase in income among farmer cooperative
     members was due to the project’s interventions (ICR, paragraph 25). Also, another assessment
     compared farmer cooperatives supported by this project versus farmer cooperatives supported by
     other government programs. The increase in income for farmers who were members of cooperatives
     supported by this project was 23.5% higher than that of farmers who were members of cooperatives
     supported by other government programs, which confirmed attribution of the observed income
     changes to the project’s interventions.
    The project-supported capacity building and market linkage efforts increased the share of project
     farmer cooperatives making profit reached 67.6% exceeding the revised end target of 40% and still
     higher than the original target of 60% (PDO indicator 3). In a further communication, the project team
     pointed out that "cold storage of fruits reduced spoilage by 5%, and optimal market entry timing
     through storage led up to 80% in price increment. Similarly, quality enhancement through cleaning
     improved product branding thus enhancing market entry."


                                                                                                Page 7 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Shaanxi Poor Rural Areas Community Dev (P153541)



                            Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project reached 277,652 beneficiaries, compared to the end target
                            of 160,000 (PDO indicator 1). The project achieved a remarkable increase in the income of cooperative
                            members through supporting innovations in primary production, processing, and marketing. The project
                            introduced new crop varieties, supported superior production methods, availed modern equipment, and
                            introduced fertigation through drip irrigation to reduce overall water and fertilizer use. In addition, the project
                            supported organic production technologies such as organic honey, some of which was being exported to the
                            European Union market, as well as organic pepper. This enhanced the competitiveness of the project-
                            supported cooperatives through tapping in the growing organic niche markets, nationally and abroad. The
                            project also improved roads which facilitated access to input and output markets, and improved the
                            agricultural irrigation and drainage capacity, which helped avert natural disasters such as flash floods and
                            damage to farmers’ crops, animals, and facilities. Also, higher growth in income among project beneficiaries
                            was further facilitated by the success in strengthening the management capacity of the participating farmer
                            cooperatives, which were further supported through developing relevant post-harvest infrastructure. This
                            included storage facilities and cleaning and processing equipment, which enabled conserving perishable
                            produce and maintaining post-harvest quality. Finally, the project exceeded its PDO outcome targets for the
                            three PDO outcome indicators as noted above. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved
                            is rated High.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated High. The project fully achieved its objective of increasing the income of the targeted
                            beneficiaries. All targets for the three PDO outcome indicators were exceeded. The project supported a
                            multifaceted approach through a strong focus on human capital development (by providing training and
                            capacity building and subsequent technical assistance provided to strengthen cooperatives on financial
                            management, community procurement, business plan preparation, and management of subprojects); funding
                            cooperative productive assets (for example, cold storage, markets, processing equipment); and supporting
                            public investments that included rural and production/farm roads, and irrigation and drainage improvements.
                            These supported activities, as confirmed by two satisfaction surveys, significantly increased incomes of
                            targeted beneficiaries in selected poor counties of Shaanxi.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



          5. Efficiency


                                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 18
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Shaanxi Poor Rural Areas Community Dev (P153541)



Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

ex ante

     The overall economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the whole project was estimated at 13.78% and
      the opportunity cost of capital (OCC) was
      set at 6%. The overall EIRR was estimated on a community basis, taking into account the total project
      costs including those for infrastructure, institutional development and project management. Spill-over
      effects from production roads, tractor roads and field tracks will benefit other non-project farmers and
      users, and institutional capacity building will have a wider impact beyond the project, which implied that
      the estimated EIRR was conservative and overall project benefits were likely to be significantly higher
      than estimated.
     Using financial returns of cropping and household activity models, the financial internal rates of returns
      (FIRR) ranged from 19% to 46% for the key project activities (livestock, crop/tree crop production and
      post-harvest handling). The crop and household activity models indicated good financial returns and
      provided attractive income opportunities for the poor farmers and cooperatives in the project areas.
     Sensitivity Analysis. A sensitivity test was done for the financial analysis, showing the FIRRs were less
      sensitive to the increases of project investment costs than to deceases of agricultural produce prices.
      Most operations would still be financially attractive to farmers (FIRR at 10%) = with a cost increase of
      25% or 20% reduction of product prices.

ex post

     The overall economic rate of return (ERR) at completion was estimated at 21% over a 20 years of project
        life and a discount rate at 6%. The estimation of project-level ERR was based on (a) net benefits from
        the operations of the 73 farmer cooperatives, plus additional 25% of their revenue, and (b) apportioned
        costs for the 19 farmer cooperatives from total project costs.
       However, the ERR at completion could not be compared with the ERR at appraisal because its
        estimation used two different methodologies. At completion, the economic analysis was based on the
        financial analysis while considering the benefits beyond farmer cooperatives’ revenues. At appraisal,
        specific cooperative-level investment proposals were not available. Therefore, the financial net returns of
        a range of typical farming activities for the proposed value chains were used to estimate the FIRR on a
        household or per hectare basis, following a traditional production-focused approach. While at completion,
        the FIRR estimation was conducted based on the actual operations of the farmer cooperatives, which
        adopted a value chain approach, rather than the farm/crop models of specific commodities used at the
        appraisal stage.
       The results of the FIRR analysis of the 20 selected farmer cooperatives showed that the FIRR ranged
        between 9% and 24%.
       Sensitivity test. The sensitivity test conducted showed that the baseline project ERR of 21% would drop
        to 8% if costs are increased or benefits were reduced by 20%, respectively.
       Implementation efficiency. The project closed on June 30, 2023 which was six months later than the
        original closing date on December 31, 2022. According to the ICR (paragraph 35) this extension "gave
        more time to fully implement all planned investments and consolidate the gains from the institutional
        learning and demonstrations." The Competitive Grants for Enterprises sub-component experienced a
        delayed start. The World Bank loan of US$100.00 million was 99.5% disbursed at project completion.




                                                                                                      Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Shaanxi Poor Rural Areas Community Dev (P153541)



       Overall, and based on the information reported in the ICR (paragraph 35), this Review concludes that
       the project was efficiently implemented.

Summary of Efficiency Analysis. The economic rate of return (ERR) at completion was estimated at 21% well
above the discount rate at 6%. While the ERR at completion was also significantly above the EIRR at appraisal
(21% compared to 13.8%), both rates were not comparable due to different estimation methodologies. Finally,
the project was efficiently implemented and almost fully disbursed the Bank loan. Therefore, efficiency is rated
Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                13.80
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                             21.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy was rated High. The project fully achieved its objective
of increasing the income of the targeted beneficiaries, and all targets for the three PDO outcome indicators were
exceeded. Efficiency was rated Substantial as the economic rate of return (ERR) at completion was
estimated at 21% well above the discount rate at 6%.

Based on the assigned ratings for the three outcome criteria, Outcome is rated Highly Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following risks could potentially impact the Development Outcome:

1. Institutional risk. This relates to the possibility of backsliding in cooperative governance. The project
supported capacity building activities to strengthen governance, including financial management, business

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Shaanxi Poor Rural Areas Community Dev (P153541)



planning, and marketing, among others. Member participation mechanisms were strengthened, and
extensive member sensitization was carried out to avoid elite capture and maintain good performance and
profitability. To further mitigate against the risk of backsliding, it was agreed with the provincial government
authorities that the Rural Revitalization Bureau would continue to provide strong oversight over these farmer
cooperatives (such as technical and financial audits), including continuation of capacity-building programs
(refresher courses, study tours, and so on).

2. Financial risk. This relates to inadequate maintenance of assets created under the project. Assets
created under the project were handed over to the respective entities, such as the beneficiary farmer
cooperatives, participating agro-enterprises, and relevant government departments (for example, roads) for
operation and maintenance. To ensure their adequate operation and maintenance, especially those handed
over to farmer cooperatives, asset management plans were developed, which will be an integral part of their
annual and multiyear business plans. There is much less risk regarding assets created under agro-
enterprises that benefited from the project’s matching grant funding. Similarly, public infrastructure, mostly
small rural roads, are likely to be maintained through regular government budget appropriations. County
governments will integrate this infrastructure in their operation and maintenance plans. It should be noted
that these roads had a simple design falling within their technical capacities and were a small addition to their
overall stock of roads, thus not imposing an undue fiscal burden.

3. Technical risk. This relates to potential adverse developments in some value chains supported by the
project. The demand for food remains high in China, and this project focused on helping farmers adapt to the
evolving urban consumer tastes and consumption patterns in tandem with the growing urban affluence,
especially toward greater food safety, and the demand for more fresh fruits and vegetables. While there will
be occasional but temporary gluts in certain commodities, persistent adverse shifts in demand for certain
commodities (as was the case for the geese value chain) will require shifting to other value chains. However,
the overall risk to the portfolio of farmer cooperatives supported by the project is not expected to be
significant given the diverse range of value chains supported (persimmon, apples, tomatoes, mushrooms,
pigs, goat milk, honey, rural/eco-tourism, chicken, walnut, vegetables, hot pepper, wheat, lavender, and
sweet potato).

4. Environmental risk. This relates to climate change. Susceptibility to climate change remains high,
including violent adverse weather events such as hail damage, unpredictable rainfall patterns, and flooding.
The project introduced several climate-smart agriculture practices (including anti-hail nets and irrigation and
drainage) which will help farmers adapt to the increasing risks. It will also be important that the provincial
government continues to promote and facilitate access to agricultural insurance among project beneficiaries
to mitigate the impact of severe climate events.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic relevance and approach. The project was strategically relevant and in line with the
          Government priorities. The PDO was also in line with the Bank strategies (see section 3 for
          details). The project was anchored in a clear policy framework, most notably China’s Poverty



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Shaanxi Poor Rural Areas Community Dev (P153541)



         Reduction Strategy 2010–2020, and the project objective was a top priority for the Government,
         which actively participated in its formulation.
        Technical, financial, and economic aspects. The project adopted a pro-poor value chain
         approach to capture opportunities for poverty reduction arising from China’s growing urban
         market. It also aimed to enable participation of smallholder farmers in modern value chains and
         improve their access to markets through investment in the development of farmer cooperatives
         and partnerships with agribusinesses. The project design was underpinned by solid value chain
         analyses and feasibility assessments of the proposed investments. Design also benefited
         from lessons learned from other poverty reduction projects within and outside China, which gave
         the project strong technical grounding. The PAD included a detailed economic analysis but the
         overall ERR was under estimated (see section 5 for details).
        Poverty, gender, and social development aspects. The project aimed to engage about 70% of
         poverty households in cooperatives to directly benefit from the project. Poor households would
         receive an additional 20% allocation of investment shares in cooperatives. Also, 80% of poverty
         households would receive training during project implementation. While women’s expectations,
         ideas and recommendations were incorporated in the designs of sub-projects including training
         programs (PAD, paragraph 51), the RF lacked relevant disaggregated indicators to clearly reflect
         women's participation.
        Environmental and Fiduciary aspects. The project had adequate environmental and fiduciary
         aspects. The project implementing agencies
          had previously managed poverty alleviation projects financed by the World Bank and successfully
         demonstrated compliance with the Bank's operational policies and requirements.
        Implementation arrangements. The project implementing agencies had previously managed
         poverty alleviation projects financed by the World Bank and successfully complied with its
         operational policies and requirements. Implementation readiness benefited from significant work
         by project counties in identifying potential farmer cooperatives for the first round of project
         support, and preliminary sets of investment proposals were prepared. This facilitated early project
         startup of the cooperative development sub-component. However, there were initial
         implementation delays with the competitive grants to enterprises sub-component.
        Risk assessment. Eight risks were identified at appraisal, with an overall rating of Substantial.
         Two risks were rated substantial including technical design of project and the institutional capacity
         for implementation and sustainability. Overall, risk assessment was thorough and candid, and
         included relevant mitigation measures such as strong emphasis on capacity building for
         farmer cooperatives.
        M&E arrangements. The Provincial Project Management Office had the overall responsibility of
         M&E activities. A qualitative cooperative performance assessment tool was used to measure the
         management effectiveness and internal governance performance of farmer cooperative supported
         by the project. Overall, M&E had an adequate design that reflected relevant indicators to
         assess implementation performance and track progress toward attaining the PDO.

Summary of Quality-at-Entry (QAE) Assessment. The project was strategically relevant with a clear
PDO. Design featured a pro-poor value chain approach to capture opportunities for poverty reduction
arising from China’s growing urban market. Environmental and fiduciary aspects were adequate, but
gender was not adequately captured. Risk assessment was thorough and candid, and included relevant
mitigation measures. M&E had an adequate design that reflected relevant indicators to




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shaanxi Poor Rural Areas Community Dev (P153541)



  assess implementation performance and track progress towards attaining the PDO. Overall, Quality at
  Entry is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The Bank conducted 12 implementation support missions with an average of two formal
        implementation support missions per year. This enabled the Bank to provide robust progress
        assessments. The skills mix of the project team was relevant to the project activities. The stability of
        the task team leadership throughout project implementation provided continuity and facilitated
        communication with the implementing agencies.
       Implementation benefited from the support provided by the World Bank office staff in Beijing
        through constant interactions with government counterparts to solve implementation issues.
       The Bank team was proactive in addressing the project’s critical issues, including restructuring the
        project to realign resources and extend the project due to COVID-19 pandemic disruptions.
       The Bank team worked closely with the client to resolve the implementation delays of the matching
        grants to agro-enterprises activity. The MIS developed by the project functioned well throughout the
        project life.

 Summary of Quality of Supervision Analysis. The Bank team successfully guided the project to achieve
 its objective. The project team provided relevant support to address implementation issues, and guided
 timely restructuring of the project to realign activities and extend the closing date. Overall, Bank
 Supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 Based on the assigned rating to QAE and Bank Supervision, the Overall Bank Performance is rated
 Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) since it was not yet required by the Bank at the
        time of appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR included a ToC that reflected the relationship between the
        project activities, outputs, outcomes and long-term impact in a plausible causal chain. This Review

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shaanxi Poor Rural Areas Community Dev (P153541)



        reconstructed the ToC based on the detailed project description in the PAD (Annex 2) in
        combination with the ToC reported in the ICR.
       The PDO was assessed based on the following three PDO outcome indicators: (i) number of direct
        project beneficiaries, disaggregated by female and poor; (ii) number of cooperative members lifted
        out of poverty (as measured by government “precise poverty alleviation” survey); and (iii) the share
        of project cooperatives making profit (percentage). The PDO outcome indicators were relevant,
        directly connected to the PDO, measurable and reflected reasonable targets.
       The Results Framework (RF) included 10 intermediate results indicators (IRIs) to track the progress
        of the different project activities. The IRIs were measurable, reflected reasonable targets, and were
        connected to the project activities. The improvement in the institutional capacity of the farmers
        cooperatives was tracked through a Managing Effectiveness Tracking Tool (METT). The
        METT enabled identifying the strengths and weakness of the cooperatives, assessing
        appropriateness of business plan, resources needed, products and services, and most importantly
        helped to prioritize and target the capacity building support. However, the RF lacked indicators to
        assess the impact of the project financed facilities (cold storage, sorting and grading) on reducing
        post-harvest losses among beneficiaries.
       Overall, M&E design was well aligned to the project PDO and ambitious enough to be able to
        effectively track and record real income improvements amongst farmers. The mechanisms in place
        to measure 'actual' real increases in income were rigorous and the RF reflected relevant indicators
        to assess the achievement of the PDO and track the progress of the different project activities.



b. M&E Implementation
       According to the ICR (paragraph 48) the M&E benefited from adequate staffing and funding. Also,
         an external M&E service provider emphasized independence and analytical rigor.
        The M&E system conducted baseline surveys, coupled with periodic county government poverty
         monitoring surveys, and beneficiary satisfaction surveys, as well as end-of-project impact
         assessments. Also, annual external audits were performed on farmer cooperatives to gauge their
         financial performance.
        M&E implementation collected included collection data on both the beneficiaries of the project-
         supported farmer cooperatives and non-beneficiaries (controls). This enabled better assessment
         of the impact attributable to the project.
        Overall, the project benefited from a successful implementation of M&E activities.




c. M&E Utilization
       The project M&E data provided valuable inputs to guide the project implementation. Specifically,
         the continuous monitoring of the performance of participating farmer cooperatives helped in
         guiding the capacity-building program, particularly in tailoring it to each farmer cooperative’s
         specific needs.
        In addition, data on each farmer cooperative’s profitability helped in understanding whether its
         performance was management related or due to market forces. For example, the poor


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shaanxi Poor Rural Areas Community Dev (P153541)



           performance of a farmer cooperative raising geese stemmed from value chain challenges. This
           prompted the project to guide this cooperative to diversify into other areas.
          The M&E system gauged the counties’ use of community procurement and this enabled guiding
           the participating counties to use procurement more efficiently.
          Overall, M&E utilization was clearly evident in guiding implementation and making timely course
           corrections through restructuring.

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. M&E design was comprehensive and dealt well with the
  challenge of tracking increases in incomes, implementation was effective, and utilization of M&E
  data was evident in guiding implementation as noted above. Therefore, given the innovation build into
  the approach and the ability to effectively track what matters, M&E Quality is rated High.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
        Environmental Category and Safeguards. The project was classified as a Category B - partial
            assessment due to short-term general construction activities associated with the
            construction/rehabilitation/upgrading of basic infrastructure (e.g. rural roads) and livelihood
            intervention activities. Two environmental and one social safeguard policies were
            triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09),
            and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). An Environmental and Social Management Framework
            (ESMF), an Environmental Management Plan (EMP), and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
            were prepared.
           Compliance with Environmental and Social Safeguards. According to the ICR (paragraphs 52 &
            53), the project complied with both environmental and social safeguards. External environmental
            monitoring was conducted during project implementation to ensure that mitigation measures in the
            Environmental Management Plans and Pest Management Plans were implemented adequately. The
            ICR (paragraph 52) highlighted the following environmentally friendly practices promoted by the
            project: "(a) using straw as organic fertilizer instead of burning it; (b) promoting traceability as a way
            of encouraging accountability in the production of safe, wholesome foods; (c) safely disposing of
            animal manure; and (d) using mushroom residue to produce organic fertilizer, among others." A total
            of 36.72 Mu (One Mu = 666.67 square meters) of collectively owned land was acquired by three
            companies in Baishui county to support construction of processing facilities and a cold storage,
            which affected 38 persons from 10 households. The affected persons were compensated to restore
            their long-term livelihoods in accordance with the resettlement framework, and the land acquisition in
            Baishui county was conducted in line with OP/BP 4.12 (ICR, paragraph 53).




b. Fiduciary Compliance

                                                                                                       Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shaanxi Poor Rural Areas Community Dev (P153541)



         Financial Management (FM). The FM arrangements were satisfactory. The project timely
          submitted five project audit reports for the fiscal years 2018 to 2022 to the World Bank, which
          according to the ICR (ICR, paragraph 56) were of acceptable quality and with unmodified (clean)
          audit opinions. Also, most interim financial reports were submitted to the World Bank in a timely
          manner and were of acceptable quality. However, some interim financial reports were received
          with short delays due to the financial staff’s heavy workload. Financial Management was rated as
          Satisfactory at project closing.
         Procurement. Procurement was carried out by the provincial/county Project Management Offices
          as well as by cooperatives. Procurement documents were uploaded into Systematic Tracking of
          Exchanges in Procurement (STEP). According to the ICR (paragraph 55) "there was no reported
          malfeasance in the procurement processes." Procurement was rated as Satisfactory at project
          closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   "The project contributed significantly to promoting environmentally friendly agricultural production
   technologies and practices and cultivating a greater consciousness about environmental considerations in
   agricultural value chain development (ICR, paragraph 43)."



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                               There was innovation and rigor
                                                                               in the approach that ensured an
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           High                      accurate measure of income
                                                                               shifts and clear attribution to the
                                                                               project.
Quality of ICR                 ---                   High


12. Lessons




                                                                                                  Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Shaanxi Poor Rural Areas Community Dev (P153541)



The ICR included four lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. To ensure the success of farmers cooperatives, projects need to invest in complementary
infrastructure in combination with investments in human capital. The project supported
investments in human capital development including training and capacity building, technical
assistance to strengthen cooperatives financial management and community procurement, business
plan preparation, and management of sub-projects. In addition, the project’s investments in
cooperative productive assets (for example, cold storage, markets, and processing equipment) and
public investments (for example, rural and production/farm roads, irrigation and drainage) greatly
contributed to the success of farmers cooperatives.

2. Projects that include public funding for private enterprises need to clearly articulate the
public benefits from such partnerships with the private sector to ensure smooth
implementation of activities. The project's experience showed that matching grants to agro-
enterprises caused delays in project implementation. To ensure smooth implementation, it is
important to clearly articulate the public benefits from such partnerships with the private sector, and
the need for maintaining strong communication with the government to familiarize new staff with the
rationale and benefits to avoid any impediments to implementation. The project highlighted the
poverty reduction dimensions, especially the gain for the poor and the Government, and the ability to
leverage private sector capital to rural and remote areas that would otherwise not be considered
attractive investment destinations. There is also need for extensive consultations among prospective
agro-enterprises to ensure that their own benefits from this arrangement are clearly understood.

3. Project design needs to accurately assess the timeframe needed to bring framers
cooperatives to profitability to ensure realistic achievements over the implementation
duration. The project experience showed that bringing farmers cooperatives to profitability is a
lengthy process that entails restructuring existing or establishing new farmer cooperatives, including
setting up the governance organs, administrative systems, accounting systems and software, and
training. In addition to developing business plans; and carrying out physical investments and
sometimes planting crops that have long maturity periods (for example, up to three years in
perennial crops) before harvest begins. In view of this lengthy process and based on this project’s
experience, ensuring significant progress toward profitability requires early identification,
mobilization and training of beneficiary farmer cooperatives. Also, a strong M&E system is needed
for performance evaluation and constant feedback loop to guide tailored and continuous technical
and administrative capacity building—the presence of both a third-party M&E service provider and a
financial auditor for farmer cooperatives can be helpful in this regard.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



                                                                                                   Page 17 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shaanxi Poor Rural Areas Community Dev (P153541)



      Quality of Evidence. The ICR benefitted from a robust M&E design and effective implementation, which
         provided an adequate evidence base to verify the achievements reported. Multiple sources of
         information facilitated triangulation of data and attribution of achievements to the project activities.
        Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linkage between evidence and findings and used the
         evidence base to serve the arguments under the different sections.
        Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.
        Results Orientation. The ICR included a relevant discussion on the achievement of the PDO. The
         outcome discussion was balanced between reporting on the achievement of outcome indicators and
         what the project actually achieved on the ground.
        Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the available data to justify most of the assigned ratings.
        Conciseness. The ICR was well written and provided adequate coverage of project activities
         and candidly reported on most shortcomings. Most sections were thorough yet concise.

 Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. The ICR included an adequate assessment of outcomes, and
reported relevant lessons that were based on the project experience. Most sections were concise and reflected
relevant information. Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated High.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
         High




                                                                                                       Page 18 of 18
