     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TAGHIR (P166978)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023493

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P166978                                  TAGHIR

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Afghanistan                              Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D4130,TF-A9123                       31-Dec-2021                                          29,702,033.06

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Dec-2018                              31-Dec-2022

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          25,000,000.00                                    50,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           38,502,429.13                                    20,102,668.14

 Actual                                       29,702,033.06                                    19,900,362.14




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Paul J. Kaiser            Konstantin Atanesyan         Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement dated December 23, 2018 (page 5), the project development objective
   (PDO) of the Tackling Afghanistan’s Government Human Resource Management (HRM) and Institutional
   Reforms Project (TAGHIR) was: “To strengthen the capacity of selected line ministries and agencies through
   merit-based recruitment of key positions, improved performance management, and better human resource
   planning.” The wording in the project appraisal document (PAD) differed slightly from the Financing
   Agreement: “To strengthen the capacity of selected line ministries and agencies through merit-based
   recruitment of key positions, improved personnel management, and better human resource (HR) planning”.

                                                                                                 Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TAGHIR (P166978)



   This ICRR will be based on the Financing Agreement referenced above, along with the version of the PDO
   used in the PAD and the ICR.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project comprised three components (Financing Agreement, page 5) (US$75 million estimate at
   appraisal).

   Component 1: Human Resource Capacity Injection (US$54 million estimate at appraisal) aimed to build the
   capacity of selected line ministries and independent agencies to deliver their key policy priorities to support
   up to one thousand five hundred (1,500) new appointees and/or Capacity Building for Results Project (CBR;
   predecessor World Bank operation) Appointees whose base salaries were financed by the Recipient in
   accordance with the Pay and Grade Salary Scale; and whose positions were: (i) identified in the Strategic
   Staffing Plans to be developed by the respective Priority Line Ministries and Independent Agencies (LMAs);
   or (ii) reserved and allocated for Non-Priority LMAs, in accordance with the Operations Manual, to meet
   emerging government priorities.

   Component 2: Personnel and Payroll Management (US$15 million estimate at appraisal) aimed to support
   the development, roll-out, and maintenance of the Human Resource Management Information System
   (HRMIS), integrated with biometric civil servant enrollment, payroll, the Afghanistan Financial Management
   Information System (AFMIS), and electronic payment systems.

   Component 3: Support to Administrative Reforms (US$6 million estimate at appraisal) aimed to provide: (i)
   technical assistance to the Independent Administrative Reform and Civil Service Commission (IARCSC) in
   the implementation of key administrative reforms; and (ii) operational support to IARCSC in carrying out the
   project, including the services of an independent third-party verification agency.

   According to the ICR, the project’s PDO and three components did not change from effectiveness to
   closure. The July 9, 2020 restructuring reallocated components downward, provided financing for the
   Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan’s (GoIRA) COVID-19 response, and included a no-cost
   one-year project extension.

                        Financing Agreement            Restructuring
Components
                        (December 23, 2018)            (July 12, 2021 Amendment to Financing Agreement)
                        Original Amount                Revised Amount
Component 1             US$54 million                  US$46 million
Component 2             US$15 million                  US$4.7 million

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TAGHIR (P166978)



Component 3             US$6.0 million                 US$4.3 million
Total                   US$75 million                  US$55 million

   According to the ICR, “the restructuring of the project, in order to reallocate financing to the GoIRA’s
   COVID-19 response, did not significantly impact project outcomes, as the adjustments to allocated amounts
   reflected lower than expected disbursement and did not impede project spending or activities” (p. 12).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The estimated original project cost, including contingencies, was US$75 million.

   Financing: IDA financed SDR 18.1 million (US$25 million equivalent) and the Afghanistan Reconstruction
   Trust Fund financed US$50 million for the original project. The financing instrument was Investment Project
   Financing.

   Borrower Contribution: The Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan (GoIRA) did not provide
   counterpart funding.

   Dates: The project was approved on December 19, 2018, became effective on January 1, 2019, and was
   restructured once (approved on July 9, 2020) as part of a portfolio-wide financing reallocation to facilitate
   the financing of GoIRA’s COVID-19 emergency response. The project’s original financing amount (US$75
   million) was reduced to US$55 million, and the restructuring included a no-cost extension of one year (to
   December 31, 2022). On August 15, 2021, Taliban forces took control of Afghanistan’s capital Kabul,
   resulting in the collapse of the GoIRA and the cessation of all project activities. This ICRR applies a split
   rating considering project results before and after August 15, 2021.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The objective of the project at approval – to strengthen the capacity of selected line ministries and agencies
through merit-based recruitment of key positions, improved personnel management, and better HR
planning – was relevant to the economic conditions, and development priorities of the GoIRA at the time of
project approval until August 15, 2021, when the World Bank paused disbursements and suspended project
operations.

Original Project: December 19, 2018 (project approval) – August 15, 2021 (suspension of operations)

Political Context: The ICR notes that Afghanistan was characterized by weak state institutions, poor
governance, and dysfunctional societal relations leading to violent conflict between groups, and this
affected almost every aspect of development. Since the formation of the first National Unity Government in
2014, intensifying conflict and political instability undermined local ownership of development initiatives as
they became points of contention and competition within the government. Without strong Presidential
endorsement development initiatives could quickly fall victim to political infighting (Risk and Resilience


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      TAGHIR (P166978)



               Assessment, 2021). Power was increasingly centralized at the Palace, often bypassing key ministries or
               shifting responsibility to the office of the President. This heightened the risk that reform would not be
               institutionalized across key GoIRA LMAs. (ICR, page 6). The project was developed shortly before
               the planned September 2019 Presidential elections and implemented during a period of political instability,
               with the GoIRA unable to maintain effective control of large parts of the country. Developing and
               implementing a project that focused on technocratic governance reforms and subsidizing the GoIRA payroll
               in this unstable environment.

               Development Priorities: TAGHIR was well aligned with the GoIRA’s development priorities, including the
               2017-2021 Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework (ANPDF) with its development
               priority on “Building a responsive and effective public administration system” and the objective of
               “Establishing, maintaining and improving professionalization (of the civil service)”. The ANPDF emphasized
               the need for the GoIRA to establish a civil service that was responsive to national development needs with
               balanced participation of Afghan men and women. The ANPDF also noted that the country needed to
               address the legacy of patronage and corruption that resulted in the employment of unqualified staff
               employed in the civil service (PAD, page 9). The project was developed to address these issues.

               TAGHIR was also aligned with Pillar 1 of the World Bank Group Afghanistan Country Partnership
               Framework 2017-20209 – Building Strong and Accountable Institutions. The overall objective of this pillar
               was to contribute to the GoIRA’s long-term goals of state-building and self-reliance and tackling the
               underlying drivers of fragility by strengthening the institutional and regulatory framework for service delivery,
               planning, and fiscal and public financial management (PFM). TAGHIR addressed all three objectives within
               this pillar, which focused on improved: (i) public financial management and fiscal self-reliance; (ii)
               performance of key LMAs and municipalities; and (iii) service delivery through enhanced citizen
               engagement (PAD, page 9).

               Suspended Project: August 16, 2021 – December 31, 2022

               The August 2021 takeover of the GoIRA by the Taliban, and the start of the Interim Taliban Administration
               (ITA), triggered an economic crisis and major disruptions to basic services across the country. In response
               to the rapid change in leadership, the World Bank paused its disbursements and suspended its operations
               on August 15, 2021. The sudden cessation of project activities combined with the impact of drought in rural
               areas, resulted in a fall in living standards and a humanitarian crisis. The World Bank, Afghanistan
               Reconstruction Trust Fund donors, and international development partners pivoted to support basic,
               essential services for the Afghan people. Existing World Bank projects that were suspended in August 2021
               were phased out and implementation completion reports (ICRs) were prepared to capture results and
               lessons learned from the World Bank’s long-term engagement in the country.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                     Page 4 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TAGHIR (P166978)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
Strengthened capacity of select LMAs through merit-based recruitment of key positions

Rationale
One PDO indicator was achieved.

      Civil servants appointed in priority LMAs following approved strategic staffing plan for targeted
       capacity ‘surge’. Baseline: 0 in 2018. Target: 100 percent in 2022. 100 percent of civil servants were
       appointed in priority LMAs as of August 2021 (achieved).

Two of three intermediate results indicators (IRIs) were achieved.

      Civil servant positions held by women. Baseline: 7.5 percent in 2018. Target: 10 percent in 2022. 11
       percent of civil servant positions were held by women in August 2021, exceeding the target of 10
       percent (achieved).
      Civil servants that meet minimum individual performance targets, as determined in Job Descriptions.
       Baseline: 0 in 2018. Target: 75 percent in 2022. 89 percent of civil servants met the individual
       performance targets in August 2021, exceeding the target of 75 percent (achieved).
      Female civil servants that meet minimum individual performance targets, as determined in Job
       Descriptions. Baseline: 0 in 2018. Target: 75 percent in 2022. 100 percent of female civil servants met
       minimum individual performance targets in August 2021, exceeding the target of 75 percent
       (achieved).



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Strengthened capacity of select LMAs through merit-based recruitment of key positions

Revised Rationale
When the ITA took control of the country, all World Bank project activities were suspended. No additional
results were achieved during this period.



Revised Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TAGHIR (P166978)



Strengthened capacity of selected LMAs through improved personnel management

Rationale
Two of three PDO indicators were achieved.

      Civil servants in priority LMAs transitioned from project to core government budget financing.
       Baseline: 0 in 2018. Target: 100 percent in 2022. 100 percent of civil servants in priority LMAs were
       transitioned to government budget financing in August 2021 (achieved).
      Civil servants in priority LMAs transitioned from project to core government budget financing as
       permanent professional cadres. Baseline: 0 in 2018. Target: 20% in 2022 (not achieved).
      Priority LMAs that meet minimum benchmark targets related to reduction in number of National
       Technical Assistants (NTAs). Baseline: 0 in 2018. Target 11 in 2022. 16 LMAs met minimum
       benchmark targets in August 2021, exceeding the target of 11 (achieved).

One IRI was achieved.

      Priority HRMIS functionalities established. Baseline: No in 2018. Target: Yes in 2022. This target was
       met in October 2021 (achieved).



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Strengthened capacity of selected LMAs through improved personnel management

Revised Rationale
When the ITA took control of the country, all World Bank project activities were suspended. No additional
results were achieved during this period.



Revised Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Strengthened capacity of selected LMAs through better HR planning

Rationale
One PDO indicator was achieved.




                                                                                                 Page 6 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                TAGHIR (P166978)




                                  Human Resource Management Information System (HRMIS)/Payroll rolled out in at least 5 LMAs.
                                   Baseline: 0 in 2018. Target: 5 in 2022. HRMIS/Payroll was rolled out to 20 LMAs, exceeding the target
                                   of 5 (achieved).

                            One IRI was achieved.

                                  Database prepared on existing parallel structures, that captures information on donor assistance,
                                   including off-budget. Baseline: No in 2018. Target: Yes in 2022. This target was met in August 2021
                                   (achieved).



                            Rating
                            Substantial


                            OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective
                            Strengthened capacity of selected LMAs through better HR planning

                            Revised Rationale
                            When the ITA took control of the country, all World Bank project activities were suspended. No additional
                            results were achieved during this period.



                            Revised Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The PDO – “To strengthen the capacity of selected line ministries and agencies through merit-based
                            recruitment of key positions, improved personnel management, and better human resource (HR) planning” –
                            was divided into three separate PDOs described below. These PDOs were aligned with the project’s three
                            components that focus on” (i) human resource capacity injection; (ii) personnel and payroll management; and
                            (iii) support to administrative reforms.

                            Project efficacy under the original project from December 19, 2018 – August 15, 2021 was Substantial.
                            Uneven but notable progress was made across all three of the project’s outcome areas.

                            The theory of change (ToC) defined in the PAD identified several key challenges to implementation, including
                            (i) the circumvention of meritocratic recruitment processes; (ii) weak internal systems for establishment
                            control and payroll; and (iii) the prevalence of pay structures and salary supplement programs leading to
                            competition for public sector skills, reduced ownership, and accountability. The ToC posited that these three

                                                                                                                            Page 7 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    TAGHIR (P166978)



challenges constrained GoIRA efforts to improve overall civil service planning and professionalization,
reasoning that if TAGHIR delivered meritocratically recruited positions in priority LMAs, then this would lead to
enhanced capacity at these LMAs, enabling them to improve revenue generation, budget execution, and
service delivery. Moreover, the roll-out of an HRMIS and Payroll system would lead to improved HR planning
and stronger internal systems for control and payroll management. In addition, targeted administrative
reforms, supported by technical assistance would lead to enhance professionalization and effectiveness of
the civil service. Combined, these outcomes would lead to strengthened fiscal and institutional sustainability
of the core civil service. Three assumptions were critical to this results chain: (i) the GoIRA maintained the
fiscal space to continue financing meritocratically recruited positions; (ii) these positions had individual
performance indicators linked to LMA-level results; and (iii) there was a sufficient political commitment to
implement administrative reforms which are critical in a fragility, conflict, and violence (FCV) context.

The efficacy of PDO 1 (Strengthened capacity of selected LMAs through merit-based recruitment of key
positions) is rated as Substantial up to August 15, 2021, and Negligible after this date when operations were
suspended. This PDO, aimed to finance up to 1,500 (later revised to 950) contracts of civil servants in key
positions appointed through merit-based recruitment. As of August 15th, 2021, TAGHIR had issued contracts
to 838 civil servants, of which 669 were still active and 169 had been terminated. Out of the 669 active
contracts, 74 were held by female civil servants, 11 percent of active appointments under TAGHIR. This
slightly exceeded the project’s IRI target, aiming to increase female appointees in CBR legacy and new
TAGHIR positions from 7.5 percent in October 2018 (the government-wide baseline for the senior positions)
to 10% by the end of the project. 100 percent of appointments were in positions prioritized in strategic staffing
plans (achieved) and 89 percent of civil servants recruited through TAGHIR (100 percent of female civil
servants) met the minimum individual performance targets, as determined in Job Descriptions, by the end of
the project (exceeding the 75 percent target for both indicators). Overall, one PDO indicator and two of three
IRIs were achieved. Despite these achievements, it should be noted that merit-based recruitment struggled
with the common practice of patronage and loyalty in government ministries, thus undermining the
sustainability of merit-based recruitment in public administration.

The efficacy of PDO 2 (Strengthened capacity of selected LMAs through improved personnel management)
was aligned with Component 2, is rated as Modest until August 15, 2021, and is rated as Negligible after this
date until project closure. This component aimed to move financing of (base) salaries of all (100 percent)
CBR legacy and TAGHIR appointees to the GoIRA’s core budget (fully achieved), and transition 20 percent of
these civil servants to permanent professional cadres (not achieved). The component also aimed to reduce
the number of NTAs across 11 out of 16 selected LMAs (based on identified benchmarks) by the end of the
project (achieved). These personnel processes were based on a March 2018 amendment to the Civil
Servants Law (2008) that allowed for the blending of the position-based civil service model with a career-
based system. This facilitated the recruitment of professional staff (cadres) in common service or functional
sectors with specific rates of pay. In addition to external entrants, current NTAs and civil servants including
CBR and TAGHIR appointees were eligible for entry into relevant cadre groups.

The project partly succeeded in strengthening the capacity of LMAs through improved personnel
management. The project financed the development of an HRMIS informed by a business process review
and integrated with biometric civil servant enrollment, payroll, the Afghanistan Financial Management
Information System (AFMIS), and e-Payment Systems. This enabled the GoIRA to improve the control of
positions, personnel numbers, and budgeted costs, enable monitoring and limiting LMA-level discretion for
allowances and overtime, link organizational structures to the functions of LMAs, and clearly identify the level
of each position and job responsibilities. Through accurate gender-disaggregated headcount data, GoIRA


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 17
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               TAGHIR (P166978)



        could monitor gender targets to address staffing imbalances. Overall, two of three PDO indicators and one IRI
        were achieved.

        The efficacy of PDO 3 (Strengthened capacity of selected LMAs through better HR planning) is rated as
        Substantial until August 15, 2021, and Negligible when project operations were suspended. This PDO was
        closely aligned with activities under component 2, with the aim of developing the HRMIS, including priority
        functions and the rollout of the system to five LMAs by the end of the project. The project’s outcomes
        exceeded the PDO indicator target (HRMIS/Payroll rolled out in at least 5 LMAs). As of August 15th, 2021,
        the HRMIS was rolled out to 60 central line ministries and agencies and all 34 provincial directorates of the
        Ministries of Education and Public Health. The IARCSC team, working on the development of HRMIS,
        finalized eight modules. In June/July 2021, the HRMIS was verified by an independent firm, resulting in a set
        of recommendations for improving the system that was to be implemented in the second half of 2021.
        Moreover, the payroll module was tested in HRMIS and linked to AFMIS. Ten LMAs had piloted the system to
        pay salaries to their staff for the first time, a month before the Taliban takeover of Kabul. As of August 2021,
        the IARCSC was still in the process of integrating LMAs’ HRMIS data with payroll, AFMIS, and the Automatic
        Payment System (used for transferring civil servant salaries). The project also established a database on
        parallel (civil servant) structures that included information on off-budget donor-financed NTAs, also in
        alignment with Component 2. Overall, one PDO indicator and one IRI were achieved.

                                   Rating 1                     Rating 2
            PDOs
                                   Original Project             Project Suspension

                                   (pre-August 15, 2021)        (post-August 15, 2021)
            PDO 1 (Merit-based
                                   Substantial                  Negligible
            recruitment)
            PDO 2 (Personnel
                                   Modest                       Negligible
            management)
            PDO 3 (HR planning)    Substantial                  Negligible
            Average                Substantial                  Negligible

        Overall Efficacy Rating
        Substantial

OBJR1_TBL




        OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
        Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
        Once the project was suspended from August 15, 2021, until closure, there were no additional results
        achieved due to the cessation of all operations. The efficacy rating during this period was Negligible.



        Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                       Primary Reason
        Negligible                                               External shock




                                                                                                           Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TAGHIR (P166978)



 5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency: A standard cost-benefit analysis of the project was not conducted for the PAD and the ICR,
so economic rate of return (ERR) and internal rate of return (IRR) analyses were not calculated at appraisal or
closure. No references were made to the ERRs or IRRs in either document. The PAD provides GDP and poverty
rate data without any reference to source documents (PAD, page 7), instead citing lessons from previous World
Bank projects in Afghanistan and referencing high-level workshops between IARCSC, the Ministry of Finance,
and the World Bank that informed project development (PAD, page 17).

Operational Efficiency: The project was restructured on July 9, 2020, as part of a portfolio-wide financing
reallocation to help facilitate the financing of GoIRA’s COVID-19 emergency response. The project’s original
financing of US$75 million was reduced to US$55 million, and the restructuring included a no-cost extension of
the project closing date by one year (to December 31, 2022). The project components’ allocated amounts were
adjusted downwards to reallocate financing for the GoIRA’s COVID-19 response.

According to the ICR, this downward adjustment was possible due to lower-than-expected expenditures under
each component. First, the ceiling to finance top-up salaries was lowered from 1,500 to 950 positions, reflecting
slower-than-expected recruitment under TAGHIR and lower actual demand for these positions (based on the
LMAs strategic staffing plans). At the time of restructuring, there were only 582 active positions financed by the
project. Second, strong progress on the in-house development of the HRMIS/Payroll solution by the
implementing agency (IARCSC) removed the need for financing a costly off-the-shelf solution. Third, the
planned just-in-time technical assistance for administrative reforms was narrowed, thus requiring fewer funds.
The restructuring of the project, to reallocate financing for the GoIRA’s COVID-19 response, did not significantly
impact project outcomes, as the adjustments to allocated amounts reflected lower-than-expected disbursement
and did not impede project spending or activities.

The project restructuring also provided for a no-cost one-year project closing date extension. Furthermore, the
project’s legal covenants were adjusted to extend deadlines and durations. The maximum duration of legacy
(CBR) and new (TAGHIR) appointees (initially set at 2 years) was waived, thus allowing TAGHIR-financed
appointees to remain in their positions longer than 2 years. The deadline for TAGHIR recruitment was also
extended for one year (to June 30, 2021). project oversight responsibility was shifted from the High Council for
Rule of Law and Anti-Corruption to the IARCSC Board of Commissioners and the project’s Political and
Governance risk rating was lowered from High to Substantial.

The ICR correctly notes that TAGHIR focused on strengthening the capacity of LMAs, while enhancing
sustainability by reducing costs of special pay modalities as well as the civil service more generally. Improving
the efficiency of the civil service, reducing costs, and enhancing outputs, was a central cross-cutting theme
woven throughout all three of the project’s components. The project reduced costs by requiring LMAs to review
their strategic staffing plan and select priorities for capacity injection, reducing the number of NTA employed
across LMAs, and transitioning towards a smaller cadre of professional civil servants (component 3). The
updated HRMIS, with its biometric data collection, allowed the Afghan government to identify wage bill savings.


Efficiency Rating
Modest




                                                                                                    Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TAGHIR (P166978)



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Under the original project, Relevance of objectives is Substantial, Efficacy is Substantial and Efficiency
is Modest, thus the Outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory. Under the revised project, Relevance remains
High, but Efficacy is Negligible, Efficiency is Modest and thus the Outcome rating is Unsatisfactory.

Thus, the overall rating is (4*0.73) + (2*0.27) = 3.46 which is Moderately Unsatisfactory overall.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to the development outcome is High.

According to the ICR, many project outcomes were reversed after August 15, 2021. Most TAGHIR
appointees, selected through merit-based recruitment, were presumed to have left their positions upon the
arrival of Taliban forces in Kabul. The ITA annulled some of the institutional arrangements in place to
promote merit-based selection of senior civil servants (and limit political interference). Systems developed
with the support of the project were idle at closure, and the implementation of reforms that benefited from the
project’s technical assistance was halted by the ITA.

The systems, procedures, and regulations developed with project support can still be used should there be a
significant political redirection of the government to strengthen the effectiveness and efficiency of the civil
service. These include cadre regulations for civil servants working in customs and public procurement, the
exam questionnaires developed for e-recruitment, and the HRMIS, developed ‘in-house’ by the GoIRA
can assist the government to identify potential wage bill savings and improve planning and establishment
controls in the civil service.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TAGHIR (P166978)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR, at appraisal, the World Bank considered the following when developing TAGHIR:

        Realities on the ground in Afghanistan, including the continued need for support to public
           administration reform and the need to avoid any disruption to the regular civil service, that could
           adversely affect the already extremely fragile situation in the country;
          Risks to the sustainability of governance reforms and project outcomes associated with political
           changes;
          Lessons learned from its predecessor CBR Project, including the need to move away from a
           broader capacity injection approach to a narrower focus on LMAs that focus on revenue and
           service delivery.
          Consultations with GoIRA leadership on whether to use an ‘off-the-shelf solution’ or develop the
           HRMIS ‘in-house’. An in-house solution was developed based on the preference of the client and
           the assumed sustainability of a system that is locally maintained; and
          Alignment with the national development strategy and the World Bank’s CPF.

  While these five factors informed project appraisal, additional targeted analyses would have been helpful.
  As discussed in Section 5, the lack of a standard cost-benefit analysis (CBA) at appraisal (and closure)
  could have would have provided additional data sources to inform the development of targeted activities
  that support and sustain economic growth and poverty reduction. Given the complex political environment
  and since there were upcoming national elections as this project was being developed, the World Bank
  would have also benefitted from targeted political economy analysis to better understand the risks and
  opportunities associated with civil service reform. The absence of a CBA at appraisal and closure, and
  the lack of a systematic and thorough political economy analysis at appraisal, were missed opportunities
  to provide useful data when developing this project.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team included a task team leader (TTL) based in Kabul, Afghanistan, working closely with the
 client and implementing agency (IARCSC). This allowed the Bank to address shortfalls on targets, delays
 in implementation, and emerging risks to implementation progress and the development outcome in real-
 time. The Bank was also able to effectively use Component 3 to effectively respond to the IARCSC’s
 requests for analytical and technical assistance needed to help them implement their reforms. This
 included providing technical advice on civil service recruitment, computerization of the civil service
 recruitment process, and promoting female recruitment and retention in the civil service. The ICR notes
 that the World Bank closely managed a recruitment quality assurance team and shielded them from
 political interference to ensure that the recruits met the minimum criteria of a competitive recruitment
 process. The World Bank also worked closely with other sectors (including education and health) to
 support their work and help them overcome resistance to reforms. However, the Bank was not able to



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TAGHIR (P166978)



 mitigate risks to the development outcome, emanating from political instability and the lack of supra-
 ministerial leadership to push forward difficult civil service reforms, limiting project outcomes.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 TAGHIR’s project activities were informed by lessons learned from the predecessor CBR project,
 specifically focusing activities on select LMAs instead of supporting general civil service reform in ministries
 and agencies across the government. This learning was effectively integrated into the design of the
 monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework . The PDO indicators tracked the (i) appointment of civil
 servants to priority LMAs based on strategic staffing plans, (ii) development of an HRMIS tailored to local
 needs, and (iii) the reduction of NTAs. While these indicators captured GoIRA compliance with project
 PDOs with realistic targets, they did not effectively capture the efficacy of the three PDOs. It is not clear
 how the capacity of selected LMAs was strengthened through merit-based recruitments, improved
 personnel management and HR planning.

 For example, the ICR notes that increasing LMA capacity through merit-based recruitment was measured
 by the percentage of TAGHIR appointees being appointed based on an approved staffing plan was a pre-
 condition for the financing of new TAGHIR positions in LMAs, but this measured compliance with the pre-
 condition instead of the progress on the PDO. The indicator would have better-reflected progress and
 impact if it measured the number of TAGHIR-appointed civil servants or the percentage of (general-
 )directors appointed through TAGHIR, out of the total pool of (general-)directors. The PDO indicator (and
 target) measuring the percentage of civil servants who transitioned from project to core government budget
 financing also reflected the achievement of pre-conditions but did little to measure the progress of improved
 personnel management.



b. M&E Implementation
  The main implementing agency, IARCSC, was responsible for overall monitoring and evaluation of the
  project, in close coordination with LMAs. The Civil Service Appointments Board and Civil Service
  Complaints Board maintained databases on civil service appointments and complaints that fed into
  project reporting. Performance benchmarks were developed to hold LMAs accountable for achieving
  planned results, with the IARCSC bi-annually assessing priority LMAs’ contributions to public
  administration and LMA-specific reforms, including the reduction in NTA numbers (captured in the results
  framework [RF]). To better manage data on new TAGHIR appointees, the IARCSC developed a tracking
  tool that categorized positions based on recruitment status. Regarding grievance redress mechanisms,
  the project utilized IARCSC’s existing platforms, including the Civil Service Appeals Board for recruitment

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TAGHIR (P166978)



  complaints. The IARCSC reported to the World Bank monthly on project-related complaints, including
  recruitment appeals and their status, monthly.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR, M&E reports were used by the IARCSC to identify weaknesses in the recruitment
  system and provide them with practical solutions. The data collected on NTAs and the performance of
  the TAGHIR appointees were used to remind the government leadership of unsustainable reliance on
  NTAs and the lack of strategic cohesion between individual civil servants’ results areas and the strategic
  level objectives of the relevant NTAs. Similarly, the performance data was used to focus the
  administration on revenue generation, efficient budget execution, and improved service delivery.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Social Safeguards: World Bank social safeguard policies were not triggered since the project focused
   mainly on policy reform and LMA capacity building. However, the World Bank recognized that there could
   be potential impacts and risks that needed to be mitigated regarding possible cases of discrimination and
   unfair selection of civil servants. The Bank discontinued the grievance redress mechanism (GRM) from the
   predecessor CBR, instead integrating and streamlining the existing GRM structure of the implementing
   entity (IARCSC) to ensure its long-term sustainability. Separate reporting procedures were, however,
   established to ensure better monitoring of project-related complaints. The IARCSC maintained a grievance
   redress mechanism with the following four dedicated platforms, (i) civil servant recruitment complaints, (ii)
   corruption (and fiduciary) complaints, (iii) legal complaints, and (iv) sexual harassment complaints. Weekly
   public hearings were chaired by the IARCSC Chairman and Commissioners so that they could directly
   receive complaints from participants. In August 2021, the project was in the process of recruiting a third-
   party verification agency for validation purposes and to ensure the application of correct procedures and
   selection criteria within government systems. During the reporting period of January to June 2021, 1309,
   complaints related to TAGHIR positions were submitted to the Appeals Board of the IARCSC. Out of the
   total registered complaints, 1133 (87%) were rejected, 161 cases (12%) were accepted, and only 15 cases
   (1%) case were reported to be under review.

   Regarding citizen engagement, IARCSC reached out to the public through social media, and forums with
   civil society, media, and religious leaders.

   Environmental Safeguards: The project was classified as category C and did not trigger any World Bank
   safeguard policy based on a March 8, 2018, environmental assessment. There were no environmental risks
   posed by the Project.




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TAGHIR (P166978)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement: Procurement staff of the IARCSC received training on World Bank procurement
   requirements, with overall responsibility resting with IARCSC's Administration and Finance Directorate. All
   procurements were subject to approval by the IARCSC Management, and high-value contracts were also
   subject to the National Procurement Commission’s (NPC) approval. Procurement Risk Assessment and
   Management System data which was updated four times during the project, showed that procurement
   performance was moderately satisfactory. Post-procurement review (PPR) did not identify any major
   issues, with required documents regularly uploaded in the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in
   Procurement (STEP)

   Financial Management (FM): The ICR does not provide a detailed assessment of project FM, referencing
   FM performance tracking in ISRs without any detail.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   No unintended impacts were raised in the ICR



d. Other
   No other issues were raised in the ICR.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                               Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following 4 lessons learned are informed by project documents and the ICR.

The lack of adequate analytic work during appraisal may lead to implementation “blind
spots” that compromise the achievement of the higher-level objectives and sustainable
reform. For complex governance and civil service reforms to succeed, the project’s reform goals

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       TAGHIR (P166978)



need to align with the incentives and goals of the government which were not sufficiently well
understood for this project. In Afghanistan, while most LMAs were eager to access financing for
increased salaries, there were numerous alternatives to TAGHIR financing of positions. These
alternatives typically allowed for more LMA discretion in selecting candidates. The project’s focus on
merit-based recruitment did not align with the primary organizing principles within government
ministries: patronage and loyalty. As such, the ‘carrot’ offered by TAGHIR was not a strong enough
incentive to mobilize LMAs for reforms. For projects focusing on human resource management
reform in political contexts that can undermine these reforms, positive incentives need to clearly
identify and build into project design.

At project appraisal, the World Bank needs to clearly assess and address the potential
impact of political will and local ownership of civil service reform on successful
implementation and sustainable reform. While the World Bank designed strong measures to
overcome the resistance to, and lack of ownership of, civil service reform, decisions by the Office of
the President and the Ministry of Finance undermined the work of the implementing agency
(IARCSC), contradicting government policy and derailing a reform agenda that aimed to amend civil
service pay, phase-out NTA, and develop more sustainable cadres in the civil service. Reforms
would have adversely affected pay at both the Office of the President and the Ministry of Finance,
and as such, these obstacles should have been expected and explicitly informed project design.

Using project financing to support higher salaries for senior civil service positions may
establish unrealistic expectations if the plan is to phase them out after the project ends.
There is a risk that such an approach creates a cycle of dependency without being able to develop a
sound exit strategy. Technical assistance, introduced by donor-finance projects in Afghanistan,
created positions in government with considerably higher pay rates than regular civil servants. It was
unrealistic to assume that the government would be able to address these disparities without
political implications.

When there are severe limitations in skills and human capital in information technology (IT),
the World Bank should carefully assess if the government has the human and financial
resources to sustain systems developed “in-house” . TAGHIR supported the development and
roll-out of an “in-house” management and information (MIS) system. The development and
maintenance of “in-house” systems require multi-disciplinary teams with specialized areas of
expertise, which cannot be easily found in countries like Afghanistan. Moreover, even if such
capacity exists in the local market, the implementing agencies may not have the resources and
capacity to optimize their impact. The development of MIS systems requires a detailed
understanding of government capacities in highly technical IT areas.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



                                                                                                   Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TAGHIR (P166978)



The ICR presented a detailed and coherent description of project activities, documenting implementation
challenges and achievements. There are three annexes to the ICR, (i) the results framework and key outputs,
(ii) World Bank lending and implementation support/supervision, and (iii) project cost by component. These
annexes provide adequate activity-level data and analysis to understand project implementation. The ICR did
not recognize that a deeper understanding of the political economy and economic drivers of reform would have
enabled the World Bank team to choose project objectives and activities based on a deeper understanding of
the incentives for political reform by key players in the country, and the drivers for poverty reduction and
economic growth. Overall, the analyses provided in the ICR provided an honest and thoughtful understanding
of project outputs and outcomes based on the available data, both intended and unintended. The lessons
learned were thoughtful, although they did not specifically address how the lack of analytic products at
appraisal may have affected activity selection and their impact on the PDOs. The ICR also identifies some of
the limitations of the RF, providing clear and actionable ways that could have improved the monitoring of
outputs and outcomes and better connected to the PDOs as well. ICR guidelines and methodology were
appropriately followed.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                               Page 17 of 17
