     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM ER DPL I MST (P170223)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023878

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P170223                                    JM ER DPL I MST

 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Jamaica                                    Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-90530                                 31-Mar-2021                                          70,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Mar-2020                                31-Mar-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                              70,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                               70,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                           70,000,000.00                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 William F. Steel            Jennifer L. Keller           Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR, para. 8) and the Program Document (PD, p.3)
stated the program development objectives (PDOs) of Jamaica’s First Economic Resilience Development
Policy Loan (ERDPL) as: “to (a) Support Fiscal Sustainability and Inclusion; (b) Enhance Fiscal and Financial
Resilience against Natural Disaster Risks; and (c) Improve the Investment Climate for Sustainable Growth.”


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      JM ER DPL I MST (P170223)



However, “inclusion” referred to social inclusion, which is different from (and potentially contradictory to) fiscal
sustainability. Hence, for the purpose of this ICR Review (ICRR), the PDOs are taken as:

        PDO 1: Support fiscal sustainability;
        PDO 2: Support social inclusion;
        PDO 3: Enhance fiscal and financial resilience against natural disaster risks; and
        PDO 4: Improve the investment climate for sustainable growth.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The program was designed to achieve the PDOs in three pillars, which corresponded to the three objectives
of the operation (as stated in the PD and ICR, para. 9). The pillars were as follows:

      Pillar A: Support fiscal sustainability and inclusion;
      Pillar B: Enhance fiscal and financial resilience against natural disaster risks; and
      Pillar C: Improve the investment climate for sustainable growth.

The latter pillar had policy actions (PAs) in the policy areas of trade, land and fisheries.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The IBRD loan of US$ 70 million for Jamaica’s First ERDPL was fully disbursed following approval on 19 March
and effectiveness on 25 March, 2020. (The ICR, p. 2, reported actual disbursement of US$ 69.825 million, after
deduction of the front-end fee of US$175,000) The operation closed as expected on 31 March, 2021.

Although the Bank had “approved a waiver to extend the deadline of Board submission of the second operation
to March 30, 2023, given delays and reprioritizations amid the pandemic” (ICR, para. 11), in October, 2022, the
government requested cancellation of the planned Second ERDPL, in part because it was unlikely to be able to
complete some key reforms in time.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 As a small Caribbean island nation whose upper-middle-income status is driven largely by tourism and
 agriculture, Jamaica is highly vulnerable to extreme weather, climate change and other external shocks. Since
 2013, Jamaica had undertaken a program of fiscal consolidation with the support of the World Bank Group
 (WBG), International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the Inter-American Development Bank (IBRD). Fiscal
 management and control measures brought the public debt-to-GDP ratio down from 147 percent in FY2012/13
 to 95 percent in 2019/20, increased fiscal surpluses, raised its credit rating, fostered increased foreign direct
 investment, and brought down poverty and inequality (ICR, para. 3). However, further progress was
 constrained by structural bottlenecks – specifically with respect to trade, land reform and fisheries (ICR, para.



                                                                                                         Page 2 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM ER DPL I MST (P170223)



4) – and the need to mitigate the increasing risks of natural disasters for infrastructure, livelihoods, and
economic growth, with implications for the objective of fiscal sustainability.

The PDOs were highly relevant to addressing these identified development challenges. PDO 1 carried forward
previous measures to strengthen fiscal sustainability. PDO 2 extended cash transfer programs that had proven
important in mitigating the shock of the COVID-19 pandemic (ICR, para. 11). PDO 3 directly addressed
inefficiencies and inadequacies in financial responsiveness to natural disasters. PDO 4 supported reforms in
the key targeted areas of trade, land, and fisheries. PDO 4 was phrased to refer to improvements in the
underlying investment climate that could be tracked during the period of the operation, rather than the longer-
term outcome of increased investment that would presumably result.

The PDOs directly supported the aims of Jamaica’s Vision 2030 National Development Plan, and the
supporting Medium-Term Socio-economic Development Framework for 2018 to 2021, to “(i) undertake
fundamental reforms to consolidate the macroeconomic gains over the years; (ii) strengthen the country’s
international competitiveness; (iii) protect the most vulnerable; and (iv) strengthen the resilience of the built
and natural environment” (ICR, para. 5; PD, para. 32). Strengthening social and climate resilience, improving
the enabling environment for private sector, and modernizing the public sector were also objectives of the
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) FY2014-19, as well as complementary investment projects and technical
assistance (PD, paras. 72-73; ICR, para. 14). Thus, the ERDPL series was appropriately designed as part of
the WBG’s overall strategy for supporting Jamaica’s fiscal sustainability and economic and social
development.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

The operation had nine PAs, two of them with two distinct but related sub-actions. The ICR (Annex 4) provided
a Theory of Change matrix drawn from the PD’s rationale for each of the PAs. PAs were all relevant to the
PDOs, with implementation often to be supported by further measures under ERDPL 2.

Table 1: Objectives and Prior Actions (PAs) for Jamaica First Economic Resilience Development Policy
Loan (ERDPL)

 PDO 1: Support fiscal sustainability
 PA1: To strengthen the fiscal responsibility framework, the Borrower, through the Cabinet, has
 approved the design of a fiscal council, which will be operationally independent and financially
 autonomous.
 PA2: To improve the governance of the public sector, the Borrower, through the Ministry of
 Finance and the Public Service, has merged, closed or reintegrated into line ministries 6 Public
 Bodies, in accordance with the Public Sector Transformation Action Plan of 2018.
 PDO 2: Support social inclusion
 PA3: To improve equity of public spending, the Borrower through: (a) the Cabinet and the Ministry
 of Labour and Social Security, has increased the benefit size of the PATH conditional cash
 transfer; and (b) the Ministry of Labour and Social Security, has implemented a Community
 Engagement Series to expand the number of PATH’s eligible beneficiaries in rural areas.
 PDO 3: Enhance fiscal and financial resilience against natural disaster risks

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    JM ER DPL I MST (P170223)



PA4: To mitigate the financial impact of natural disasters, the Borrower, through the Cabinet, has
approved a Public Financial Management Policy Framework for Natural Disaster Risk Financing.
PA5: To expedite post-disaster relief and recovery, the Borrower, through the House of
Representatives, has raised the ceiling of the Contingencies Fund, from J$100 million to J$10
billion.
PA6: To expedite funding for disaster relief and recovery, the Borrower, through the Ministry of
Finance and Public Service, has issued binding guidelines governing the process for budgetary
allocation and reallocation, procurement, and disbursement of public funds in post-disaster
situations.
PDO 4: Improve the investment climate for sustainable growth
Trade
PA7: To improve customs management and reduce foreign trade transaction costs, the Borrower,
through the Ministry of Finance and the Public Service, has submitted a new customs bill to the
House of Representatives for its approval.
Land
PA8: To facilitate the titling of land, the Borrower: (a) through the Cabinet, has integrated the Land
Administration and Management Programme into the National Land Agency; and (b) through the
Ministry of Economic Growth and Job Creation, has enacted the amendment of the Registration of
Titles, Cadastral Mapping and Tenure Clarification (Special Provisions) Act, to reduce the fees for
land titling transactions for first time registrations.
Fisheries
PA9: To promote the effective management and sustainable development of fisheries,
aquaculture and other related activities, the Borrower has enacted a new Fisheries Act.

PDO 1: Support fiscal sustainability

PA1 was designed to encourage prudent fiscal management by establishing an independent fiscal
council/commission that would “inform the public on the soundness and sustainability of Jamaica’s fiscal
position” (PD, para. 40). The increased public accountability, as well as provision of independent advice, was
expected to help ensure government adherence to the fiscal rule adopted in 2014 (to bring the public debt-to-
GDP ratio below 60 percent by FY2025/26; ICR, para. 16). The Indicative Trigger (IT) for ERDPL 2 did include
further steps toward implementation through “the adoption of the legal framework to establish the fiscal council
and integrate it into Jamaica’s institutional framework for fiscal policy” (PD, para. 40). It was not clear what
complementary enforcement mechanisms might be needed to ensure more than a modest contribution to
actually achieving the PDO. Rating: PA1: Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

PA2 was needed to address the proliferation during the 1980s/90s of public bodies (including statutory
authorities and state-owned enterprises [SOEs]) with various sources of funding and often with “inadequate
governance of some public bodies and insufficient compliance with the legal framework” (PD, para. 42). The
number of such bodies had been reduced from over 190 to about 160 by 2019. Further consolidation was
considered necessary to improve governance and oversight by the relevant Ministries. Nevertheless, the small
number of bodies targeted (6 in ERDPL 1, with a further 18 slated for ERDPL 2) and the lack of criteria to
prioritize the most impactful meant that contribution to the PDO was likely to be modest, at best (ICR, para. 17).
Rating: PA2: Unsatisfactory (U).

PDO 2: Support social inclusion


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    JM ER DPL I MST (P170223)



PA3 was intended to enhance social inclusion and protection by addressing the low “benefit sizes and lingering
coverage gaps [that] hinder effective inclusion of the poor” under the country’s key social safety net conditional
cash transfer program, the Programme of Advancement Through Health and Education (PATH) (PD, para. 45;
ICR, para. 18). The World Bank’s 2019 study on Social Protection Programs in Jamaica noted that Jamaica’s
relatively low benefit sizes were “hindering intended equity and poverty reduction outcomes” (PD para. 45). It
also cited low application rates from PATH among the relatively poor population, especially in rural areas,
where poverty rates were highest. The supported actions constituted an important contribution to PDO 2 and
the overall objective of enhancing economic resilience to natural disasters. (Although the budgetary cost of the
PATH reforms would work against the fiscal sustainability objective of PDO 1, the IT for ERDPL2, to revise the
rules governing the National Insurance Scheme (NIS)’s benefits for formal employees, was designed to address
sustainability concerns that were raised by an actuarial review (PD, para. 46.) Rating: PA3: Satisfactory (S).

PDO 3: Enhance fiscal and financial resilience against natural disaster risks

PA4 directly addressed the severe shortcomings in Jamaica’s ability to cope with the financial consequences of
a major disaster, which could incur financial losses and recovery costs estimated to reach as much as 50
percent of GDP (PD, para. 50). Fiscal responsiveness was constrained by a “piecemeal approach” and reliance
on multiple, uncoordinated funding sources (ICR, para. 20). The reforms supported by PA 4 addressed a
substantial range of issues that were important to achievement of PDO 3, including central risk analysis and
management, decentralized fiscal efforts, increasing a disaster-specific reserve fund, and strengthening
institutional capacity (including a specialized unit). Rating: PA4: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA5 was directly relevant to PDO 3 by raising the ceiling on the disaster relief/recovery Contingencies Fund
tenfold to JS$10 billion (US$ 70.6 million). This amount was based on WBG-supported analysis of low-cost,
high-frequency natural disaster events, although it was still well below the annual cost of hurricanes. The ICR
(para. 21) noted, however, that implementation to achieve the objective would depend on legislation and setting
up a new National Natural Disaster Reserve Fund (NNDRF). Enacting the legislation was an IT for ERDPL2,
which was cancelled – but has now been incorporated as a PA for a new operation (Sustainable and Resilient
Recovery DPF; ICR, para. 21). While PA5 by itself was insufficient to achieve the objective, can be considered
satisfactory as a step toward the objective when combined with further follow-on actions. Rating: PA5:
Satisfactory (S).

PA6 was appropriately designed to address the “fragmented financing sources, inconsistent procedures, and
lack of emergency guidelines….consolidated information and clear instructions” that constrained budgetary
responses to disasters (PD, para. 56). It was based on analysis in WBG sector work and preparation for the
Public Financial Management under the Strategic Public Sector Transformation Project (PD, Table 6).
Implementation was to be supported by further actions under the Second ERDPL to guide operation of the
National Disaster Fund and the process for accessing it (ICR, para. 22). Rating: PA6: Satisfactory (S).

PDO 4: Improve the investment climate for sustainable growth

PA7 addressed the constraint on Jamaica’s competitiveness and attractiveness to foreign businesses imposed
by its “outdated trade facilitation regulatory framework inconsistent with World Trade Organization (WTO) rules”
and its exceptionally high cost of complying with trade regulations (PD, para. 60). Building on a previous DPL
series and complemented by WBG TA on Trade Logistics in the Caribbean and the Foundations for
Competition and Growth Project, the new Customs Bill supported by PA 7 was designed to “facilitate full
implementation of the ASYCUDA World platform….launch of the Jamaica Trade Information Portal…and
[make] progress towards an Electronic Single Window for Trade” (PD, para. 61 and Table 6). These measures


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM ER DPL I MST (P170223)



 would directly support PDO 4, although implementation depended on complementary rules and regulations that
 were to be undertaken under ERDPL 2. Rating: PA7: Satisfactory (S).

 PA8 addressed the “costly, complex and lengthy procedures” that constrained issuance of land titles, which
 were identified as important to investors and to enabling transfer of land to more efficient users (PD, para. 63).
 Measures relevant to PDO 3 included institutional reform “to harmonize and streamline procedures related to
 land titling…a set of principles for modernizing titling legislation….[and] a systematic land registration policy,” as
 well as reduction of fees, based on analysis under the Foundations for Competition and Growth Project (PD,
 para. 64 and Table 6). Untitled land parcels constituted 40 percent of Jamaica’s 650,000 land parcels (PD,
 para. 63; World Bank Country Profile for Jamaica, 2008; cited in USAID Land Links). Although the annual
 increase in registrations was expected to reach only 1.3 percent of untitled parcels by the end of the operation,
 the PD (para. 64) proposed an IT for “the submission to Parliament of legislation to implement an electronic
 titling system” that might have helped to build more broadly on these initial steps to simplify procedures and
 reduce costs. Rating: PA8: Satisfactory (S).

 PA9 was directed toward the “outdated legal and regulatory framework” that had proven unable to cope with
 overfishing, environmental degradation and other challenges to fisheries, which “form the backbone of the local
 economy in many coastal and inland communities” (PD, para. 66). PA9 supported legislation “for the
 establishment of a National Fisheries Authority (NFA) with the responsibility to manage, develop, [and] regulate
 the fisheries and aquaculture industries” (PD, para. 67), directly relevant to PDO 4. Whether the NFA would
 have the authority and budget to enforce regulations and address the increasing challenges being posed by
 climate change and natural disasters was unclear. Implementation was to be supported by principles and
 regulations to be issued under ERDPL 2. Rating: PA9: Moderately Satisfactory (MS).



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

EMDPL 1 used eleven results indicators (RIs) to measure the impact of its nine PAs and progress toward
achievement of the PDOs. Although the majority of the RIs were satisfactory in terms of monitoring the
impact of the associated PA and progress toward objectives, four were problematic in that regard or in
definition/measurement. The RIs for PDO 4 tracked outputs related to actions to improve the underlying
investment climate, though not outcomes in terms of increased investment (more appropriate for a higher-
level, longer-term indicator). The ICR (para. 33) reported that data for most indicators could readily be
obtained from the relevant administrative unit or involved data collection systems already in place.

PDO 1 had two RIs, associated with PAs 1-2.

PDO 2 had one RI to track PA 3.




                                                                                                        Page 6 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    JM ER DPL I MST (P170223)



PDO 3 had three RIs, associated with PAs 4-6.PDO 4 had five RIs, associated with PAs 7-11. (An
additional RI discussed in the ICR was omitted here, as it related only to a trigger for ERDPL 2, which was
canceled, not related to any PA in ERDPL 1.)


Table 2: Results indicators by Objective and PAs; baseline and target values; status and
achievement
                                                          Actual
                                   RI                                      Actual as
Results indicator (RI)      Asso-        Baseline Target        (2021)
                                                                           % of      RI Achieve-
                            ciated
                                   Rele-                                   targeted ment rating
                            PAs          (2018) (2021)          (2022)
                                   vance                                   change

PDO 1: Support fiscal sustainability
RI1. The Fiscal Council is
adequately staffed and
                                                     ≥2
issues regular fiscal
                            PA1 MU         0                    0          0%         [Negligible]
assessment reports (that
include debt sustainability
analysis)
                                                                28.6%
RI2. Percentage of self-                                        (2021)                [Modest]
                                                                           - 115%
financing public bodies
compliant with submitting                                       51.8%                 [public
                            PA2     MU     47%       63%                     30%
an Annual Report within                                         (2022)                bodies
four months after the end                                                             reduced to
                                                                           - 26%
of the financial year                                           42.9%                 149]
                                                                (2023)
PDO2: Support social inclusion
RI3. Percentage of rural                                   95%
beneficiaries and peri-                                    (2021)     200%
urban beneficiaries among PA3    S      80%      85%                                  High
all [new] PATH                                             89%        180%
beneficiaries                                              (2023)
PDO 3: Enhance fiscal and financial resilience against natural disaster risks
RI4. Annual Fiscal Policy
Paper has a section
                             PA4 HS     No       Yes       Yes        100%            High
quantifying disaster-related
risks
                                                           J$4.5b                     High
RI5. Capitalization of the                                 (2021)     137%
                                        J$100    JS3.1
National Natural Disaster PA5    S                                                    [but NNDRF
                                        million billion
Reserve Fund                                               J$4.9b     160%            not yet
                                                           (2022)                     established]
RI6. Number of post-             MU
natural disaster sources of

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    JM ER DPL I MST (P170223)



financing available to       PA6       0        5        5                   100%       [Substantial]
ministries, departments,
and agencies with                                        [4
documented emergency                                     accessible
procedures                                               in 5 hours]
PDO 4: Improve the investment climate for sustainable growth
Trade
                                                         76%
RI7. Percentage of
                                                         (2021)              119%       High [but
commercial declaration
                             PA7 S     51%      70%                                     Customs Bill
documentary processed by
                                                         88.8%               180%       not passed]
customs within 16 hours
                                                         (2023)
                                                         24%
RI8. Percentage of
                                                         (2021)              70%
commercial consignment
                             PA7 S     10%      30%                                     Substantial
initially assigned to Green
                                                         25%                 75%
Channel
                                                         (2023)
Land Titling
                                                         7,872
                                                         (2021)              299%
RI9. Number of titles
                             PA8 HS    1,300    3,500                                   High
issued annually
                                                         14,105              586%
                                                         (2023)
                                                         6,769
                                       2,000
RI10. Total number of titles                             (2021)              238%
with unimproved value of PA8     MU             4,000
                                       per
J$ 2 million and below                                    3,424              71%        [Modest]
                                       annum
                                                         (2023)
Fisheries
                                                         49.5%
                                                                                        [Negligible]
                                                         (2021)              239%
RI11. Percentage of active
                             PA9 U     16%      30%
fishers who are licensed                                                                [regulations
                                                         52.4%               260%
                                                                                        not enacted]
                                                         (2022)
Source: ICR, Table 2.

Note: RI12 regarding days to obtain a construction permit is omitted because it related to a trigger for
ERDPL 2 (which was canceled) and there was no associated PA in ERDPL 1.

PDO 1: Support fiscal sustainability

RI1 as stated included “adequate staff”, which would have been suitable to track implementation of PA 1
(which only referred to approval of the design of a fiscal council), but this aspect was not captured in the
actual indicator used. Issuance of regular fiscal assessment reports was reasonably relevant as a
measure of progress toward the objective of supporting fiscal sustainability through adherence to the
fiscal rule – on the assumption that a better-informed public would bring pressure on the fiscal council to



                                                                                                       Page 8 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JM ER DPL I MST (P170223)



press for compliance. However, monitoring actual compliance with the fiscal rule would have been more
directly related to the objective. Relevance Rating: RI1: Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU).

RI2 did not directly track PA 2 to reduce the number of public bodies. It was intended to capture the
impact of the PA on the performance of public bodies in terms of prompt issuance of annual reports,
which also would facilitate oversight. Nevertheless, the results chain from better governance to the
objective of fiscal sustainability was unclear – especially as “the expected impact on the wage bill is likely
to be minimal” (PD, para. 44). An indicator of the number and/or costs of public bodies would have been
more relevant to both implementation of the PA and the objective. Relevance Rating: RI2: Moderately
Unsatisfactory (MU).

PDO 2: Support social inclusion

RI3 was directly relevant to the second sub-action of PA3 regarding expansion of PATH’s rural
beneficiaries, and hence to PDO 2 to support social inclusion, though it did not track implementation of the
first sub-action to increase the size of the benefit. The indicator was readily measurable and suitable to
monitor implementation on a regular basis. Relevance Rating: RI3: Satisfactory (S).

PDO 3: Enhance fiscal and financial resilience against natural disaster risks

RI4 directly related to implementation of PA4 to establish a policy framework that would address the
identified “need to identify, monitor, and mitigate all sources of contingent liabilities” (PD, para. 51).
Regular quantification of disaster-related risks was highly relevant to the objective of enhancing resilience,
as a basis for budgeting and increasing the size of the reserve fund. Assessment of the indicator was
straightforward (yes/no). Relevance Rating: RI4: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

RI5 likewise directly captured both implementation of PA5 and progress toward the objective of ensuring
adequate fiscal capacity to cope with natural disasters. It was readily measurable and suitable for tracking
progress over time. (However, actual achievement was contingent on establishment of the NNDRF to
manage the funds, which was to be enabled as a trigger for ERDPL2). Relevance Rating:
RI5: Satisfactory (S).

RI6 tracked the next stage of implementing the guidelines for disaster recovery funds that were supported
by PA6, but only the availability of funds with procedures, not ease of access or use. As stated and
measured, it was not entirely clear whether it was the number of funds being tracked or the number that
had “documented emergency procedures.” The ICR (Table 6) indicated that “the Government already had
five funds available,” implying that the baseline of 0 referred to those with the requisite procedures and
that all five had adopted the procedures by 2021 as targeted. However, the objective was expedited
access to recovery funds, which was not captured by this indicator. The ICR noted that quick access
(within 5 hours) was available for “all except for the CCRIF” – suggesting that ready access could have
been a RI. Relevance Rating: RI6: Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU).

PDO 4: Improve the investment climate for sustainable growth

RI7 and RI8: RI7 measured implementation of the new customs bill supported by PA7 in terms of
reducing customs declaration delays as a constraint on and cost of importation. It was directly related to
achievement of the objective in that trade administration inefficiencies and costs had been identified as a
negative factor for the investment climate (PD, paras. 60-61). RI8 likewise was designed to track
reduction in commercial trade processing time in terms of the share allocated to the “green channel” –

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 18
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   JM ER DPL I MST (P170223)



               presumably expedited or with less cumbersome procedures (the PD and ICR gave no explanation). They
               were suitable as proxies for the objective of reducing the costs of importation, which would have been
               more difficult to measure directly. Relevance Rating: RI7: Satisfactory (S); RI8: Satisfactory (S).

               RI9 directly monitored implementation of the institutional streamlining and reduced titling costs supported
               by PA8 in terms of the impact on number of titles issued. Ease of obtaining titles was relevant to the
               objective of improving the investment climate by facilitating the acquisition of land for investment.
               Relevance Rating: RI9: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

               RI10 was intended to track achievement of the Government’s objective of “targeting lower income
               households, to ensure that the land titling reform is inclusive” (PD, para. 65). The relevance to the
               objective of improving the climate for investment is limited to the extent that investment by low-income
               families does not depend importantly on having a formal title, and low demand for such titles could
               prevent achieving the target, even though the cost of titles had been reduced. Relevance Rating: RI10:
               Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU).

               RI11 was somewhat relevant to monitoring implementation of the new Fisheries Act supported by PA9, to
               the extent that issuance of fishing licenses represented improved administrative capabilities. However, it
               was at best indirectly related to the objective of sustainable growth, which would depend on effective
               enforcement of the licensing system to curtail overfishing. The PD (para. 68) did not specify how the “new
               category of licenses, authorizations and permits” in the new Act would improve the investment climate,
               nor how it (together with increased penalties” would “address illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing.”
               Nonetheless, these more relevant aspects may have been more difficult to measure than new licenses
               issued. A further problem was that the issuance of licenses depended on factors other than the Fisheries
               Act and hence did not adequately track implementation of PA9 – evident in the fact that the number
               increased despite the fact that the necessary regulations had never been enacted (ICR, para. 32).
               Relevance Rating: RI11: Unsatisfactory (U).




   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                Support fiscal sustainability

                Rationale

                                                                                                                  Page 10 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   JM ER DPL I MST (P170223)



RI1: regarding issuance of fiscal assessment reports that included debt sustainability analysis was not
achieved because COVID-19 disruption delayed appointment of the Fiscal Commissioner and staffing of the
Fiscal Council (ICR, para. 29). Achievement Rating: Negligible.

RI2: COVID-19 likewise disrupted submission of Annual Reports by public bodies in FY 2020/21. Although
the number submitted in FY 2021/22 rose above the baseline, it fell again in FY 2022/23 below the baseline
(ICR, Table 2, p. 17), representing negative progress (not partial achievement, as stated in the ICR, para. 29).
Although the RI was unrelated to implementation of the PA in terms of consolidation to reduce the number
public bodies and hence their fiscal cost, additional evidence provided showed that the number had been
reduced to 149 by July 2023 (from 160 in 2019), indicating some progress toward the objective of fiscal
sustainability. Achievement is rated modest in Table 2, but the MU relevance rating of RI2 triggers a
downgrade to Negligible. However, additional information provided during the preparation of this review on
implementation of the PA (reduced number of public bodies) and the progress made towards achievement of
the PDO on fiscal sustainability warrants an Modest achievement rating. Achievement Rating: Modest.



Rating

Unsatisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Support social inclusion

Rationale
RI3: The share of rural and peri-urban beneficiaries jumped substantially from 80 percent (2018 baseline) to
95 percent in the target year of FY 2020/21 – due in part to substantial additional funding under the COVID-
19 pandemic response (ICR, Table 2, p. 17). While the share subsequently slipped back somewhat (to 89
percent in FY 2022/23), it remained above the targeted level. Additional data in the ICR (p. 17) indicated that
achievement of the social inclusion objective was being sustained in terms of adequate funding and an
estimated decline in the poverty rate. Achievement Rating: High.



Rating

Highly Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Enhance fiscal and financial resilience against natural disaster risks

Rationale
RI 4: The Fiscal Policy Paper published annually in 2021, 2022 and 2023 included an Appendix quantifying
disaster-related risks and quantifying contingent liabilities, as targeted by RI 4 (ICR, p. 18). Achievement of



                                                                                                   Page 11 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   JM ER DPL I MST (P170223)



the objective was furthered by a White Paper on Public Financial Management Policy for Disaster Risk
Financing tabled in Parliament in June 2023. Achievement Rating: High.

RI 5: The JS$4.5 million required to capitalize the NNDRF was raised and deposited in the Contingencies
Fund (enabled by the increased ceiling supported by PA5), nominally exceeding the target for RI5.
Nevertheless, full achievement of the objective depended on setting up the NNDRF, which was delayed by
the COVID-19 pandemic and the cancellation of ERDPL2. Additional evidence revealed that Government had
submitted legislation to establish the NNDRF as a separate account to Parliament in December 2023,
supported by the IMF’s Resilience and Sustainability Facility (RSF) program. Achievement Rating: High.

RI 6: Guidelines/procedures for emergency financing had been consolidated into a single, comprehensive
source of information that was adapted by the five Government funds relevant to disaster recovery that were
in place at baseline, meeting the target for RI 6 in tracking implementation of PA6. Nevertheless, the indicator
did not adequately capture the speed with which such funds could be accessed; the ICR, (p.18) reported that
four of the five funds could be accessed within five hours, indicating substantial achievement of the objective.
While achievement is rated High, the MU relevance rating of RI6 triggers a downgrade to Modest. However,
given additional evidence provided in the ICR, and progress towards the achievement of the objective, the
rating is upgraded to Substantial. Achievement Rating: Substantial.



Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
Improve the investment climate for sustainable growth

Rationale
RI7: Implementation of the Customs Bill that was approved under PA7 has been stalled in Parliament for two
years (ICR, p. 19). Nonetheless, the objective of expediting processing of customs declarations has been
achieved through measures to streamline procedures, exceeding the RI7 target for the percentage of
documentation processed within 16 hours by 2021 (76 percent), with sustained improvements in subsequent
years (to 89 percent in FY 2022/23). Achievement Rating: High.

RI8: The complementary indicator of the share of commercial consignments assigned to the Green Channel
(to expedite clearance) was substantially achieved over FYs 2020/21 through 2022/23, but fell short because
the re-verification process found gaps for some importers (ICR, p. 19). As for RI7, the indicator related more
to achievement of the PDO than implementation of the PA. Achievement Rating: Substantial.

RI9 indicated that the institutional, procedural and fee reforms in land titling supported by PA8 were highly
successful in achieving the intended result of increasing the annual issuance of land titles, which reached
double the target by FY 2020/21 and continued to rise sharply to nearly six times the targeted annual
increase by FY 2022/23. This also reflected a surge in demand for titles due to a construction boom and lower
mortgage rates (ICR, p. 19), which is indicative of achievement of the ultimate objective of increased



                                                                                                 Page 12 of 18
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         JM ER DPL I MST (P170223)



                      investment. (Nevertheless, cancellation of ERDP2 may have compromised further progress toward the
                      objective through the next step of an electronic system for registering titles). Achievement Rating: High.

                      RI10: Although the number of titles for relatively low-value land issued annually surpassed the target in FYs
                      2020/21 and 2021/22, it then declined to 3,424 in FY 2022/23 – below the targeted level. The data indicate
                      substantial achievement of the objective of greater inclusion of lower-income groups (PDO 1), though not
                      necessarily the desired outcome of increased investment. Additional evidence supported progress toward
                      implementation of the IT associated with PA8 in that the legislative package including e-titling of land has
                      been submitted to Parliament for preparation of the second draft bill. The substantial rating of RI10 is
                      downgraded due to the MU relevance rating of the RI. Achievement Rating: Modest.

                      RI11: Although the share of active fishers with licenses increased beyond the level targeted for RI11, this was
                      unrelated to implementation of PA9, since the regulations for the new Fisheries Act had not been enacted
                      (ICR, para. 32), and hence could not have been enforced to achieve the objective of more sustainable
                      development of fisheries. Nonetheless, it did reflect more effective management of fisheries, e.g., due to
                      creation of the NFA and establishment of the Fisheries Compliance and Statistics Division (ICR, p. 20),
                      although this was unrelated to PDO 4. Achievement Rating: Negligible.



                      Rating

                      Moderately Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

While achievement of PDOs 2, 3 and 4 is rated Highly Satisfactory, Satisfactory and Moderately Satisfactory,
respectively, the Unsatisfactory for PDO 1 yields an overall achievement of Moderately Satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory


      6. Outcome

      Rationale

      While the relevance of the PAs was Satisfactory, a Moderately Satisfactory rating for Efficacy yields an overall
      outcome of Moderately Satisfactory.


      a. Rating

                                                                                                                      Page 13 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      JM ER DPL I MST (P170223)




Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk of natural disasters poses the greatest threat to sustaining the achievements of ERDPL 1
with respect to fiscal sustainability and investment for growth. Climate change is likely to intensify the
risk of weather-related disasters. ERDPL 1 specifically included actions to improve the institutional and
financial capabilities to mitigate the impact of such risks. Nevertheless, even though the new Sustainable and
Resilient Recovery DPF (SSRDPF) supports operationalization of the NNDRF, even the increased ceiling of
J$10 billion under ERDPL 1 remains below the average annual cost of hurricanes. Thus, recurrent fiscal
challenges from natural disasters can be expected.

The ICR (para. 52) cites several on-going factors that help mitigate the above risks. First, progress
toward implementing institutional objectives of ERDPL 1 resumed after delays due to the COVID-19
pandemic and will be supported by the SSRDPF (expected in FY 2024/25). Second, a new IMF-supported
Resilience and Sustainability Facility will “strengthen Jamaica’s physical and fiscal resilience to climate
change, while catalyzing funding for climate priorities from both other lenders and the private sector.” This
will be supported by the Government’s efforts to collaborate with “international partners to strengthen
cooperation and crowd in private investment.” Third, the latest CPF and IMF reports indicate that “inflation is
decelerating, international reserves are healthy, and the financial system is well-capitalized and liquid.”

Changing priorities contributed to cancellation of EDRPL2, impeding further actions to implement
measures initiated under EDRPL1. While this was triggered by the COVID-19 crisis, and a subsequent DPL
is expected to pick up on some of the reforms, progress toward achievement of objectives clearly can be
compromised both by external shocks and changes in government priorities. Furthermore, the priorities of
some of the implementing agencies did not necessarily align with those of the Ministry of Finance and the
Public Services, resulting in the unavailability of some data needed for monitoring and evaluation.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


Analytical underpinnings and lessons from prior experience

A number of directly relevant studies and reports motivated the design of actions to support fiscal and
financial sustainability, resilience and inclusion, including (PD, Table 6): LAC Regional Study: Fiscal Rules
in Small Economies (2019); Financial Solutions for Climate and Natural Disaster Risks Program in the
Caribbean (2018); Advancing Disaster Risk Finance in Jamaica; and Jamaica Strengthening Social
Protection System for Disaster Preparedness and Response (2015-2017). Measures to improve the
investment climate were based on previous technical assistance on Trade Logistics in the Caribbean and



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      JM ER DPL I MST (P170223)



two projects: Foundations for Competition and Growth Project; and Promoting Community-based Climate
Resilience in the Fisheries Sector.

The design drew on relevant lessons from experience with the implementation of the First and Second
Competitiveness and Fiscal Management DPL and the Economic Stabilization and Foundations for Growth
Development Policy Loan (PD, para. 37). Those experiences indicated “that a targeted operation, clearly
focused on the critical constraints would have a greater likelihood of achieving results.” Other lessons
included holding social forums to help build Governmental and societal ownership and commitment, and
the importance of coordination with other development partners.

Results chain and indicators

The PD (section 4.2) provided thorough explanations of the rationale for the PAs, which enabled the ICR
(Annex Table A4.1) to formulate a basic theory of change linking the actions to expected outcomes and
impacts. The RIs were generally satisfactory in terms of monitoring the impact of the associated PA and
progress toward objectives, although there were some gaps with respect to tracking achievement of
outcomes.

Identification and mitigation of risks

The PD adequately identified and discussed mitigation of risks in the areas of debt sustainability (paras.
23-24), macroeconomy (paras. 25 and 28), global conditions (para. 26), and natural disasters (para. 27).
Specific risk mitigation measures were discussed under the PAs that were intended to deal with fiscal
sustainability and natural disaster risks.

Consultation with stakeholders and development partners

The PD (para. 74) indicated that consultations with Government, Parliament and other key stakeholders
had been held in connection with preparation of Vision 2030 and the MTF 2018-2021. The PD (para. 75)
also noted close collaboration with the IMF on reforms promoting macroeconomic and fiscal stability, and
with “DFID, the US Agency for International Development, the European Union, and Global Affairs Canada
on issues related to disaster risk financing and disaster risk management,” as well as with the IDB and the
European Union on public financial management.



Rating

Highly Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Monitoring

The data for RIs to monitor implementation of the PAs were readily available and reported in the ICR. However,
monitoring of progress toward intended outcomes and objectives was disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic,

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      JM ER DPL I MST (P170223)



which “took focus away from the ongoing reforms,” and the subsequent cancellation of the planned Second
ERDPL (ICR, para. 11). Furthermore, “data on several results indicators was not systematically tabulated and
shared at program closure….suggesting low buy-in for the program by some agencies” (ICR, para. 55).

Adaptation

The Government and the Bank agreed on a separate standalone emergency DPF to help mitigate the effects of
the pandemic and prepare for recovery (ICR, para. 12). While somewhat complementary to the ERDPL, “the
development objective changed significantly.” Although the team obtained a waiver from the Board to extend
the time for submission of the Second ERDPL, continued delays in reforms led to its cancellation (ICR, para.
11). This compromised the ability to continue with further steps and monitoring toward achievement of the
ultimate objectives.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Strong program design enabled several components to cope reasonably well with the difficult conditions
ensuing from the COVID-19 pandemic, but it proved impossible to overcome the challenges to maintaining
progress in the key area of fiscal sustainability, especially with cancellation of ERDPL 2.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

It is too early for evidence to be available on possible social and poverty impacts.



b. Environmental

It is too early for evidence to be available on improvements in resilience to climate change and other external
shocks.




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       JM ER DPL I MST (P170223)



c. Gender

There were no gender-specific measures and indicators.



d. Other

n.a.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR clearly laid out the challenges to be addressed, in particular with respect to external shocks and fiscal
sustainability, and it made clear the rationale for Bank involvement (although the application of lessons learned
from previous operations was asserted without specifics). It explained the rationale for each PA and formulated
a theory of change (Annex 4). Although it summarized the evidence on achievement of targets in Table 2, it
could have analyzed and interrogated the extent of achievement (and reasons for underachievement) in more
detail in Section B, especially with regard to progress toward intended outcomes/objectives. It stated
reasonable lessons and suggestions for improvement. It was concise and consistent with the guidelines.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreement/Comments
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory         Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                  Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      JM ER DPL I MST (P170223)



Results indicators that are not clearly linked to the results of PAs or the intended outcomes do not
adequately measure the impact of an operation. The target for RI7 was met even though the new customs
bill enabled by PA7 had not been enacted (thus representing progress toward the objective that was
nevertheless not attributable to the action). Submission of annual reports (RI2) was unrelated to either the action
or the objective of reducing the number of public bodies. Specifying a clear results chain from the action to its
implementation to the indicator and the expected outcome can facilitate evaluation of the impact of an operation.

Collaboration with and support for implementing agencies can improve monitoring implementation and
achievement of a DPO. The ICR (para. 55) noted that one risk of a DPO is that “funds are delivered to the
Ministry of Finance and the Public Service, but the agencies tasked with making progress in policy areas are not
necessarily given the resources” to carry implementation forward and monitor progress. The ICR had difficulty
obtaining needed data from some agencies. Providing complementary support to such agencies through
technical assistance or investment operations may help ensure their buy-in.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                    Page 18 of 18
