     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Post COVID-19 Recovery DPF (P174440)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023894

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P174440                                    Post COVID-19 Recovery DPF

 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Peru                                       Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-92250                                31-May-2022                                        750,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Mar-2021                               31-May-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                          750,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           750,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                       750,000,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Antonio M. Ollero           Fernando Manibog           Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The program development objective of the Peru Strengthening Foundations for Post COVID-19 Recovery
Development Policy Financing was to strengthen institutions to mitigate the social and economic impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic and to reinforce [the] structural foundations for an inclusive and climate smart economic
recovery.


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Post COVID-19 Recovery DPF (P174440)




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The program had two pillars.

Strengthening Institutions to Mitigate the Social and Economic Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
supported measures to: (a) expand the number of poor and vulnerable household beneficiaries of cash
transfers in response to job losses and wage cuts arising from the pandemic; (b) adopt modes of digital
payments to better deliver the emergency cash support to affected households; and (c) introduce credit
guarantees to provide needed credit and liquidity to enterprises adversely affected by the pandemic.

Reinforcing the Structural Foundations for an Inclusive and Climate Smart Economic Recovery
supported a wide range of structural and policy reforms to strengthen the country’s economic recovery
following the pandemic, headlined by reforms to: (a) expand financial inclusion with the use of the national
identification number for financial transaction accounts; (b) broaden the access of citizens to broadband
services; (c) foster industrial competition through merger control; (d) upgrade the country’s climate change
ambition and commitments; (e) enhance the verification system for GHG emissions mitigation including for
carbon trading; and (f) expand access to resilient housing through lower savings requirements for low income
groups and incentives for sustainable construction.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Program Cost. The program was estimated to cost US$750 million at appraisal.

Financing. The program was financed by an IBRD loan to the Republic of Peru for US$750 million. The loan
was fully disbursed.

Dates. The program was approved on March 25, 2021, became effective on June 23, 2021, and closed as
scheduled on May 31, 2022.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Peru reacted swiftly to the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic with a set of public health measures aimed at
 containing the spread of the disease (headlined by a general lockdown 10 days after the first case) and a
 package of fiscal (tax relief and emergency expenditures), monetary (interest rate cuts and liquidity
 provisions), and financial measures (withdrawals from savings funds and bankruptcy refinancing) aimed at
 supporting affected households and firms and shoring up the economy amid widespread disruptions to activity
 and production. The announced response package was valued at 20 percent of GDP and was headlined by
 two rounds of emergency cash transfers to households in the second and third trimesters of 2020. Approved
 in March 2021, a year after the outbreak of the pandemic, this development policy operation would support the
 response plan as the pandemic entered a second wave and as the Government, keen on a rebound from the
 downturn in 2020, launched an economic reactivation effort that also included a job-centered works program
 (Trabaja Peru) and a public investment program (Arranca Peru). Combining the elements of a crisis response

                                                                                                 Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Post COVID-19 Recovery DPF (P174440)



and structural reforms to anchor a recovery from the crisis, the program objectives were relevant to
diagnostics and strategies articulated by the Government and the Bank.

Bank Group COVID-19 Crisis Response Strategy. The program development objectives were aligned with
the strategy articulated in the World Bank Group COVID-19 Crisis Response Approach Paper – Saving Lives,
Scaling-up Impact and Getting Back on Track (2020). The strategy paper promoted four pillars: (a) saving
lives – prevent, detect, and respond to the health threat posed by COVID-19 and strengthen national systems
for public health preparedness; (b) protecting the poor and vulnerable – protect poor and vulnerable
households and communities from the economic and social shocks of the crisis, restore human capital, and
promote equity and inclusion in the recovery; (c) supporting business growth and job creation – maintain the
private sector so that viable firms do not exit as a result of the pandemic; and (d) strengthening policies,
institutions, and investments for rebuilding better – maintain a line of sight to long-term goals during the relief
and restructuring stages to regain momentum on the twin goals of economic growth and poverty reduction
in recovery. The program objectives corresponded to the second, third, and fourth pillars of the Bank strategy.

Binding Constraints to Development. The program development objectives – especially the objective to
reinforce the structural foundations for an inclusive and climate smart economic recovery – were relevant to
addressing the binding constraints to development identified for Peru. The Peru Systematic Country
Diagnostic of 2017 cited development constraints across a wide range of sectors, which might otherwise serve
as strong foundation for a rebound from the economic downturn triggered by the pandemic.

      Financial inclusion had been slow, with high transaction costs (costs of opening new bank branches,
         poor infrastructure, and limited connectivity) posing the main obstacles to broadening financial
         inclusion.
        Broadband internet penetration lagged that in other countries in the region, even in urban areas,
         especially outside Lima, with the high price of internet service deterring higher take-up rates. The
         ongoing expansion of the fiber-optic network would improve high-speed internet access and
         affordability, but regulatory barriers might impede reaping the full potential of the investment, if
         the regulatory constraints remained unaddressed.
        Product market competition was higher than average in the region, but barriers to entry and rivalry still
         hindered efforts by firms to raise efficiency or to innovate, especially in the backbone service sectors –
          gas, electricity, airlines, and telecommunications.
        Rapid urbanization had generated a large housing deficit. Some 72 percent of households had no or
         had precarious housing, according to data from the International Development Bank (IDB, 2012, Un
         Espacio para el Desarrollo - Los Mercados de Vivienda en América Latina y el Caribe), and the
         demand for new housing now topped 1.3 million units, according to the Bank (World Bank, 2016,
         Demand for Housing in Peru).
        The country was highly exposed to climate risks and natural hazards, qualifying as a "particularly
         vulnerable country" according to the criteria set by the United Nations Framework Convention on
         Climate Change. Economic losses due to climate change were potentially large – the total loss could
         amount to 5.7-6.8 percent of real GDP (compared to the baseline scenario without climate change) by
         2030, and 20-23 percent of real GDP by 2050. Mitigation and adaptation measures would cut these
         losses.

Bank Group Country Strategy. The program development objectives were aligned with the Bank Group
strategy for Peru at closing. The Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Peru FY23-FY27 (CPF)
committed Bank Group support to the country's development program organized around three "high-level
outcomes" – Increased access to high-quality economic opportunities for workers and entrepreneurs,

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Post COVID-19 Recovery DPF (P174440)



Improved access to quality public services, and Increased resilience to shocks. The program objective
to strengthen institutions to mitigate the social and economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic was aligned
with the third outcome, specifically with the CPF objective to "strengthen mechanisms to protect people
against shocks." The objective to reinforce the structural foundations for an inclusive and climate smart
economic recovery was aligned with the second outcome, specifically with the CPF objective to "enhance the
delivery of public services," and with the third outcome, specifically with the CPF objective to "enhance climate
change mitigation and adaptation."

The Program Development Objective was appropriate in its ambition and relevant to the country context and
Bank strategy.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale



 Objective 1 - To strengthen institutions to mitigate the social and economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemi
 PA1 - In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Borrower has: (i) expanded the National Registry of Households b
 November 30, 2020 and published in the Official Gazette on December 6, 2020, and (ii) introduced new digital payme
 published in the Official Gazette on January 30, 2021, to channel the new Temporary Cash Transfer Programs (Bono
 families.
 PA2 - The Borrower adopted the credit guarantee scheme Reactiva Peru Program to provide liquidity for the enterpri
 Legislative Decree No.1455, dated and published in the Official Gazette on April 6, 2020, and Circular No. 0017-2020
 Objective 2 - To reinforce the structural foundations for an inclusive and climate smart economic recovery
 PA3 - The Borrower has increased financial inclusion through the provision of transaction accounts linked to the natio
 RENIEC and in line with the National Financial Inclusion Policy; as evidenced by the Cuenta DNI Law.
 PA4 - The Borrower has promoted adoption and usage of broadband access by: (i) mandating active infrastructure s
 broadband deployment; as evidenced by the 3rd complementary final disposition of Legislative Decree 1478 dated M
 0709-2020-MTC, dated October 15, 2020 and published in the Official Gazette on October 17, 2020.
 PA5 - The Borrower has enhanced market competition by enacting a new merger control regime; as evidenced by La
 PA 6 - The Borrower has adopted the updated National Determined Contributions (NDC) that increase the Borrower's
 submission, as evidenced by the updated NDC published on the UNFCCC website.
 PA 7 - The Borrower has enhanced measurement, reporting and verification of GHG mitigation initiatives, including fo
 (ii) regulating the process and requirements for private institutions to certify their mitigation efforts under the Carbon F
 MINAM, dated and published in the Official Gazette on December 31, 2019 and MINAM Resolution No 237-2020-MIN
 PA8 - The Borrower has expanded access to more resilient housing under the MiVivienda Program through: (i) reduc
 Legislative Decree No. 1464 dated April 17, 2020 and published in the Official Gazette on April 18, 2020 and Ministe
 May 1, 2020; and (ii) enhancing incentives for sustainable construction under the Nuevo Credito MiVivienda credit m
 and published in the Official Gazette on January 24, 2020 and Decree (Decreto Supremo) No. 007-2020-VIVIENDA,


Objective 1 - To strengthen institutions to mitigate the social and economic impact of the COVID-19
pandemic



                                                                                                       Page 4 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Post COVID-19 Recovery DPF (P174440)



 Peru reported over 140 deaths per 100,000 population in February 2021 (at appraisal), a year after the
  Coronavirus disease was declared a pandemic – at that time, the country ranked the worst in death
  rates (proportional to the population) in the Latin America and Caribbean region and the eight worst in
  the world, according to the Coronavirus Resource Center at Johns Hopkins University. The poor health
  outcomes were exacerbated by the precarious condition of the public health system, poor water and
  sanitation services, and overcrowded housing conditions. Meanwhile, the pandemic triggered an
  economic downturn in Peru, as it did globally, marked by strict and prolonged activity restrictions, area
  lockdowns, and quarantine mandates. The economy contracted 11.1 percent in 2020, with private
  consumption falling 9.8 percent. A government response plan consisting of fiscal and financial
  measures, valued at 20 percent of GDP, kept public consumption growth positive, but widened the fiscal
  deficit to 8.9 percent of GDP in 2020, from 1.6 percent of GDP in 2019. With the economic contraction,
  the poverty rate (US$5-a-day at 2011 PPP) deteriorated to 32.6 percent in 2020, from 20.6 percent in
  2019.
 PA1 aimed to support households adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Two measures
  would enable the Government to more effectively and efficiently administer an assistance
  initiative focused on a set of new temporary cash transfer programs (the Bono Independiente, Bono
  Rural, Bono Yo me Quedo en Casa, Bono Universal). First, the Ministerio de Desarrollo e Inclusión
  Social (MIDIS) would collaborate with three other agencies to integrate their household databases
  and create a new Registro Nacional de Hogares (RNH) – linked to the national identity card managed by
  the Registro Nacional de Identificación y Estado Civil (RENIEC) – that would increase the number of
  eligible beneficiaries to 12.6 million households. Second, the Government would improve the cash
  transfer payments system, by allowing for multiple providers (commercial banks and microfinance
  institutions) rather than a single provider (the Banco de la Nación) and by permitting digital payments
  (bank accounts, mobile bank accounts, cellular accounts, e-wallets, and cashier payments) rather than
  simply physical payments (cash withdrawals). The expanded registry would enable the Government to
  assist the new poor, consisting of unemployed and displaced formal and informal workers in urban
  areas, while digital payments would improve the administration of social assistance programs, expand
  consumer choice of payment providers and methods, and strengthen financial inclusion (i.e., the access
  by individuals and businesses to useful and affordable financial products and services that meet their
  transactions, payments, savings, and credit needs). The relevance of PA1 is rated satisfactory.
 PA2 aimed to support firms adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Facing higher lending costs
  (the average impairment charge on loans rose 3.4 percent in June 2020) and lower profit margins (the
  operating profit plunged to 1.4 percent of average risk-weighted assets in June 2020), many financial
  firms were bound to reduce credit flows to firms as the health and economic crisis raged. To help
  forestall a credit crunch, the Government would adopt the credit guarantee scheme Reactiva Peru
  Program to provide liquidity to lenders and enterprises – the Corporación Financiera Desarollo SA
  (COFIDE) would grant partial government guarantees to eligible credits extended by financial firms to
  business enterprises, enabling the financial firms to participate in central bank repos (using interest rate
  auctions with the COFIDE-guaranteed loan portfolio as collateral) and enabling the enterprises to obtain
  working capital injections to fulfill their liabilities to suppliers and workers. The Reactiva Peru Program
  would: (a) provide liquidity to enterprises, from credits granted by financial firms and guaranteed by
  COFIDE; (b) provide liquidity to financial firms, through their participation in the central bank repo
  market; and (c) enable the central bank to conduct monetary policy efficiently, using repo allocations
  during a period of market stress. The relevance of PA2 is rated satisfactory.




                                                                                               Page 5 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Post COVID-19 Recovery DPF (P174440)




Objective 2 - To reinforce the structural foundations for an inclusive and climate smart economic
recovery

     An incipient economic recovery from the crisis, beginning in 2021, would likely be subdued, with global
      GDP remaining below its pre-pandemic trend and with downside risks clouding the baseline outlook,
      according to the Bank in early 2021 (World Bank, January 2021, Global Economic
      Prospects). Emerging market and developing country economies would need "decisive policy actions to
      raise the likelihood of better growth outcomes while warding off worse ones." For Peru, which had
      undergone several waves of structural reforms in the preceding decades to remove distortions in the
      economy and to promote private led growth (World Bank, 2015, Peru: Building on Success - Boosting
      Productivity for Faster Growth), the challenge was to continue with reforms, amid the crisis, to address
      remaining market failures. This operation would support reforms centered on two themes – an inclusive
      recovery, focusing on financial inclusion, access to broadband services, and market competition, and a
      climate-smart recovery, focusing on climate risk mitigation measures, and resilient housing and
      sustainable housing construction.
     PA3 focused on expanding access to financial services. As late as 2017, the majority of adults
      remained unbanked (only 37 percent had a financial account and only 33 percent had access to formal
      credit), the use of digital financial services was low (19 percent financial account contracts), and gender
      gaps were among the widest in the region. To address these failures, and aligned with the National
      Policy for Financial Inclusion (launched in 2015 with the goal that 75 percent of adults have access to a
      financial transaction account by 2021), the Banco de la Nación (a state bank with extensive presence in
      rural areas), would – under the Cuenta DNI Law and in collaboration with the RENIEC – launch Cuenta
      DNI as a commission-free 100-percent digital account that was linked with the national identification
      number and that also granted access to emergency welfare checks. The Cuenta DNI would boost
      financial inclusion in several ways: (a) it was available to all citizens; (b) other financial service providers
      could, through open banking, allow customers to link their e-wallets to Cuenta DNI; (c) by prioritizing the
      opening of Cuenta DNI for social welfare recipients (mostly women), it would help address the gender
      gap in account ownership; (d) the accounts could be used to deliver digital payments for other purposes
      (e.g., emergency transfers during natural disasters), further expanding the service base for financial
      services. The relevance of PA3 is rated satisfactory.
     PA4 focused on widening access to broadband services. Access to broadband services in Peru was
      poor: (a) some 83 percent of districts had only 2G networks – the lowest telecommunications technology
      available – according to the Inclusive Internet Index; (b) more than half of rural population centers
      did not have mobile internet coverage, according to the Ministry of Transport and Communications; (c)
      limited competition, barriers to innovation, underinvestment, and lack of effective coordination
      constrained universal digital inclusion; yet (d) studies consistently found a positive and significant link
      between internet use and income – De Los Rios (2010), Fernandez and Medina (2011), and Chahura
      and Trelles (2014), and (e) the Government itself estimated that access to the internet could raise
      monthly family income by an average Peruvian sol (PEN) 276 in urban areas and PEN 391 in rural
      areas (Ministry of Transport and Communications, 2020, Economic Impact of Internet Access in
      Peruvian Households). Mandating active infrastructure sharing and radio access network (RAN) sharing
      – the most comprehensive form of access network sharing – would enable telecommunications service
      operators to serve areas where they did not have their own networks. Separately, changes to the
      National Frequency Plan would maximize the use of the 3.5 GHz band (also known as C-band and the
      basis for the first implementations of 5G globally) and facilitate the deployment of 5G. These
      new policies would enhance the ability of market entrants to compete with established operators in


                                                                                                      Page 6 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Post COVID-19 Recovery DPF (P174440)



  areas with poor coverage and to offer better broadband services in rural communities that were served
  by a single operator. The relevance of PA4 is rated satisfactory.
 PA5 aimed to enhance market competition. Although the links among competition, innovation, and
  inclusive growth are complex and multi-faceted, in summary it can be asserted that "competition and
  innovation-led growth are critical to drive productivity gains and support-broad based growth," according
  to the economic literature (e.g., Aghion, Cherif and Hasanov, 2019, Competition, Innovation, and
  Inclusive Growth, IMF Working Paper WP/21/80). Stated differently and more starkly – " less
  competition disproportionately hurts the poor, especially in developing economies, and it contributes to
  rising inequalities and less inclusive growth." In Peru: (a) the lack of competition pressures was slowing
  productivity growth (World Bank, 2014, Peru: Building on Success - Boosting Productivity for Faster
  Growth), including at the sub-national (municipal) market level (Schiffbauer and Sampi, 2019,
  Competition and Productivity: Evidence from Peruvian Municipalities, World Bank Policy Research
  Working Paper 8714); (b) with high levels of concentration in certain markets, resuming higher long-term
  growth would require boosting productivity through more competition (OECD, 2018, OECD-IDB Peer
  Reviews of Competition Law and Policy - Peru; (c) most markets identified by the Instituto Nacional de
  Defensa de la Competencia y de la Protección de la Propiedad Intelectual (INECOPI) as lacking
  competition produced key items in the consumption basket of poor households (World Bank, 2021,
  Fixing Markets, Not Prices - Policy Options to Tackle Economic Cartels in Latin America and the
  Caribbean); (d) while it had made significant achievements with its anti-cartel program, Peru
  remained one of two upper middle-income countries in the region that did not have an economy-wide
  mechanism to control mergers and acquisitions (M&A). This operation supported the enactment of
  a new merger control law in line with international best practices, providing the legal framework to
  regulate M&A activities that, if left unregulated, would derail competition. The relevance of PA5 is rated
  satisfactory.
 PA6 aimed to boost Peru's climate smart recovery. The Government would increase by 50 percent the
  country's Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) – the country's climate action plan to cut
  greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and adapt to climate impacts – first submitted in 2016 as the
  country's governmental obligation under the Paris Agreement (the international treaty on climate change
  adopted by 196 parties in 2015). The new NDC would raise Peru's unconditional GHG reduction target
  from 20 to 30 percent by 2030, and its conditional goal from 30 to 40 percent, compared with the
  business-as-usual (BAU) scenario – the equivalent of reducing emissions by 80.5-119.3 metric tons of
  carbon dioxide. Although the inclusion of the NDC update as a prior action for this operation may be
  questioned, considering that the Paris Agreement asks countries to update their NDCs every five years
  anyway, the ambition of Peru's program – a 50 percent increase – may well justify support for this prior
  action. The Program Document did not quantify the potential economic growth impact of this prior
  action, but the ICR cites a Bank report published at closing in 2022 – the promised climate action had
  the potential of increasing Peru's GDP by 2 percent by 2030 and 10 percent by 2050 (World Bank, 2022,
  Peru - Country Climate and Development Report). The relevance of PA6 is rated satisfactory.
 PA7 served to complement PA6 and support its implementation. Even as it committed to more
  ambitious climate actions, Peru lacked a system to measure, report, and verify GHG mitigation initiatives
  by public and private actors. A measurement and verification system was necessary if Peru were to
  adequately monitor and report on progress with its NDC. The system was also essential if Peru were to
  make further headway with carbon trading – some 29 projects were trading emissions reductions in
  voluntary carbon markets, and another 66, in regulated carbon markets, in 2019. The creation of a
  national registry of mitigation measures, the Registro Nacional de Medidas de Mitigación (RENAMI), as
  the platform to collect, register, and manage information on climate mitigation measures, coupled
  with the regulation of the process by which private actors would certify their mitigation actions, would
  meet both needs – the Government would register and certify GHG emission reduction or

                                                                                             Page 7 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Post COVID-19 Recovery DPF (P174440)



        removal (ERR) actions through RENAMI, while private entities would quantify and report their ERR
        actions in four stages (footprint calculation, verification, reduction, and neutralization) through the Huella
        de Carbono Peru platform, which would be verified by MINAM. The relevance of PA7 is rated
        satisfactory.
       PA8 focused on increasing access to more resilient housing. Peru had the third-largest housing deficit
        in Latin America in 2012 (World Bank, 2012, Peru - Vivienda para Todos) and 1.6-1.9 million
        households still suffered from housing deficit in 2020, with lower-income households facing the greatest
        shortages (Banco Central de Reserva del Peru, 2021, Construcción Residencial y el Mercado
        Inmobilarió). This operation supported the expansion of the housing programs administered by Fondo
        MiVivienda whereby the Government would – reduce the savings requirement for the acquisition and
        construction of new housing for low-income groups under the Techo Propio Program; increase the
        amount of the Family Housing Bonus in the case of construction on own site; and enhance incentives for
        the use of sustainable construction techniques and materials. Providing access to affordable housing,
        particularly for low-income families, was expected to foster inclusive growth. Meanwhile, the use of
        sustainable construction techniques and materials would help with climate-smart development. The
        relevance of PA is rated satisfactory.

 The prior actions were appropriate for realizing the intended objectives. All the eight prior actions were rated as
 Satisfactory. Overall, the relevance of design is rated as Satisfactory.




Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Objective 1 - To strengthen institutions to mitigate the social and economic impact of the COVID-
19 pandemic

       RI1 – The percentage of the new temporary cash transfer program disbursements channeled
        through bank accounts or e-wallets was adequate to measure the impact of raising the number of
        cash transfer beneficiaries to include those affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, consolidating the
        rolls of beneficiaries into a single national registry, and broadening the range of transfer payment
        methods to include digital payments. RI1 was adequate to reflect improvements in the institutional
        arrangements to deliver and manage the transfer payments to support of households affected by
        the pandemic. The relevance of RI1 is rated satisfactory.
       RI2 – Although an increase in credit to the private sector, as a percentage of GDP, would reflect
        an improvement in the economy arising from measures to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19
        pandemic on enterprises and financial firms, it is questionable that the increase could be attributed
        to PA2 alone. Peru had launched other initiatives that could have sustained credit flows to the
        private sector: (a) the Banco Central de Reserve del Peru cut the policy rate in March and April
        2020 by a cumulative 200 basis points to a record low 0.25 percent; (b) the central bank adopted

                                                                                                       Page 8 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Post COVID-19 Recovery DPF (P174440)



      forward guidance on the future path of the key interest rate, exerting downward pressure on long-
      term rates; (c) the central bank eased the reserve requirements on domestic and foreign short-
      term deposits and the minimum current account requirements on banks; and (d) the banking
      supervisor, Superintendencia de Banca y Seguros, allowed financial firms to modify the terms of
      their loans to households and enterprises without changing the classification of the
      loans. Moreover, as a macro financial variable, credit to the private sector is driven by various
      economic and non-economic factors, including economic growth itself (or prospects for economic
      growth), political systems and legal traditions, and institutions (Levine, 1997, Financial
      Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda, Journal of Economic Literature, Vol.
      XXXV (June 1997), pp. 688-726). Because of an attribution problem (i.e., changes in credit to the
      private sector, in percent of GDP, cannot be attributed to policy innovations supported by PA2
      alone), the relevance of RI2 is rated moderately satisfactory.


Objective 2 - To reinforce the structural foundations for an inclusive and climate smart economic
recovery

     RI3A – The number of Cuentas DNI accounts activated primarily for cash transfers was intended
      to measure the impact of the enactment of the Ley de Cuenta DNI and the collaboration by Banco
      de Nacion and RENIEC to open, for all citizens, Cuentas DNI accounts. While the initial phase of
      the program focused on serving payments of cash transfers, and hence partly justified the use of
      RI3A, the confinement of RI3BAto accounts "primarily for cash transfers" would under-estimate the
      full impact of PA3, if the prior action actually succeeded in opening Cuentas DNI accounts for all
      citizens and not just social transfer recipients. In hindsight, PA3 substantially accomplished that
      goal a year after closing, with the opening of 28 million Cuentas DNI accounts for a population of
      33 million. Because of the limited scope of RI3A relative to PA3, the relevance of RI3A is rated
      moderately satisfactory.
     RI3B – The gender gap in account ownership (percentage points) was adequate to measure the
      impact of opening DNI Cuenta accounts for all citizens and to measure progress toward financial
      inclusion for women. Since the early phase of Cuentas DNI account opening was devoted to
      serving social transfer payments and since most household social transfer payment recipients
      were women, PA3 would lead directly to RI3B, i.e., raise account ownership by women and
      close the gender gap in financial inclusion. The relevance of RI3B is rated satisfactory.
     RI4 – The percentage of the population covered by 4G networks was intended to measure the
      impact of mandating infrastructure sharing among telecommunications service operators and
      broadening the use of the C-band. While the C-band has served as the basis for the first
      implementations of 5G globally, the reference by RI4 to 4G (rather than 5G) coverage represents a
      more conservative target. Nonetheless, RI4 is adequate to measure the impact of PA4 – 4G
      remained the dominant technology for mobile subscription globally in 2022, with 58 percent of the
      world population covered by 4G networks in 2022, versus 31 percent by 5G networks (which
      started commercial deployment only in 2019) (International Telecommunications Union, Facts and
      Figures 2023). The relevance of RI4 is rated satisfactory.
     RI5 – The number of INDECOPI decisions assessing the anticompetitive effects of mergers would
      reflect progress toward effective merger regulation and enhanced market competition. However,
      as defined, RI5 makes no reference to the number of merger application filed with the competition
      authority. A stronger results indicator would have been the percentage of decisions made by the
      INDECOPI assessing the anticompetitive effects of mergers out of the total number of merger
      applications filed with the agency. The logic of this alternative indicator is fairly straightforward – a

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Post COVID-19 Recovery DPF (P174440)



       target of 5 INDECOPI decisions would be less significant if 100 merger applications were filed with
       the competition agency (a 5 percent assessment rate) than if 10 merger applications were filed (50
       percent). The relevance of RI5 is rated moderately satisfactory.
      RI6 – The number of annual reports from sectoral agencies on the implementation of mitigation
       measures was a relatively weak indicator to measure the impact of Peru raising its NDC
       commitments in 2020. The result ought to be that Government agencies (if the target were
       confined to the government sector) have achieved their NDC obligations – if not in actual GHG
       emission reductions by 2022, then in concrete actions to reduce GHG emissions by some
       quantitative target in some future target date. As defined, RI6 is confined to producing annual
       reports, albeit about program implementation, without any reference to the achievement (however
       defined) of the program targets. The relevance of RI6 is rated moderately unsatisfactory.
      RI7 – The number of private and public sector entities that registered their mitigation measures in
       RENAMI and in Huella de Carbono Perú was adequate to measure the impact of creating
       the national registries of climate mitigation measures, in response to the lack of a national system
       to measure, report, and verify GHC mitigation measures by the public and private sectors. An
       increase in the number of entities that registered their mitigation measures would reflect a higher
       rate of participation by public and private actors in climate actions. The relevance of RI7 is rated
       satisfactory.
      RI8 – The number of Bono de Vivienda Sostenible (sustainable construction subsidies) was
       adequate to measure the impact of the actions to expand access to more resilient housing under
       the MiVivienda Program (the financial program wherein the Government provides low-cost funds
       to financial institutions that on-lend to customers for home purchase or construction). The Bono
       de Vivienda Sostenible is direct non-refundable financial aid granted to people who access
       sustainable housing through a MiVivienda credit provided by an intermediary financial
       institution. Award of a Bono de Vivienda Sostenible means that the recipient would have obtained
       a MiVivienda credit for sustainable housing purchase or construction, which was the object of the
       PA8 measures. The relevance of RI5 is rated satisfactory.

The results framework was mostly appropriate with clear, feasible, and measurable indicators. Some
indicators had moderate shortcomings, as noted above, Overall, the relevance of results indicators is
rated as Moderately Satisfactory.

Results         Associated Relevance        Baseline   Target    Actual Value Actual      Achievement
Indicator       Prior Action Rating                                           Change in Rating
                                                                              Results
                                                                              Indicator
                                                                              Relative to
                                                                              the
                                                                              Targeted
                                                                              Change, in
                                                                              Percent
Objective 1 - To strengthen institutions to mitigate the social and economic impact of the COVID-
19 pandemic
RI1 -          PA1         Satisfactory 30           80          77           96%         Substantial
 Percentage of                            (April     (June
the new                                   2020)      2021)
temporary cash


                                                                                                 Page 10 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Post COVID-19 Recovery DPF (P174440)



transfer
program
disbursements
channeled via
bank accounts
or e-wallets
RI2 - Credit to PA2         Moderately     26.9     At least    31.1        116        Substantial
the private                 Satisfactory (Q4-2020) 26.9         (Q4-2021) (Q4-2021)
sector as a                                         (Q4-2021)
percentage of                                                   28          104
GDP                                                             (Q4-2022) (Q4-2022)
Objective 2 - To reinforce the structural foundations for an inclusive and climate smart economic
recovery
RI3A - Number PA3           Moderately     0        1           1.8         180        Substantial
of activated                Satisfactory (2019)     (March      (February
accounts                                            2022)       2022)
(Cuentas DNI)
– primarily for
cash transfers,
in million

RI3B - Gender     PA3      Satisfactory    17       10        9            111          High
gap in account                             (2019)   (2021)    (Q4-2021)
ownership
(percentage
points)
RI4 -             PA4      Satisfactory    77       83        87           105          High
 Percentage of                             (2019)   (2021)    (2021)
population
covered by 4G
networks
(international
data from
GSMA)
RI5 - Average     PA5      Moderately      0        5         8            160          Substantial
number of                  Satisfactory    (2020)   (2021)    (2021)       (2021)
INDECOPI
decisions                                                     38           760
assessing                                                     (2023)       (2023)
anticompetitive
effects of
mergers per
year
RI6 - Number      PA6      Moderately     0         5         9            180          Substantial
of annual                  Unsatisfactory (2020)    (2021)    (2021)
reports from
sectorial

                                                                                            Page 11 of 21
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Post COVID-19 Recovery DPF (P174440)



               agencies on
               the
               implementation
               of mitigation
               measures in
               accordance
               with the
               updated NDC
               RI7 - Number PA7           Satisfactory    0         320        480          150            High
               of private and                             (2019)    (March     (March       (March
               public sector                                        2022)      2022)        2022)
               entities that
               registered their                                                921          288
               mitigation                                                      (April 2023) (April 2023)
               measures in
               Huella de
               Carbono Perú
               and RENAMI
               RI8 - Number PA8           Satisfactory    5,900     6,500      7,730        119            High
               of “Bono de                                (2019)    (2021)     (2021)       (2021)
               Vivienda
               Sostenible”                                                     8,038        124
               (sustainable                                                    (2022)       (2022)
               construction
               subsidies)




   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To strengthen institutions to mitigate the social and economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic

                Rationale
               Theory of Change. To mitigate the adverse economic and social effects of the pandemic, Peru needed to
               strengthen the institutions by which poor and vulnerable households could be assisted with income support,
               and enterprises, with credit flows. A consolidated emergency cash transfer program that aimed to add
               2.5 million households to the social protection roll would be more effective in reaching its goals if bank
               accounts and e-wallets could be added to the cash transfer distribution channel. Separately, a government


                                                                                                              Page 12 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Post COVID-19 Recovery DPF (P174440)



partial credit guarantee scheme would enable business enterprises to better obtain working capital loans from
banks amid tightened financial conditions triggered by the crisis.

Outcomes. The percentage of cash transfers disbursed to poor and vulnerable households through banks
accounts or through e-wallets was a low 30 percent in the baseline, a month into the pandemic. Meanwhile,
credit to the private sector had plunged from 44.7 percent of GDP in 2019 to 26.9 percent of GDP in the
fourth quarter of 2020, nine months into the pandemic.

After the expansion of the national registry of households and the introduction of new digital payment
methods, new temporary cash transfer disbursements that were channeled through bank accounts or e-
wallets rose from 30 percent in the baseline to 77 percent by closing, substantially achieving the target
increase to 80 percent. The Government extended emergency cash transfers averaging US$211 per
household to some 8.4 million households (out of the 12.6 million households in the new Registro Nacional de
Hogares), The expansion allowed for multiple payment methods and multiple payments service providers.

Following the introduction of the partial credit guarantee scheme, credit to the private sector increased from
26.9 percent of GDP in the baseline to 31.1 percent of GDP at closing, meeting the target that credit to the
private sector be at least 26.9 percent of GDP. The US$16 billion Reactiva Peru credit guarantee scheme
topped 8 percent of GDP (PEN 52.3 billion of guarantees supported PEN 58 billion of credits)
and benefitted 501,298 firms (MSMEs comprised 98 percent of firms and 46 percent of credit volume), which
firms accounted for 2.8 million jobs (half of all formal worker jobs). Labor market participation rates gradually
recovered to near pre-pandemic levels – 79.6 for men (just 1.5 percentage points below the pre-pandemic
rate) and 63.3 percent for women (1.2 percentage point below the pre-pandemic rate). Without the
Reactiva Peru Program, financial conditions would have been tighter, economic production would have been
lower, and poverty rates would have been two percentage points higher, according to studies.

With the attainment of the results targets, this operation achieved the objective to strengthen the institutions
to mitigate the social and economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. This development outcome is likely
to be sustained in the short to medium term.

The RNH will likely be useful for the identification of beneficiaries in future government assistance programs:
(a) the country's first comprehensive social registry has data on 12.6 million households and 33 million
individuals, covering practically the entire national population (33.7 million in 2021); (b) the roll is linked to the
national identification card, forestalling the duplication of identities; (c) at closing, the Government enacted a
new law on household targeting, the Sistema Nacional de Focalización de Hogares (SINOFA), transferring
the management of the RNH to the MIDIS to better ensure the sustainability, operability, and technological
integrity of the registry.

The success of digital payments under the emergency cash transfer programs made a compelling business
case for the adoption of digital payments elsewhere in the economy. According to the ICR, the digital
payments under the program have had spillover effects – the number e-wallet transactions grew 358 percent,
economy-wide, from 2019 to 2022.

Overall, most of the targets were achieved or exceeded. There was shortcoming in the achievement of the
indicator regarding the percentage of the new temporary cash transfer program disbursements channeled
through bank accounts or e-wallets. The achievement of the objective is rated as Satisfactory.



                                                                                                       Page 13 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Post COVID-19 Recovery DPF (P174440)




Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To reinforce the structural foundations for an inclusive and climate smart economic recovery

Rationale
Theory of Change. A two-pronged approach to advancing economic growth – the first, based on an
inclusive growth path, and the second, on a climate smart strategy – would help Peru to better rebound from
the economic contraction caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Inclusive growth would focus on expanding
access to financial services, widening access to broadband services, and expanding market competition and
innovation. A climate smart recovery would be driven by an upgrade to the country's contribution to the
international climate action plan, coupled with a more explicit and credible system to verify and monitor these
commitments by public and private actors, and an expansion of access to environmentally sustainable
housing technologies.

Outcomes. In the baseline, ownership of DNI Cuenta financial accounts was nil, reflecting low levels of
financial inclusion; the coverage of the 4G telecommunications networks was below par, disadvantaging
underserved regions; and pro-competitive decisions by the competition authority were non-existent, stifling
industrial development.

Following the launch of digital accounts, the number of Cuenta DNI accounts that were activated primarily for
cash transfers reached 1.8 million by closing, exceeding the target of one million. The accounts facilitated the
payment of emergency cash transfers worth more than US$140 million to provide financial support to
households affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Moreover, the Banco de la Nacion had reportedly
broadened the functionality of its Cuenta DNI accounts, in anticipation of its future use for other Government
payment purposes.

In the process, the gender gap in financial account ownership was reduced from 17 percentage points in the
baseline to 9 percentage points by closing, exceeding the target reduction to 10 percentage points, according
to the Bank's Global Findex Database 2021 Edition (of indicators on access to, and use of, formal and
informal financial services and digital payments).

As a result of mandates for infrastructure sharing in the broadband market, the share of the population
covered by 4G increased from 77 percent in the baseline to 87 percent by closing, exceeding the target
increase to 83 percent, as measured by the Groupe Speciale Mobile Association (GSMA), the organization
representing mobile network operators worldwide. Additional data provided by the ICR include the following:
(a) mobile internet traffic doubled between 2019 and 2021; (b) in rural areas, the percentage of households
reporting having access to mobile internet rose from 37.8 percent in 2019 to 68.3 percent in 2021; (c)
nationwide, the percentage of households reporting having access to mobile internet rose from 74.2 percent
in 2019 to 85.8 percent in 2021. These additional data – quoted from the Organismo Supervisor de Inversión
Privada en Telecomunicaciones (OSIPTEL), Reporte Estadistico - Oktubre 2023 – would follow from the rise
in coverage by the 4G networks (RI4) and serve to validate the numbers reported by the GSMA. Following
the reforms to boost the deployment of, and widen access to, broadband services (PA4), the percentage of
the rural population with access to the internet increased by 15.5 percentage points from 2019 to

                                                                                                 Page 14 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Post COVID-19 Recovery DPF (P174440)



2022. Moreover, among households in the lowest quantile of the consumption expenditure scale, the
percentage with access to the internet increased by 21.7 percentage points over the same period.

The number of INDECOPI decisions assessing the anti-competitive effects of mergers reached 8 by closing,
exceeding the target of 5. In the baseline, except in the electricity sector (which is not covered by this
operation and prior action), Peru did not have a control regime for mergers (i.e., the competition authority did
not evaluate mergers nor issue any decisions on them). The ICR also provides additional information to
better understand the context and consequences of the INDECOPI decisions: (a) most merger transactions
were eventually authorized; (b) one transaction in the pharmaceutical industry was authorized under special
conditions meant to preserve competition – the benefits (savings to consumers) arising from the decision was
estimated as exceeding US$4 million; (c) many private parties refrained from submitting their merger
proposals to the competition authority on realizing the anticompetitive effects of their proposal – the merger
control regime served as a deterrent to harmful market consolidations; (d) the evaluation system was efficient
– the average time to hand down a ruling was 22 business days, fewer than in Chile, the regional benchmark,
and (e) there was no evidence that the new procedure had delayed investments, a concern of the private
sector.

In the baseline, neither public agencies nor private entities listed their climate risk mitigation commitments in
any public registry nor did they report to the public on the implementation of their mitigation
measures. Separately, only 5,900 Bono de Vivienda Sostenible subsidies had been granted.

Following the upgrade to the NDC, the number of agency reports documenting the implementation of
mitigation measures pursuant to the updated NDC reached nine by closing, exceeding the target of
five. According to the ICR, the creation of the High-Level Commission on Climate Change helped
mainstream climate action across economic sectors and levels of government. This institutional reform was
complemented by a key policy measure - the updating of the National Strategy for Climate Change. The
indicators and the ICR did not specify the concrete actions tor targets o reduce GHG emissions.

After the creation of RENAMI, the number of public and private entities that registered their mitigation
measures in the Huella de Carbono Peru (the digital platform administered by the Ministry of the Environment
that generates information about, and facilitates monitoring of, GHG emissions and part of the international
network of carbon footprint communications programs) and the Registro Nacional de Medidas de Mitigación
(RENAMI) (the national registry for mitigation measures) reached 480 by closing, exceeding the target of
320. According to the ICR, the emission reductions that reached verification stage in Huella de Carbono
Peru increased from 30,700 tons of carbon dioxide (tCO2) in 2019 to 2.7 million tCO2 in 2021 (Huella de
Carbono Peru, Estadistica de Reduccion).

And, after reforms to the MiVIvienda Program, the number of Bono de Vivienda Sostenible subsidies
increased from 5,900 in the baseline to 8,308 by closing, exceeding the target of 6,500.

With the attainment of the results targets, this operation achieved the objective to reinforce the structural
foundations for an inclusive and climate smart economic recovery. This development outcome is likely to be
sustained in the short to medium term.

On financial inclusion, the number of Cuenta DNI accounts topped 24 million by November 2023, a year and
a half after closing, more than 1,300 percent that achieved by the program in 2022.



                                                                                                    Page 15 of 21
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Post COVID-19 Recovery DPF (P174440)



                      On merger control and market competition, the number of INDECOPI decisions assessing the anti-
                      competitive effects of mergers reached 38 in 2023, from 8 at closing in 2022. Post-closing, a survey of
                      competition and anti-trust lawyers in the region ranked Peru favorably (compared to Chile, Colombia, and
                      Ecuador) on many aspects of competition regulation, including depth of legal analysis, juridical deference
                      (i.e., the principle of judicial review in which a federal court yields to an agency's interpretation of a statute or
                      regulation), agency professionalism, transparency, efficiency to detect the existence of cartels, clarity and
                      predictability in the application of rules, and anti-trust law compliance (Deloitte et. al., 2023, Estudio Sobre
                      la Percepción de las Autoridades de Libre Competencia en Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, y Peru).

                      On climate risk mitigation and adaptation, the number of entities that registered their mitigation measures
                      reached 921 by 2023, almost twice the 480 achieved under this program in 2022. Although PA6 committed
                      only to the doubling of the country's GHG emission reduction targets with the NDC update of 2020, Peru
                      actually pledged more than this target. In submitting the NDC update in December 2020, the
                      President announced the country’s commitment to achieving net zero CO2 emissions by 2050. Three new
                      developments help reinforce the updated commitments: (a) the Government released the National Adaptation
                      Plan (NAP) in June 2021, prioritizing the agriculture, water, forestry, fisheries and aquaculture, and health
                      sectors, identifying two new areas – tourism and transport, and proposing strategies to implement 13 strategic
                      actions, 46 products, and 92 adaptation actions; (b) the Multiannual Macroeconomic Framework for 2022-25
                      now includes specific fiscal forecasts for climate change for the first time; and (c) the Bank recently approved
                      new operations – the programmatic First (2022-2023) and Second (2023-2026) Enabling Green and Resilient
                      Development Policy Loans – to support the development of a green financing framework, the
                      adoption of sustainability criteria in public investment management, the transition to renewable energy, and
                      the decarbonization of the transport sector.

                      While there are some moderate shortcomings in the relevance of the results indicators under the objectives,
                      most of the indicators were met or exceeded. The achievement of this objective is rated as Satisfactory.



                      Rating

                      Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The degree of achievement of the objective to strengthen institutions to mitigate the social and economic impact
of the COVID-19 pandemic is rated satisfactory. The degree of achievement of the objective to reinforce [the]
structural foundations for an inclusive and climate smart economic recovery is rated satisfactory. The overall
achievement of the objectives is rated satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Satisfactory

                                                                                                                             Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Post COVID-19 Recovery DPF (P174440)




6. Outcome

Rationale

The relevance of the prior actions in achieving the program development objectives is rated satisfactory. The
overall relevance of the results indicators in measuring and signaling that the prior actions had achieved and are
achieving the program objectives is rated satisfactory. The overall efficacy is rated satisfactory. The outcome
of the operation is rated satisfactory.


a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Development outcomes achieved by this program are likely to be sustained in the short to medium term,
based on the post-closing developments cited by the ICR, in particular – the utility of the RNH for other
government social assistance programs and the growth of e-wallet transactions since (see Section 5 -
Objective 1), as well as the rapid surge in Cuenta DNI accounts, heightened regulatory activity by
INDECOPI, and the elevation of the Government's international commitments to climate risk mitigation (see
Section 5 - Objective 2).


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


Analytic Underpinnings. The diagnostics of development problems and the design of prior actions was
informed by analytic work produced by the Bank, other development partners, and the Government.

Cooperation with Other Development Partners. The Bank collaborated with other development
partners on the design of several prior actions and on other aspects of this operation. For example, on PA2
- the Bank, the IMF, and the Government collaborated on the Reactiva Peru Program; on PA3 - The Bank
and the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) combined their expertise on digital financial inclusion,
with the IADB supporting activities on the demand side (e.g., promoting MSME digitalization) through a
budget support operation and the Bank supporting the creation of Cuenta DNI accounts through this
development policy operation; on PA5 - the Bank, the OECD, and the United National Conference on
Trade and Development (UNCTAD) engaged in technical discussions and supported capacity-building
activities related to merger control and competition policy.




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Post COVID-19 Recovery DPF (P174440)



Macroeconomic Framework - The Bank coordinated with the IMF in evaluating and monitoring the
macroeconomic framework governing this operation. The policy framework was deemed adequate for this
operation and sustainable over the medium-term. The crisis and the country's fiscal and financial
response would weaken available buffers (e.g., the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, liquid asset reserves at the
General Account, and contingent credit lines). This operation would provide financing equal to 0.3 percent
of 2020 GDP.

Operational Risks and Mitigation Measures. The Bank assessed the overall risk of the operational to be
moderate, although it considered two risks as substantial - political and governance risk, and institutional
capacity risk. The risk mitigation measures were largely adequate during implementation. Political and
governance risk arose from recent tensions between the executive and legislative branches
of government, culminating in the impeachment of the President in November 2020, the appointment of an
interim President, and the scheduled conduct of elections in April 2021 (two months ahead of the Board
date for this operation). Three measures would mitigate the political and governance risk: (a) the operation
would focus on incontrovertible elements of the CVID-19 response plan – support to households and
support to firms; (b) the legislation supported by this operation had strong bipartisan appeal – the Ley de
Cuenta DNI (PA3) and the Ley de Control Previo de Concentraciones Empresariales (PA5); and (c) the
Bank had engaged various stakeholders in policy dialogue over reforms supported by this operation, and
the reforms enjoyed strong support across the political spectrum – financial inclusion, and market
competition. Historically weak inter-agency coordination and slow consensus-building processes implied
that implementation capacity risk was substantial for this operation, as it was for other Bank operations in
Peru. To mitigate the risk, the Bank: (a) selected institutions that had a strong track of program
implementation – the Banco de Nación and RENIEC (PA3), the Ministry of Transport and Communications
(PA4), and INDECOPI (PA5); (b) obtained agreement for the Government to ensure funding for the new
institutional arrangements to implement reforms supported by this operation – for the new Merger Control
Unit at INDECOPI; and (c) continued to provide technical assistance and advisory services to help the
Government implement the policy reforms supported by this operation – just-in-time support for the
national registry, roll-out of the Cuenta DNI, technical assistance for the digital connectivity agenda, and
continuing advisory services on competition policy.

Overall, the Bank performance is rated as Satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Monitoring. The Bank monitored progress toward the achievement of the result targets. There were data
available to report on the results targets at closing (end-December 2021 for annual data, and end-March 2022
for other data). The ICR adds that the Bank continued to engage various stakeholders on the progress of
Government programs directly or indirectly supported by the reforms advanced by this operation (e.g., the



                                                                                                  Page 18 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Post COVID-19 Recovery DPF (P174440)



emergency cash transfer programs, and digital payments to convey the transfers). The stakeholder meetings
were conducted virtually during the pandemic.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Bank performance at design is rated satisfactory. Bank performance during implementation is rated
satisfactory. Overall Bank performance is rated satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The ICR argues that the operation had positive poverty and social impacts, including a greater access to the
internet by poorer households, a rebound in labor market participation rates, including by women, and a less
severe uptick in poverty rates than would have been expected given the severity of the health and economic
crisis (see Section 5 - Objective 1 and Objective 2).



b. Environmental

Two prior actions were expected to have positive environmental effects, according to the Program Document: (a)
PA6 would advance Peru toward a low-carbon climate-resilient development path; and (b) PA7 would generate
emissions reductions, contributing to the achievement of the NDC update targets, and facilitate the country's
access to the international carbon market.




c. Gender




                                                                                                 Page 19 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Post COVID-19 Recovery DPF (P174440)



The ICR cites the achievement of RI3B (the narrowing of the gender gap in financial account ownership) as
evidence of the positive gender effects of this operation, ex-post.

Related to RI3B (although not part of the formal results framework), the ICR adds that the share of women making
payments using the internet or their phones increased 3.4 percentage points from 2019 to 2022.



d. Other

---

10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR is consistent with OPCS guidelines on ICRs for development financing operations and includes a
highly informative discussion of the relevance of the prior actions. The efficacy assessment is outcome-
oriented and based on the degree of achievement of the results targets. The ICR provides additional
information about the results post-closing, which are useful to assess the sustainability of the development
outcomes achieved by the operation. The ICR presents ample evidence to support its assessment of the
Bank’s performance at design. The enumeration of the analytic underpinnings of the operation and accounts of
the coordination with other international partners are fairly detailed. The ICR draws lessons that would be
valuable to development policy operations in upper middle-income countries.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
 Ratings                       ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreement/Comments
                                                                               This ICR Review rates the
                                                                               degree of achievement of RI1
 Outcome                       Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory              and RI6 as substantial; hence
                                                                               the efficacy of the objectives is
                                                                               satisfactory.
 Bank Performance              Satisfactory          Satisfactory
 Relevance of Results
                               ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
 Indicators
 Quality of ICR                ---                   Substantial



                                                                                                  Page 20 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Post COVID-19 Recovery DPF (P174440)



12. Lessons

Two lessons are drawn from the ICR, with some adaptation.

In upper-middle-income countries pursuing long-term structural and policy reform programs, continued
Bank technical assistance can help build a pipeline of measures that can deepen the reform effort in the
future. Peru had embarked on three rounds of reforms beginning in the 1990s that helped boost real income
per capita growth to 3 percent annually over 1990-2013 (versus 1.7 percent for the Latin America and
Caribbean region) and lifted the economy to upper-middle-income status in 2008. The structural and policy
reforms supported by this operation were informed by diagnostics, policy dialogue, institutional capacity-building
activities, technical assistance, and analytical and advisory services continued by the Bank and other
development partners (and mostly financed by multi-year trust funds) over the years even as Peru had
graduated to upper-middle-income status. For example, merger control has been debated in Peru for the past
15 years; the Bank, as well as the OECD, provided technical assistance and advisory services to key
stakeholders to inform the policy debate. That continued Bank engagement with Peru proved beneficial for the
design of this operation reinforces the conclusions drawn by an IEG evaluation – it found that continued Bank
engagement with upper-middle-income countries helped these countries to address structural issues that
underlay their vulnerability to various shocks; helped sustain progress in several important development areas;
and offered potentially valuable demonstration effects to lower-income countries (IEG, 2017, World Bank Group
Engagement in Upper-Middle-Income Countries: Evidence from IEG Evaluations).

Political risk can be effectively mitigated by prudent program design decisions that consider the
political feasibility of reform measures. In this operation, the reform measures (prior actions) were
completed notwithstanding the political turmoil that ensued following the impeachment of the President in
November 2020 and the call for elections in April 2021. At program design, the Bank and the Government
selected reform areas that had been extensively vetted with stakeholder groups – access to financial services,
access to broadband services, and access to housing. The Bank and the Government focused on two
proposed legislation that had strong bipartisan support in Congress – the Ley de Cuenta DNI, which would
advance the National Financial Inclusion Policy, and the Ley de Control Previo de Concentraciones
Empresariales, which would institute a new merger control regime to enhance market competition. The Bank
and the Government supported two COVID-19 response measures that had popular support and were endorsed
by leaders across the political spectrum – emergency cash transfers to affected households and credit support
for affected firms.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                   Page 21 of 21
