     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Land Regis & Cadastre Modernization Proj (P106284)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023844

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P106284                                    Land Regis & Cadastre Modernization Proj

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Turkiye                                    Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-75370,IBRD-85410                      30-Sep-2013                                          238,531,391.12

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 01-May-2008                                31-May-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           203,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            264,013,827.16                                                0.00

 Actual                                        238,531,391.12                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Maria Shkaratan             Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                     IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Original Project Development Objective (PDO) was “to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the
   land registry and cadastre services through: (i) renovating and updating cadastre maps to support digital
   cadastre and land registry information; (ii) making the digital land registry and cadastre information available
   to public and private entities; (iii) improving customer services in land registry and cadastre offices; (iv)
   improving human resources in TKGM; and (v) developing policies and capacity to introduce best international
   practices in property valuation in Turkey.” (Legal Agreement, page 2).


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Land Regis & Cadastre Modernization Proj (P106284)



   The PDO was stated almost the same way, with a slightly different wording, in the Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD): “To improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the land registry and cadastre services. This
   objective will be achieved through: (i) renovating and updating cadastre maps to support digital cadastre and
   land registry information; (ii) making the digital land registry and cadastre information available to public and
   private entities (iii) improving customer services in land registry and cadastre offices; (iv) improving human
   resources in the TKGM; (v) developing policies and capacity to introduce in Turkey best international
   practices in property valuation. (PAD, page 4).

   The PDO was not revised. The Additional Financing (AF) Restructuring Paper (October 15, 2015) used the
   phrasing from the Legal Agreement and noted that “The PDO that exists in the system is edited to match the
   exact same wording of the original Loan Agreement (no.7537-TU). This revision which is only editorial does
   not introduce any changes to the substance of the original PDO but is marked as a change in PDO due to
   system requirements.”

   For the purposes of this Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR) review, the objective
   will be assessed as follows:

   PDO 1: To improve the effectiveness of the land registry and cadastre services.

   PDO 2: To improve the efficiency of the land registry and cadastre services.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  15-Oct-2015

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Note: While total Project costs are presented in USD, component costs are quoted in euros (EUR), the
   currency of the loan. The Project team did not find it possible to provide component costs in USD due to
   significant fluctuations of the EUR / USD exchange rate over the 15-year long implementation of the Project.
   Also, the component costs include financing from the two IBRD loans (the original loan for the appraisal
   estimates and both the original and the additional finance loans at closure) but not the Borrower
   contribution, due to a significant devaluation of the Turkish Lira over the Project life.

   1. Original components

   Component 1 Cadastre and Land Registry Renovation, Data Improvement and Updating (cost at
   appraisal: EUR 112.7 million; actual cost: EUR 170.3 million) was to support the conversion of the
   cadaster and land registry data into digital format; the integration of the data into accurate, consistent,

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Land Regis & Cadastre Modernization Proj (P106284)



standardized, and legally agreed digital cadastral maps and datasets; and the development of base maps.
The data would be made available to the Turkish Computerized Cadastre and Land Registry System
(TAKBIS). The digitalization and the creation of cadastral maps would be completed in five high priority
regions (Ankara, Antalya, Istanbul, Izmir, and Gaziantep) and initiated in other regions. Base maps would
be developed for selected areas.

Component 2 Improved Service Delivery (cost at appraisal: EUR 12.4 million; actual cost: EUR 17.1
million) was to finance modernization of the offices, including new equipment, for the General Directorate
of Land Registry and Cadastre (TKGM). The modernization would support the updated TAKBIS and lead to
improved work processes. The component was also to finance strategic advice on the national
implementation of TAKBIS. In addition, the component would make the e-Cadastre data available through
the Turkish National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI).

Component 3 Human Resources and Institutional Development (cost at appraisal: EUR 3.9 million;
actual cost: EUR 0.02 million) was to support the design of strategic plans and human resources
development plans for TKGM. The component would also finance training, study visits to countries which
have undertaken similar modernization programs, and the development of video conferencing capability
between regional directorates and HQ.

Component 4: Property Valuation (cost at appraisal: EUR 3.2 million; actual cost: EUR 1.0 million)
was to support policy and institutional development for the introduction of property valuation function, based
on best international practices. This would include the development of interim guidelines, piloting property
valuation in two municipalities, and related capacity building.

Component 5: Project Management (cost at appraisal: EUR 1.4 million; actual cost: EUR 1.3 million)
was to finance project management costs, including procurement, financial management, supervision of the
field activities, and monitoring and evaluations (M&E).

Unallocated at appraisal: EUR 1.4 million. This amount was allocated at the first restructuring of February
2013.

2. Changes during implementation

Changes in costs:

- Additional Financing (AF) (fourth restructuring) for the Project was approved on October 16, 2015 in the
amount of US$90.6 million. The AF was mostly allocated to Component 1 to cover the scale-up of the
cadastre renovation works and to other components for additional technical assistance activities.

- Throughout Project implementation, Türkiye was affected by the devaluation of Turkish Lira. The currency
of the Project was Euro, and as a result, the Project had savings from loan proceeds, which were partially
used to undertake additional activities (including, at the fifth restructuring of December 2018 and at the sixth
restructuring of November 2020). Some of the savings were cancelled, specifically: (i) at the second
restructuring of December 2014, US$12.5 million (second Restructuring paper, page 7); and (ii) at the sixth
restructuring of November 2020, US$15.3 million (calculated based on the data in Euro in the sixth
Restructuring paper, page 7).

Change in components:


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Land Regis & Cadastre Modernization Proj (P106284)



  - The AF (fourth restructuring, October 2015) entailed an increase in the Project scope due to a scale-up of
  the original activities under Component 1 to additional parcels of land and to the continuation of the
  technical dialogue between TKGM and the World Bank. Otherwise, Project components remained
  unchanged, albeit minor adjustments were made based on government’s priorities. These minor
  modifications did not affect the Project’s scope.

  Change in PDO indicators: the PDO indicators underwent some adjustments, mainly to measure the
  outcomes more precisely. None of the adjustments entailed a change in Project scope or ambition.

  - At the first restructuring of February 2013:

       o PDO indicator targets and intermediate indicator baselines, which were missing from the Project
         Appraisal Document (PAD), were added to the Results Framework (RF).
       o The PDO indicator “Increased income of TKGM from Cadastre related services” was dropped
         because it was decided that cadastre renovation services were to be provided by private sector.
       o The phrasing of the PDO indicator “Improved customer satisfaction for cadastre services
         (Poor/Good)” was slightly adjusted to “Improved customer satisfaction for land registry and cadastre
         services (40 percent/90 percent)”, to better measure the outcomes.

  - At the third restructuring of August 2015, the phrasing of the indicator “Reduced number of cadastre
  disputes in courts” was expanded to “Reduced number of cadastre disputes”.

  - At the fifth restructuring of December 2018:

       o The PDO indicator “Increased number of external users who have on-line/off-line access to digital
         cadastre information” was modified as “Active protocols with other public and private institutions
         having on-line access to digital cadastre information from TKGM” in order to measure the outcomes
         more precisely.
       o The intermediate indicator “Number of information requests increases by 10 million per year” was
         rephrased as “Number of annual on-line enquiries from TAKBIS (Number)”.
       o The following three indicators were dropped: “Target population with use or ownership right recorded
         as a result of the project”, “Target land area with use or ownership rights recorded as a result of the
         project”, and “Land parcels with use or ownership rights recorded as a result of the project”. At IEG
         request, the Project team clarified that these were added as mandatory Core land administration
         indicators [at the first restructuring in February 2013] and then dropped [at the fifth restructuring in
         December 2018] when the World Bank retired them because they often duplicated other indicators
         or were not fully consistent with the technical design of projects.
       o The following two PDO indicators were added: (i) “Cumulative number of TKGM and contractor
         personnel trained to implement cadastre renovation and digitization”; and (ii) “Total number of
         parcels renovated/updated in digital format”.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The appraisal estimate was US$210.1 million, and the actual disbursement was US$253.9
  million.




                                                                                                   Page 4 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Land Regis & Cadastre Modernization Proj (P106284)



   Project Financing: The Project was financed by two IBRD loans: the original loan and the AF loan. For the
   original loan, the appraisal estimate was US$203.0 million and the actual amount at closure was US$164.6
   million. For the AF loan, the original amount was US$90,6 million, and the actual amount at closure was
   US$73.9 million.

   Borrower/Recipient contribution: The Borrower’s contribution was expected to amount to US$7.1 million
   at appraisal, and the actual amount was US$15.4 million.

   Project Dates: The Project was approved on May 1, 2008 and became effective on August 13, 2008. The
   MTR review was on May 30, 2011. The Project was restructured seven times: (i) on February 22, 2013; (ii)
   on December 2, 2014; (iii) on August 2, 2015; (iv) on October 16, 2015; (v) on December 10, 2018; (vi) on
   November 6, 2020; and (vii) on November 22, 2022. The original closing date was September 30, 2013.
   The Project was extended six times, for the total of nine years and eight months (or 116 months), to May
   30, 2023, which was the date of the Project’s actual closure.

   Split evaluation.

   - The Project received AF (fourth restructuring of October 2015) to scale up its activities, mainly under
   Component 1. The AF Restructuring paper noted that the related indicator targets were revised to capture
   the proposed changes and monitor the results of the AF, and a new indicator was added (AF Restructuring
   Paper, page 16, pages 29-36). Since the related RF targets were increased accordingly, no split rating is
   necessary in relation to the AF, and the Project can be assessed based on the targets approved by the AF.

   - The Project’s RF was significantly revised during the fifth restructuring of December 2018, with some
   indicator targets changed, some dropped, and some added. While there is no indication of a reduced
   Project ambition, split evaluation of Project efficacy will be applied for clarity.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context. At Project approval in 2008, more than 95 percent of the country’s land was
already mapped, registered, and administered by the General Directorate of Land Registry and Cadastre
(TKGM). The cadastre and land registration system was considered one of the most effective in the Europe
and Central Asia (ECA) region. While TKGM was in the process of digitalizing the country’s cadastre via the
development of TAKBIS, most of its offices continued to rely on manual systems and old documents. A key
challenge was the varying accuracy and consistency of maps. Property valuation mechanisms were also
outdated, and property taxation relied on the minimum value of property provided by local governments.
The socio-economic benefits of a modernized cadastre were clear to the government, including
digitalization and information accessibility.

Relevance to Government Strategies. The Project contributed to the government’s Ninth Development
Plan for 2007-2013, which emphasized the need to improve the efficiency and quality of public services
through increased access to e-Government applications. The Project helped to achieve this objective
through integrating land registry and real estate information into NSDI. The Project remained highly relevant
at completion: it supported the Eleventh Development Plan (2019-2023), specifically, Section 2.4.2

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Land Regis & Cadastre Modernization Proj (P106284)



               “Urbanization”. The Project’s cadastre modernization activities directly contributed to the government’s
               goals of completing multidimensional cadastre/map production and advancing digitalization and use of new
               technologies. Technical advice concerning the development of TAKBIS and the Spatial Property
               Information System (MEGSIS) also supported the Plan’s goals of transferring property-related transactions
               to electronic media. The property valuation activities contributed to Section 2.1.6 “Fiscal Policy” by
               supporting the usage of sales values as a basis for real estate taxation.

               Relevance to the World Bank Group's (WBG’s) Assistance Strategies. The Project helped to achieve
               the objectives of the World Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Türkiye for 2008-2011,
               specifically, in the area of efficient delivery of high-quality public services, including modernization of land
               registry and cadastre, as well as contributing to the CPS objective of improving local delivery of public
               services through supporting the development of property valuation policies in line with international
               standards. At completion, the Project objectives were well aligned with the Country Partnership Framework
               (CPF) for FY17 – FY21, which was extended to cover the FY22-FY23 period through the Performance and
               Learning Review. The Project contributed to CPF Focus Area 3 “Sustainability”, Objective 8 “Improved
               sustainability and resilience of cities” by supporting improved delivery of and expanded access to digital
               land registry and cadastre information, as well as by improving mass property valuation.

               Related World Bank operations. The Project was pitched at the right level of ambition and incorporated
               lessons learned from past World Bank-financed projects in support of land registry and cadastre. The
               Agricultural Reform Implementation Project (P070286, completed in 2008) included a component for
               producing cadastral maps and issuance of titles to documented owners in rural areas, as well as
               investments in computer systems to maintain digital cadastral records. The Marmara Emergency
               Earthquake Reconstruction Project (P068368, closed in 2006) included investing in reliable land ownership
               information system. At closure, the World Bank was planning to build upon the success of the Project via
               the recently approved Land Management Infrastructure for Green and Sustainable Development Project
               (P179217).

               Given that the project was pitched at the right level of ambition, and the alignment with the Government and
               Bank strategies, the relevance of the PDO is rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             PDO 1: To improve the effectiveness of the land registry and cadastre services.

                             Rationale


                                                                                                                            Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Land Regis & Cadastre Modernization Proj (P106284)



The theory of change (ToC) for the Project was not included in the PAD but was developed for the ICR. It
showed direct, logical causal links from inputs (activities) to outputs, to five intermediate outcomes, and to the
two PDO outcomes of the Project. To achieve its two objectives, the Project supported the following activities:
(i) cadastre updating, base mapping, and supervision activities; (ii) cadastre integration and creation of model
offices; (iii) preparation of the human resources (HR) development strategy, strategic and business plans, and
training; (iv) the preparation of the property valuation policies, methodologies, and standards, as well as
related capacity building; and (v) customer satisfaction surveys. The expected outputs of these activities
were: (i) renovated cadastral data and created base maps; (ii) cadastre information and model offices; (iii)
prepared HR strategy and strategic and business plans; (iv) prepared property valuation policies,
methodologies and standards; (v) feedback from customers. The outputs were expected to support five
intermediate outcomes: (i) increased access to cadastral data; (ii) digitalized TKGM services; (iii) improved
understanding and definition of property valuation policies based on market values; (iv) modernized land
registry and cadastre facilities; (iv) improved customer satisfaction. Altogether, the five intermediate outcomes
would ultimately lead to the achievement of the two PDO outcomes: increased effectiveness and efficiency of
the land registry and cadastre services.

The ToC provided a comprehensive picture of the logic of Project interventions, listing all main inputs and
outputs, intermediate outcomes, and the PDO outcomes. Importantly, it also provided a detailed illustration of
the links across the results chain, from inputs to outputs, to intermediate outcomes, and to the PDO
outcomes, thus presenting the logic of the Project through specific cause-effect relationships. This made the
logic of the Project very clear. The critical assumptions were also listed (i.e., “Continued high-level
government prioritization of land sector initiatives and reforms” and “Adequate Implementing Agency capacity
(technical and human resources) for implementing project activities”).

As discussed in Section 2.e, the Original Project will be assessed based on the targets approved at the fourth
(AF) restructuring of October 2015. The Revised Project will be assessed based on the targets approved at
the fifth restructuring of December 2018.

Outputs:

Objective 1 outputs were measured by the Original Project using the following indicators:

Cadastre and Land Registry Renovation, Data Improvement and Updating

- “Land parcels with use or ownership rights recorded as a result of the project-female”. The achievement at
closure was 6,020,850 parcels, against the target of 2,415,000 parcels and the baseline of 798,000 parcels.
The target was significantly exceeded. At IEG’s request, the team clarified why the result at closure was more
than twice above the target. While the target was set correctly, based on relevant data, due to the significant
exchange rate fluctuations between the Turkish lira and the Euro (the currency of the loan), the Project had
savings and used them for additional cadaster modernization contracts, including for female-owned land
parcels. The closing date extensions made it possible.

Note: this indicator stayed in the RF until Project’s closure, while the following three similar indicators were
dropped, partially eliminated repetition, and their achievement at closure was not known. All three indicators
were added as Core Indicators at the first restructuring in February 2013 and dropped at the fifth restructuring
in December 2018, as explained in section 2d of this review..

     o “Target population with use or ownership right recorded as a result of the project”.

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Land Regis & Cadastre Modernization Proj (P106284)



    o “Land parcels with use or ownership rights recorded as a result of the project”.
    o “Target land area with use or ownership rights recorded as a result of the project”.

- “Base maps including orthophotos are available to government agencies”. The achievement at closure was
265,848 square kilometers, against the target of 140,000 square kilometers and the baseline of zero. The
target was significantly exceeded.

- “Cadastre data converted to new database and harmonized with registration data”. The achievement at
closure was 57,262,840.00, against the target of 55,000,000 and the baseline of zero. The target was
exceeded.

- “Cadastre and registration data integrated”. The achievement at closure was 56,235,496, against the target
of 50,000,000 and the baseline of zero. The target was exceeded.

Human Resources and Institutional Development

- “Strategic Plan prepared and approved” (Yes/No). The target was reached.

- “Number of TKGM staff trained for capacity building”. The achievement at closure was 169,033 staff, against
the target of 5,000 staff and the baseline of zero staff. The target was significantly exceeded.

- “Completed number of study visits.” The achievement at closure was 10 visits, against the target of 11 visits
and the baseline of zero visits. The target was almost fully achieved.

Property Valuation

- “Detailed design for pilot completed and pilot areas selected for Property Valuation” Yes/No. The target was
reached.

- “Evaluation of mass valuation pilots completed and policy options developed” Yes/No. The target was
reached.

- “Draft property valuation policy is completed and submitted to inform Government's policy discussion”
Yes/No. The target was reached.

Outcomes:

Objective 1 outcomes were measured by the Original Project using the following indicators:

- “Improved Customer Satisfaction for land registry and cadastre services”. The achievement at closure was
80.3 percent, against the target of 95 percent and the baseline of 40 percent. The target was largely
achieved.

- “Reduced Number of cadastre disputes”. The achievement at closure was 0.3 percent, against the target of
1.5 percent and the baseline of four percent. The target was exceeded.

- “Increased number of external users who have online/offline access to digital cadastre information”. The
target was 800 users and the baseline was zero users. This indicator was replaced (to better measure the


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Land Regis & Cadastre Modernization Proj (P106284)



outcome) with the indicator “Active protocols with other public and private institutions having on-line access to
digital cadastre information from TKGM (0/900)” at the fifth restructuring of December 2018, and its
achievement at closure is not known.

- “Parcels renovated/ updated in digital format”. The achievement at closure was 14,685,000 parcels, against
the target of 9,400,000 parcels and the baseline of zero. The target was significantly exceeded.

     o “Parcels renovated”. The achievement at closure was 11,186,000 parcels, against the target of
       6,900,000 parcels and the baseline of zero. The target was exceeded.
     o “Parcels digitized”. The achievement at closure was 3,499,000 parcels, against the target of 2,500,000
       parcels and the baseline of zero. The target was exceeded.

Rating. The Original Project almost fully achieved its intended Objective 1 results, and its efficacy rating is
Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
PDO 1: To improve the effectiveness of the land registry and cadastre services.

Revised Rationale
Please see the discussion of the ToC under Objective 1, Original Project.

The following output indicator was rephrased and the target revised at the fifth restructuring of
December 2018:

- “Cumulative number of TKGM and contractor personnel trained to implement cadastre renovation and
digitization (Number)”. The achievement at closure was 169,033 personnel, against the target of 7,000
personnel and the baseline of zero personnel. The target was significantly exceeded.

The following outcome targets were revised at the fifth restructuring of December 2018:

- “Improved Customer Satisfaction for land registry and cadastre services”. The achievement at closure was
80.3 percent, against the revised target of 90 percent and the baseline of 40 percent. The target was largely
achieved.

- “Parcels renovated/ updated in digital format”. The achievement at closure was 14,685,000 parcels, against
the revised target of 11,000,000 parcels and the baseline of zero. The target was significantly exceeded.

- “Parcels renovated”. The achievement at closure was 11,186,000 parcels, against the revised target of
8,500,000 parcels and the baseline of zero. The target was exceeded.




                                                                                                    Page 9 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Land Regis & Cadastre Modernization Proj (P106284)



The following outcome target was added at the fifth restructuring of December 2018, replacing the
previous indicator to better measure the outcome:

- “Active protocols with other public and private institutions having on-line access to digital cadastre
information from TKGM (Number)”. The achievement at closure was 4,052 protocols, against the target of
900 protocols and the baseline of zero protocols. The target was significantly exceeded.

The following outcome target was revised at the fifth restructuring of December 2018:

- “Land parcels with use or ownership rights recorded as a result of the project-female”. The achievement at
closure was 6,020,850 parcels, against the revised target of 2,820,000 parcels and the baseline of 798,000
parcels. The target was significantly exceeded. As mentioned in the discussion of efficacy of the Original
Project, Objective 1, this result is significantly above the target because Project’s savings were used for
additional cadaster modernization contracts once the Project closing data was extended.

Rating. The Revised Project almost fully achieved its intended Objective 1 results, and its efficacy rating is
Substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO 2: To improve the efficiency of the land registry and cadastre services.

Rationale
Please see the discussion of the ToC under Objective 1, Original Project.

Output:

Improved Service Delivery

- “Design of model office is completed by end of first year of project implementation” (Yes/No). The target was
achieved.

- “Model offices constructed”. The achievement at closure was three offices, against the target of three offices
and the baseline of zero offices. The target was fully achieved.

- “Average number of days to complete the recordation of a purchase/sale of a property in the land
administration system”. The achievement at closure was 0.25 days, against the target of 0.25 days and the
baseline of one day. The target was fully achieved. The urban sub-target was also fully achieved.

- “Policy on access and charges of land registry and cadastre data is prepared and approved” (Yes/No). The
target was reached.



                                                                                                  Page 10 of 19
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Land Regis & Cadastre Modernization Proj (P106284)



                            - “Number of information requests increases by 10 million per year”. The target of 170,000,000 requests and
                            the baseline was zero requests. This indicator was replaced (to better measure the outcome) with the
                            indicator “Number of annual on-line enquiries from TAKBIS (Number)” at the fifth restructuring of December
                            2018, and its achievement at closure is not known.

                            Outcome:

                            - “Reduction in time to deliver cadastre data requests.” The achievement at closure was 0.25 percent, against
                            the target of 0.25 percent and the baseline of seven percent. The target was fully achieved.

                            Rating. The Original Project almost fully achieved its Objective 2 intended results, and its efficacy rating is
                            Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


                            OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective
                            PDO 2: To improve the efficiency of the land registry and cadastre services.

                            Revised Rationale
                            Please see the discussion of the TOC under Objective 1, Original Project.

                            This output indicator was added at the fifth restructuring of December 2018:

                            - “Number of annual on-line enquiries from TAKBIS (Number)”. The achievement was 3,553,000,000
                            enquiries, against the target of 350,000,000 enquiries and the baseline of zero. The target was significantly
                            exceeded. At IEG’s request, the team explained why the result was more than ten time above the target. The
                            result reflects the enquiries made during the 15-year Project implementation. Customer demand for data was
                            increasing over time, driven by the following (unexpected and exceeding expectations) factors: increased
                            reliability and quality of data, expansion of data coverage, increased associated e-services, undergoing digital
                            transformation across economic sectors, and increased reliance on e-services during COVID-19 and natural
                            disasters.

                            Rating. The Revision 1 Project fully achieved its Objective 2 intended results, and its efficacy rating is High.



                            Revised Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                                                                                                                               Page 11 of 19
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             Land Regis & Cadastre Modernization Proj (P106284)




         Rationale
         Original Project:

         For the Original Project, the rating for efficacy is Substantial: the targets under both objectives were almost
         fully reached.



         Overall Efficacy Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         For the Revised Project, the efficacy rating is Substantial: the targets under Objective 1were almost fully
         reached, and the targets under Objective 2 were fully reached.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic analysis

At appraisal, economic analysis focused on Component 1. The benefits from the improved TKMG services
within the TKMG system, for the users and for the larger economy, were estimated using a discount rate of 15
percent over 10 years (PAD, pages 61-65). Specifically, the Project benefits considered in the model were as
follows: (i) enhanced TKGM services to users, mainly for land information systems (cadastre information, line
maps and orthophotos); (ii) savings to users from access to data; and (iii) savings to the economy and society,
including from reduced cadastre-related litigation. The results of the analysis were as follows: the economic
internal rate of return (EIRR) was 18.0 percent, the net present value (NPV) was US$23 million, and the cost-
benefit ratio was 1.23. (PAD, pages 67-68) The estimated EIRR was above the opportunity cost of capital
reflected in the discount rate of 18 percent, making the Project efficient.

At closure, the ex-ante economic analysis was replicated. Despite the very conservative assumptions, the EIRR
turned out to be 23 percent, the NPV was EUR 426 million, and the Benefit-Cost Ratio was 5.03, pointing to a
highly efficient investment. (ICR, pages 47-48) The EIRR was significantly above the opportunity cost of capital
of 18 percent, making the Project efficient.

Administrative efficiency

Administrative efficiency had some deficiencies, especially at the start of implementation when the Project
experienced delays (ICR, page 13). The Project was restructured seven times. However, there was no reduction


                                                                                                             Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Land Regis & Cadastre Modernization Proj (P106284)



in the scope or ambition, and the restructurings were often related to the need to reallocate funds due to
currency devaluation and changes in government priorities, creating the need for extensions of the closing date.
The closing date was extended six times, for a total of nine years and eight months (or 116 months), from
September 30, 2013, to May 30, 2023, the date of the Project’s actual closure. However, the ICR mentions that
the original Project was only extended to December 31, 2015 (for two years and three months or 27 months)
(ICR, page 21). The AF was originally scheduled to close on December 31, 2020 (AF Restructuring Paper, page
4), but the closure was on May 31, 2023, two years and five months later (or 29 months later).

At the same time, the strong performance of the implementation agency (TKMG) and the close involvement of
the World Bank team efficiently supported project implementation, which were major factors in achieving the
PDO (ICR, page 24).

On balance, considering economic efficiency and a strong implementation record, while taking into account
closing extensions, Project’s efficiency rating is Substantial, with moderate shortcomings.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    83.50
 Appraisal                                                18.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    89.80
 ICR Estimate                                             23.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

With both the Original Project and the Revised Project rated as Satisfactory, the Overall Project outcome rating
is Satisfactory. For information, the disbursed funds before the restructuring of December 2018 were
US$196.66 million, or 82.4 percent of the Project costs at closure.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Land Regis & Cadastre Modernization Proj (P106284)



Technical, institutional, and financial. The technical innovations and related capacity development
supported by the Project will need to be maintained to sustain Project outcomes. However, this risk is
evaluated as low. First, at closure, TKGM (the responsible agency) had high technical and human resources
capacity to sustain and further develop Project-created assets. Second, the government provides budget
allocations and uses a revolving fund to finance the land registration and cadastre data production,
management, and maintenance. Third, TKGM has “continuous learning” initiatives, which support technical
and human capacity building. (ICR, page 28).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The ICR reported that Project preparation was diligent and involved accounting for lessons learned from
  other Bank operations. The economic analysis was sound. All appropriate safeguards and fiduciary
  assessments were conducted to ensure that TKGM had the capacity to implement the Project. While
  there were no conditions for loan effectiveness, the World Bank was proactive in including Legal
  Covenants in the Financing Agreement for the original loan, requesting TKGM to complete the policy for
  data sharing and pricing for NSDI development and develop its Strategic Plan and Human Resources
  Development Plan at the start of Project implementation. (ICR, page 27) Even thought the PDO was well
  defined and the RF indicators aligned to the PDO, the RF design had deficiencies (including missing
  indicator baselines and targets, imprecise measurement of some of the expected results, and unclear
  formulation of some of the indicators), and the RF had to be significantly modified during implementation.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR reported that the supervision was effective. The World Bank provided close and continuous
 support, both during in-country missions and remotely. The country-based staff was actively involved in the
 supervision and in high-level policy discussions when needed. The arising issues were flagged and
 addressed; this included actions taken in relation to the decrease in the M&E ratings from Satisfactory to
 Moderately Unsatisfactory and then to Unsatisfactory level, leading to an efficient mitigation of the
 challenges and the improved M&E ratings. In response to the government requests, the World Bank
 agreed to provide AF to scale-up cadastre modernization and maintain the dialogue and technical support
 to activities that were financed independently by TKGM (including property valuation and further IT
 development). The AF was executed successfully. (ICR, page 28)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Land Regis & Cadastre Modernization Proj (P106284)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The original RF reflected the logic of Project interventions in the PAD, was sufficiently linked to the PDO
 and the ToC, and was comprehensive yet manageable. The PDO outcome indicators reflected all expected
 Project outcomes. The intermediate indicators were linked to the PDO indicators, providing more details
 and measuring intermediate outcomes and outputs. The indicators measured both objective results (e.g.,
 reduced number of cadastre disputes and reduced time to deliver cadastre data requests) and customer
 satisfaction with improved cadastre service. Most of the RF indicators were quantitative, and all of them
 were time-bound and attributable to the Project.

 However, many of the baselines and targets were missing from the RF in the PAD: none of the PDO
 indicators had targets and none of the intermediate indicators had baselines. The missing baselines and
 targets were approved only five years after Project approval, at the first restructuring of February 2013.
 Also, the phrasing of several indicators had to be corrected at the restructurings, in some cases,
 significantly.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR reported that TKGM collected, recorded, and analyzed data soundly throughout the
  implementation, with significant improvements in data collection over time. The indicator targets and
  baselines missing from the RF in the PAD were diligently filled in. The World Bank worked closely with
  TKGM to develop standardized progress reports on indicator achievement, and TKGM’s team was
  compiling information across relevant TKGM departments.

  However, in June 2017, challenges arose: no data could be provided on cadastre renovation and
  digitization (the core Project activity), and the Project’s M&E rating was downgraded from Satisfactory to
  Moderately Unsatisfactory and then Unsatisfactory, until the challenges were resolved and the rating was
  restored to Satisfactory. This happened as a result of the World Bank working closely with TKGM to
  develop a standardized template to report on cadastre modernization and to switch from the semi-annual
  progress reports to the quarterly ones. (ICR, page 27)

  The RF had to be significantly adjusted during the M&E implementation, with many indicators being
  phased out and the new ones added. Mostly, this was done to improve the measurement of the
  outcomes or to formulate the indicators better.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reported that the RF was utilized to monitor outputs and to focus on areas where expected
  results were not achieved. Indicators were monitored and reported upon during regular World Bank
  implementation support missions and in Aide-Memoires. TKGM maintained M&E specialists to compile

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Land Regis & Cadastre Modernization Proj (P106284)



  and review RF information. An external M&E Specialist was hired at the start of implementation, but
  TKGM later transferred this responsibility to in-house staff. (ICR, page 26)

  Even though there were significant shortcomings in M&E design in terms of lack of baseline and targets,
  these were then subsequently addressed during implementation. Thus, overall, the M&E is rated as
  Substantial.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards. At appraisal, the Project was classified as Environmental
   Category B. This was related to Component 2 of the Project, which included reconstruction works for
   cadastral and land registry offices. The World Bank policies on Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) and
   on Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.1 1) were triggered, and an Environmental Management
   Framework (EMF) was prepared and disclosed as required in December 2007 (PAD, page 69). The Project
   closed in full compliance with World Bank safeguard policies, with no outstanding social or environmental
   issues, resulting in a Satisfactory rating. TKGM continuously tracked and reported the number of cadastral
   complaints and court cases, registering decreases in both by the end of the Project. TKGM also carried out
   a social impact assessment at the end of the Project. The study found that most of the beneficiaries did not
   raise any objections during the cadastre modernization process, although some raised objections related to
   demarcations and area measurements. Most of the objections were resolved. (ICR, page 27)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management (FM). TKGM maintained Satisfactory FM arrangements throughout
   implementation, documented with 13 FM supervisions, as well as desk reviews of quarterly interim un-
   audited financial reports and annual audit reports. TKGM prepared a Financial Management Manual for the
   Project and revised it as needed and used an off-the-shelf accounting and reporting software tailored to the
   Project, with strong additional internal control measures over expenditures. The FM arrangements were
   successfully adapted during the transition from the original loan to the AF. (ICR, page 27)

   Procurement. TKGM maintained Satisfactory procurement implementation throughout Project
   implementation. Although some World Bank-financed projects were delayed due to the February 2023
   earthquake in Türkiye, TKGM successfully completed the procurement. The “Lots” approach TKGM used
   to identify the most economical options for their tenders may be a helpful example for other projects, both
   in Türkiye and in other countries, to consider. (ICR, page 27)



                                                                                                  Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Land Regis & Cadastre Modernization Proj (P106284)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons were derived from the ICR (ICR, pages 28-29):

1. The World Bank can take advantage of the IPF and AF tools for land sector reforms that
take a long time to ensure outcomes and sustained client engagement and dialogue. Land
sector reform takes long periods of time to ensure successful outcomes. The reforms implemented
by the Project took fifteen years. The success of the Project relied on continued collaboration
between TKGM and the World Bank, enabled by a combination of extensions of the closing date of
the original loan and the AF. The lifting of the three-year implementation requirement for AFs was a
key factor in the World Bank’s ability to leverage this operational tool and to strengthen long-term
cooperation on land sector reform, particularly for countries that are transitioning from analogue
systems to digital ones.

2. Investment project financing (IPF) can be an important tool for continued policy dialogue.
IPFs can act as a platform for advocating policy solutions. The Project’s property valuation activities
were considered novel in 2008, but also a means to identify ways to address taxation and
registration revenue shortfalls in Türkiye, and discussions concerning how to address property
valuation challenges in Türkiye may not have occurred without the Project’s focus on this issue.
Moreover, the World Bank’s continuous engagement with TKGM, along with broader stakeholder
consultations, helped to develop the policy options reflected in the draft valuation policy and the
establishment of TKGM’s Property Valuation Department in 2019.

3. Private sector participation can provide a strong signal of an advanced public sector
reform. The involvement of the private sector can provide a strong signal that the public sector is
capable of contract development and management, as well as transparency and accountability.
Private sector participation was a major success factor for the overall reform of Türkiye’s land
administration system. Nearly the entire cadastre modernization process, including cadastre

                                                                                                      Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Land Regis & Cadastre Modernization Proj (P106284)



renovation and digitization, was carried out by the private sector based on clear procedures, as
specified in contracts but with a comprehensive quality assurance program carried out by TKGM—a
major lesson for many countries. In general, countries that procure services from the private sector
for land administration reform tend to reap financial, managerial, and technological benefits.

4. “Continuous learning” can provide an opportunity to open a discussion on the needed
changes to the agency mandates. A “continuous learning” model can provide many examples of
how cadastral data can be used and what human and technical capacities are required to maximize
the benefits. TKGM recognized that its staff had to go through routine training to achieve the
agency’s vision, mission, and strategic goals. The concept of “continuous learning” was also
instrumental in helping TKGM identify how its cadastral data, once it was fully modernized, could be
utilized by other agencies. This offers a good example for other land agencies that are defining their
strategic goals and roles in public administration mechanisms.

5. The use of career staff with strong technical capacities by an implementing agency can be
a major factor in the success of a Project. TKGM utilized internal staff to manage Project
activities, resulting in highly reduced costs for Project management. Nearly all of the staff continued
to work on the Project throughout its fifteen-year implementation. This lesson may help the World
Bank to consider medium- to longer-term building of in-house capacities of Implementing Agencies
that new projects can use.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides sufficient technical details to understand the logic of the Project, the factors of Project
performance, the outcomes of the Project, and various aspects of Project implementation. It provides a good
justification of the PDO relevance, comprehensive and well-supported evidence on all aspects of Project’s
evaluation, a clear linking of evidence to findings, and suggests lessons that are useful for future lending
operations.

However, there is a minor deficiency: the presentation of Project costs is confusing because they are presented
in EUR in some cases, in USD in other cases, and both in USD and EUR in yet other cases. This makes it hard
to understand the related discussion. However, because the Project was denominated in Euros and because
there were savings of Project proceeds during implementation (and therefore no overspending), this deficiency
is considered minor.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 18 of 19
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Land Regis & Cadastre Modernization Proj (P106284)




                                                                                  Page 19 of 19
