     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Zanzibar Improving Student Prospects (P153277)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023847

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P153277                                    TZ-Zanzibar Improving Student Prospects

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Tanzania                                   Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-58500                                  31-Jul-2021                                          34,226,060.42

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Jun-2016                                31-Jan-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            35,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             35,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                         34,345,508.17                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Livia Maria Angelica        Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez               IEGHC (Unit 2)
 Benavides Matarazzo                                      Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement was “to improve in the islands
   of Zanzibar within the Recipient’s territory the quality of (a) instruction; and (b) learning environment in
   Targeted Grades and Targeted Subjects.” The Project Appraisal Document (PAD) had a similar statement,
   except that it omitted the phrase “in the islands of Zanzibar within the Recipient's territory.” Targeted grades
   included upper primary through lower secondary (Standard 5 and 6, Forms 1 and 2), and the targeted
   subjects were math, science, and English.


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Zanzibar Improving Student Prospects (P153277)



   This Review agrees with the assessment in the ICR (p. 4) that the project included two objectives: (a) improve
   the quality of instruction in targeted grades and targeted subjects, and (b) improve the quality of the learning
   environment in targeted grades and targeted subjects.

   The project was restructured in August 2020 to modify the results framework and extend the project by 18
   months. There was no change in project objectives. The PDO indicator for the second objective, which
   measured schools with access to enhanced learning facilities, was revised from a percentage to a numerical
   target. The original target aimed to cover 95 percent of schools, which would require the construction of 25
   hubs. Under the restructuring, the new numerical target was 20 school hubs, a partial reduction in number,
   but with a change in the description of the indicator that now included the readiness and operationalization of
   the hubs. At closing the project overachieved the revised target such that there was no significant difference
   from the original one. Therefore, no split evaluation is considered necessary.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   At appraisal, the project included four components:

   1. Effective Math, Science, and English Instruction (appraisal: USD 12 million; restructuring: USD 7
   million equivalent; actual: USD 5.91 million). This component aimed to transform the way math, science,
   and English (MSE) was taught in upper primary and lower secondary grades through “(a) retraining of
   selected in-service teachers to increase the supply of math and science teachers in lower secondary
   grades; (b) training of all MSE teachers in targeted grades in enhanced student support; and (c) teacher
   management reforms to strengthen teacher accountability and motivation structures.” This component was
   designed to be disbursed based on results. Disbursements would be based on eligible expenditures upon
   compliance with agreed-upon disbursement linked indicators (DLIs).

   2. Improved School Autonomy and Learning Environment (appraisal: USD 6 million, restructuring: USD
   8 million; actual: USD 7.27 million). This component aimed to equip schools with autonomy, resources, and
   incentives to improve the quality of instruction and learning environment. School improvement grants (SIGs)
   would be provided in two parts: (a) Base School Improvement Grants, which would be provided to all
   schools on a per capita basis linked to the number of students enrolled in secondary grades, and (b)
   Performance-Based Top-Up Grants, which would be awarded to those schools that showed improvements
   in Standard 6 and Form 2 exams in MSE. This component was also designed to disburse based
   achievement of DLIs.

   3. Hubs for Enhanced Math, Science, and English Learning (appraisal: USD 11.5 million, restructuring:
   USD 17 million; actual: USD 17.83 million). Under this component, hubs were to be built and equipped to
   include 159 new additional classrooms and MSE learning spaces (science rooms, language laboratories,

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    TZ-Zanzibar Improving Student Prospects (P153277)



  and information and communication technology facilities). These hubs would serve a cluster of lower
  secondary schools, would be built within 25 existing secondary schools, and would be expected to reach
  75-100 lower secondary schools.

  4. Systems Transformation and Project Management (appraisal: USD 3.7 million, restructuring: USD 2.5
  million; actual: USD 2.54 million). This component focus was to focus on: (a) examination reform to improve
  student assessment in Standard 6 and Form 2, to transform examinations into formative assessments and
  make them more automated; (b) education systems planning to support the preparation of the Zanzibar
  Education Development Plan 2016-2020; (c) strengthening of data systems and support for project
  monitoring and evaluation (M&E); and (d) project implementation support. All activities under this
  component, except for (d), were designed to be results-based.

  A Project Preparation Advance (PPA) was agreed upon in November 2015, with the purpose of
  facilitating the preparation of the project (appraisal USD 1.7 million, restructuring USD 0 million).

  As part of the restructuring of the project, a fifth component was introduced:

  5. Support to COVID-19 Response Plan (restructuring: USD 0.5 million; actual: USD 0.33 million). This
  component was designed to respond to the shutdowns resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic by creating
  an e-learning platform, the Learning Management System, which would facilitate student learning from
  home and provide support for the development of curriculum-based content for students and teachers
  in lower secondary levels. In addition, e-learning content would be provided offline through school hubs for
  remedial education.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  The project was fully financed through an International Development Association Credit for SDR 25.7 million
  (USD 35 million). Actual disbursements were USD 33.88 million, 97 percent of the original credit. The
  project sustained losses of about USD 2.6 million due to exchange rate fluctuations.

  The project was approved on January 13, 2016, and became effective on January 25, 2017. The mid-term
  review was carried out on November 4, 2019. The project closed on January 31, 2023.

  The project was restructured once, on August 20, 2020, following the mid-term review, at which stage USD
  20.69 million had been disbursed. The restructuring included: (a) an extension of 18 months; (b) the
  reallocation of financial resources among components and from the PPA. The PPA had not been spent
  because there was a delay in its approval at the government level and, as a result, contract periods would
  have overlapped with the start of project implementation; (c) the introduction of a COVID-19 response
  component; (d) the inclusion of a study on school construction in Zanzibar under Component 4; (e)
  modifications to DLI allocations to reflect actual costs at the time of restructuring; and (f) adjustments to the
  results framework, including a small change in one of the targets of a PDO indicator, and an update of the
  timeline to consider the extension period and changes in components, costs, and allocations between
  disbursement categories. There were no changes to the PDO or safeguard category under the
  restructuring.




                                                                                                      Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Zanzibar Improving Student Prospects (P153277)



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objectives were highly relevant to country and sector conditions. At the time of appraisal, the
islands of Zanzibar were facing high dropout rates and low attainment of skills, particularly in MSE. Dropout
rates were particularly high in secondary education, where only half of students entering secondary school
reached the end of secondary education (Form 4). A large share of dropouts occurred at the end of Form 2,
where all students were required to take the corresponding exam. The high dropout rate was attributed to
both the lack of readiness for this exam and the high costs to families due to out-of-pocket expenditures
demanded from them by the schools. In the case of girls, early marriage was also a contributing
factor. Further to this, attainment of MSE skills was very low, with about 73 percent of students at the end of
primary education (Standard 6) below beginning numeracy levels. Also, few students were able to pass the
Form 4 (end of secondary) exams in math and science. Several factors were identified as the main drivers
for the low quality of education: (i) low quality of instruction, which was linked to a severe shortage of math
and science teachers, poor English proficiency among teachers, and overall weak pedagogical skills; (ii)
weak teacher motivation and accountability, with high rates of absenteeism and infrequent supervisory
visits by school inspectors; and (iii) highly constrained teaching and learning resources, resulting in
overcrowded classrooms and lack of opportunities for students to learn, particularly to develop practical
science skills.

The project was aligned with the Zanzibar 2006 Education Policy, as expressed through the Zanzibar
Education Development Program (ZEDP) 2008/09-2015/16, which aimed to better prepare Zanzibaris for
the workforce. The government had launched in January 2015 a policy on free basic education, whereby
fees and “voluntary parental contributions” at the primary and secondary levels would be abolished,
although implementation was proving challenging given fiscal constraints. At the time of project preparation,
the follow-up education development program ZEDP 2016-2020 was under preparation. According to the
PAD, this project was also informed by the dialogue resulting from the preparation of this ZEDP. Support to
the ZEDP was coordinated with other donors working in Zanzibar, where upper primary and lower
secondary were relatively unsupported by other development partners.

The objectives were relevant to World Bank strategies, both at the time of preparation and at closing. The
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) 2012-2015 included a specific outcome on “improved access to and
quality of education” under the Strengthen Human Capital and Safety Nets objectives. In addition, the
project contributed to other CAS objectives, including building of infrastructure and delivery of services, as
well as promotion of accountability and governance. At closing, the Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
for the period FY2018-FY2022, the latest CPF for Tanzania, had relevant objectives under the Focus Area
“Boost Human Capital and Social Inclusion,” which included a specific objective aiming to “Improve the
Quality of Health Care and Education.”

The World Bank had prior experience working in the education sector in Zanzibar through the Zanzibar
Basic Education Improvement Project, ZBEIP (P102262). The ZBEIP was implemented between 2007 and
2013 and had as its objective improvement in completion of secondary education with successful
performance among students. The project faced design and implementation shortfalls that were taken into
account under this project. In particular, this project's design recognized the need for realism in the design
of the PDO and corresponding indicators, as well as ensuring of adequate M&E arrangements
and implementation readiness.


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      TZ-Zanzibar Improving Student Prospects (P153277)




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             improve the quality of instruction in targeted grades and targeted subjects

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change for this objective held that improving the quality of instruction would be achieved
                             through retraining of selected in-service teachers to increase the supply of trained math and science
                             teachers; provision of teacher training to MSE teachers in targeted grades in order to enhance teacher
                             proficiency and pedagogical skills; reform of the teacher inspection system to ensure a formative framework;
                             and provision of annual recognition awards to the best-performing teachers in order to provide incentives for
                             better teaching.

                             Outputs

                             The supply of trained math and science teachers was increased through a two-year re-training/conversion
                             program in which 607 selected arts and language teachers from the lower secondary grades participated,
                             exceeding the target of 600 teachers.

                             A total of 581 re-trained teachers (96 percent of the total) passed the qualifying examinations, specifically 98
                             percent in math, 95 percent in science, and 93 percent in English, exceeding the target of 545 teachers (DLR
                             1.2).

                             A total of 2,379 teachers participated in training on enhanced student support, exceeding the target of 1,500
                             teachers. The last cohort in this training program was assessed, and the results showed that 93 percent of
                             teachers passed the math, 85 percent passed the science, and 85 percent passed the English pedagogy
                             tests. The ICR however, did not provide evidence in relation to other dimensions of the training such as (i)
                             support for lagging students through extra classes and tutoring; (ii) formative student assessments; (iii)
                             student counselling and guidance.

                             The Project Implementation Entity (PIE) issued an order on diploma and salary entitlement of retrained
                             teachers (DLR 1.3) as part of an incentives program to increase the supply of MSE teachers.

                             A performance-based teacher assessment at the district level was carried out with the purpose of rewarding
                             lower secondary teacher performance. A total of 32 teachers received performance-based teacher
                             recognition awards across all the 11 districts in Zanzibar, meeting the target (DLR 2.2).



                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Zanzibar Improving Student Prospects (P153277)



Almost all (99 percent) of targeted secondary schools were inspected at least twice a year, exceeding the
target of 90 percent (DLR 2.1). The ICR reported that the Inspection Framework tool helped inspectors to
effectively provide targeted feedback.

As part of the COVID-19 Emergency Response Plan, an e-learning platform was established, providing online
and offline resources to support remote learning, facilitate lesson planning, improve pedagogical skills, and
complement teaching and learning in the classroom.

Outcomes

93.7 percent of targeted teachers showed improved pedagogy and content knowledge in classroom
observations, exceeding the target of 90 percent, as compared with baseline classroom observations.

The overall outcome under this objective was also a DLI and referred to teacher proficiency in MSE. Overall,
96.2 percent of teachers achieved proficiency in MSE as measured by the those who passed the qualifying
examinations, exceeding the target of 90 percent. Given that this proficiency examination was carried out for
the first time, the baseline was zero. Proficiency was also measured for specific subject areas through the
qualifying exams, where 97.7 percent of teachers achieved proficiency in math, 95.3 percent in science, and
92.5 percent in English, in all cases exceeding the specific target for each area of 90 percent.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the quality of the learning environment in targeted grades and targeted subjects

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective held that the quality of the learning environment would be improved
through reducing financial and resource constraints; making physically available spaces with equipment and
learning resources; transforming the system to make examinations formative, as opposed to punitive; and
strengthening data systems in support of improved monitoring and evaluation. Financial and resource
constraints would be addressed through the provision of SIGs, provision of performance-based top-up grants,
and training of school management committees. Spaces would be made available, together with equipment
and resources, through the construction of hubs to enhance MSE learning.

Outputs

206 additional furnished classrooms and learning facilities were built, including teaching and learning
materials, exceeding the target of 150 classrooms and facilities.

94 percent of head teachers were satisfied with improvements in the school learning environment,
exceeding the target of 75 percent. The ICR reported that the improved learning environment has facilitated
changes in how students learn. For example, the ICR (16) reported that science experiments are now
conducted by students with equipment, when previously it was theoretical for many schools, students have

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Zanzibar Improving Student Prospects (P153277)



access to a well-resourced library, and teachers use digital content through the computer and language
laboratories to supplement lessons.

All the 218 secondary schools received SIGs (DLR 3.2), surpassing the target of 90 percent. The grants were
$10 per primary student and $15 per secondary student and helped cover the loss in revenue for schools
following the removal of parental fees (in support of the Government’s policy of free basic education). The
ICR (p. 15) reported that the funds were used to purchase teaching and learning materials for schools to
operate and improve their learning.

642 upper primary and secondary schools in Zanzibar received performance-based grants, exceeding the
target of 200 schools.

A manual for administering and monitoring capitation grants was prepared, adopted by the PIE, and
disseminated to all schools (DLR 3.1).

An examination reform was conducted for the Form 2 exam based on recommendations from the
corresponding evaluation, including the development of an online exam registration form and exam
management system, capacity building of the Zanzibar Examination Council in the use of the system,
provision of training to subject coordinators on test construction, development and data analysis, and training
of 30 developers at the school level to attain skills and expertise on item development. Although the indicator
only refers to the Form 2 exam, the team reported that the Standard 6 exam was also reformed in a similar
fashion.

All lower secondary schools received student-level Standard 6 and Form 2 exam data (DLI 4), exceeding the
target of 90 percent.

The target of making available complete data on lower secondary schools on the School Data Dashboard
was not achieved. The task team reported that, by the end of the calendar year 2023, the School Data
Dashboard interface had been developed and piloted in primary schools. The next steps will be adjustments
in order to roll out the dashboard to all primary and secondary schools.

The school construction study, which was added during the project restructuring, was carried out and
informed the preparation of a follow-up project.

An e-learning platform (VLE) was supported and provided online and offline resources for remote learning,
facilitate lesson planning, improve pedagogical skills, and complement teaching and learning in the
classroom. The VLE focused on the development of resources for Form 1 and 2 Math and Physics.

A total of 214,163 students, teachers, and head teachers and Zanzibar Ministry of Education and Vocational
Training (MoEVT) staff benefited from project activities, exceeding the target of 168,142.

24 targeted schools had access to enhanced learning facilities and resources as a result of the construction
of MSE hubs, exceeding the target of 20 hubs. These hubs were built on the sites of existing secondary
schools and served a cluster of neighboring schools. Enhancements included the provision of school
furniture, laboratory materials, teaching aids, educational equipment, information technology equipment,
library books, computers, and consumables. It should be noted that the original target was 95 percent, which
amounted to 25 hubs, but during restructuring, progress was assessed indicating that one hub was already
being financed by another development partner and, while all other 24 were under implementation, there had

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                TZ-Zanzibar Improving Student Prospects (P153277)



                            been delays due to lack of construction materials and COVID-19-related closures. While previously the target
                            referred to construction of the hubs, the restructuring modified the measurement to reflect the full
                            operationalization of the hubs, including the preparation and validation of implementation plans,
                            including training of hub staff. The ICR (p. 15) reported that the hubs promoted an active learning
                            environment, were transformative to the school and local communities. Consistent with the theory of change,
                            the hubs and infrastructure have resulted in reducing overcrowding in classes and providing more resources
                            for effective teaching and learning.

                            Outcomes:

                            The ICR (16-17) reported that the enhanced learning environment (combined with changes in teacher
                            pedagogical practices) are transforming learning. In the first year of operation of the hubs, the trends in Form
                            2 examination results are increasing in the share of students who have passed examinations in Physics (43
                            percent), Chemistry (49 percent), Biology (78 percent), Math (47 percent) and English (86 percent) since
                            students began utilizing the hubs. Form 4 examinations also increased in Physics (65 percent), Chemistry
                            (63 percent), Biology (69 percent), Math (51 percent), and English (53 percent). On the island of Kojani, the
                            changes have substantially increased with a Form 4 Chemistry pass rate of 93 percent in 2022 compared to
                            19.2 percent in 2020.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The evidence in the ICR shows the activities supported by the project such as school hubs, school grants,
                            inspection tools, training, etc. improved the learning environment, reduced overcrowding in
                            classes, provided more resources for teaching, which is plausibly related to improvements in teaching
                            competencies and quality of instruction, which has contributed to higher share of students who passed Form
                            2 and Form 4 examinations. The only minor shortcoming was related to the availability of data for the School
                            Data Dashboard, which is currently under implementation.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



    5. Efficiency
   A cost benefit analysis (CBA) carried out at appraisal estimated an internal rate of return (IRR) of 23 percent and
   a net present value (NPV) of USD 61.2 million. The analysis (PAD, Annex 5, pp. 54-61) projected that the
   benefits of improved schooling (higher completion rates and learning outcomes) would result in increased labor

                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Zanzibar Improving Student Prospects (P153277)



earnings over the course of a person’s working life. A ten percent increase was assumed in pass rates of the
Primary School Leaving Examination and the Certificate of Secondary Education Examination. With respect to
learning, the analysis assumed that all students in the project regions would be positively affected by
improvements in teachers’ subject and pedagogical skills. On the other hand, the impact of improved
infrastructure in the school hubs (i.e. availability of labs, computers, and other learning resources) would only
affect 60 schools located in the clusters around the hubs, out of 218 schools at the secondary level. Other
possible benefits were not quantified, such as improvement in non-cognitive skills, and potential lower fertility
rates, infant mortality, and child stunting. A sensitivity analysis was carried out, where assumptions were
modified, including lower returns to quality of education, varied discount rates, lower labor participation (from 70
percent to 63.5 percent), and inclusion of informal rural workers. Under the most stringent scenario, where five
different parameters were reduced, the IRR was 8 percent and the NPV was USD 20 million.

The ICR's CBA methodology was somewhat different from the one at appraisal. In particular, the CBA at closing
included the actual costs under the project, where the infrastructure allocation increased from USD 11.5 to 17
million. In addition, the analysis estimated both the maintenance costs of the new infrastructure as well as the
additional costs both households and government would have to face because of the project. This CBA also
used an updated methodology to estimate the benefits of education quality more accurately. The ICR notes that
there were improvements in examination scores both in the Standard 6 and Form 2 exams, and even though
these results could not be fully attributed to the project, it probably contributed in that regard. The estimated IRR
was 20.8 percent and the NPV was USD 42.5 million.

Implementation of the project was efficient. The project achieved its original objectives even though there was a
loss of about USD 2.6 million due to exchange rate fluctuations. The ICR (p. 9) reported cost savings under
Components 1, Effective Math, Science, and English Instruction, and 4, Systems Transformation and Project
Management. Activities were carried out as planned, including two additional activities that were added during
the restructuring: the virtual learning environment (to respond to COVID-19-related closures) and a school
construction study in support of future infrastructure development in the education sector. Project
implementation was streamlined across the MoEVT, thus contributing to building capacity and fostering
sustainability. The project also benefited from continuity in the PIE staff, enabling continuous support to ministry
staff, where turnover was more frequent. Financial audits were unqualified, with no evidence of resource
mismanagement. Still, an 18-month extension was necessary to counter implementation issues faced by the
project. There were delays in construction times due to a sand shortage in the islands, extended times in the
procurement of civil works (see also Section 10b), and closures due to the COVID-19 pandemic. There were
also delays in launching other project activities due to capacity constraints.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       84.00
 Appraisal                                                   23.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable


                                                                                                        Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Zanzibar Improving Student Prospects (P153277)



                                                                                     91.00
ICR Estimate                                               21.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project was highly relevant to country and regional conditions, to government strategy, and to Bank
strategy, both at appraisal and closure. Outcome indicators were fully achieved or exceeded and provided
evidence of improved teaching and learning environment that has contributed to increased share of students
who passed the examinations. Efficacy is therefore rated High. Efficiency is rated substantial as a result of a
favorable economic analysis both at appraisal and at the end of the project. Implementation efficiency was
adequate. Overall efficiency is therefore rated Substantial. These ratings are consistent with essentially no
shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and results, producing an Outcome rating of Highly
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (p. 27) noted the commitment of the Government of Zanzibar to continue supporting the
implementation of its education reform. For example, a budget line was included for school grants and the
operation of school hubs through national resources. The project's implementation design also fostered
institutional strengthening, generating ownership of the reforms and a focus on results.

At the time of project closing, the World Bank was preparing a follow-up project that would continue support
to activities along the lines of those financed by the project, including further construction of classrooms,
expansion of teacher training, strengthening of school inspections, and full digitalization of the data
management system. In addition, the Korea International Cooperation Agency and the United States Agency
for International Development were providing financing for infrastructure development of new learning hubs
and data systems development, respectively.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project's design was highly relevant at the time of appraisal. It was based on analytical work, was
  aligned with both the country’s education strategy and World Bank CAS, and drew from prior work in
  Zanzibar as well as global knowledge on the sector. Lessons from prior engagement included the need
  for evidence-based approaches, government ownership of the project, and a robust M&E system. In
  addition, prior experience in the country, as well as globally, indicated that use of a results-based design

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Zanzibar Improving Student Prospects (P153277)



  provided incentives for the implementation of reforms, and that an effective instruction program required it
  to be tailored to the appropriate learning level and to respond to students’ specific needs.

  Project design was also clear and realistic. There was an adequate balance between the focus on results
  in parts of the project, such as teacher training and school autonomy, while using regular investment
  project procedures for other parts, such as infrastructure. The theory of change was well defined, and
  indicators were realistic and measurable.

  Implementation was mainstreamed into the respective departments and units of the MoEVT, fostering
  institutional strengthening and ownership of project activities. The project's overall risk was assessed
  appropriately as Substantial. Risks included inadequate implementation capacity, weak fiduciary teams,
  and political challenges linked to the proposed reforms under the project. Mitigation measures included
  providing incentives on results through the DLIs, providing technical assistance for overall project
  implementation, training of counterparts on fiduciary and contract management, strengthening the M&E
  system, and supporting head teachers in budget planning, management, and accounting.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team carried out implementation support missions twice a year in person and, during the
 COVID-19 travel restrictions period, virtually. Follow-up meetings were held subsequent to missions to
 assess progress made as well as compliance with fiduciary and safeguards aspects of the project. The
 mid-term review and the corresponding restructuring were carried out in a timely manner. The local
 presence of the World Bank team contributed to continuous dialogue with counterparts. The team provided
 technical assistance and analytical work in support of the implementation process.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Project design included realistic and measurable indicators. The indicators were set at the appropriate
 outcome level. Reporting on these indicators was carried out through an initial baseline collection exercise
 in February 2016, with follow-up assessments planned on an annual basis. Even though the higher-level
 indicators of student learning achievement (through the Standard 6 and Form 2 examination data) were not
 part of the project objectives, M&E design included their monitoring as part of the overall program to

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Zanzibar Improving Student Prospects (P153277)



 strengthen the ministry's M&E system. There was no plan to measure graduation rates from Standard 6 or
 Form 2.

 The project included activities under Component 4 that aimed to strengthen the MoEVT’s Education
 Management Information System (EMIS). These activities aimed to generate better-quality data to be
 measured at a higher frequency on student performance. The information was expected to be made
 accessible through the School Data Dashboard. The project also intended to gather direct beneficiary
 feedback through periodic SMS polls. DLIs would be verified through an independent verification
 agent. Finally, a project impact evaluation was to be carried out.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (p. 23), the M&E system developed under the project was maintained throughout
  and provided timely data for progress reports, missions, and Implementation Status and Results
  Reports. The PIE developed an Excel-based monitoring system that was shared with the ministry’s
  EMIS. The project collected beneficiary data. DLIs were verified by the third-party agency as
  planned. The annual school census, which collected data on students, was carried out and uploaded into
  the EMIS. Given the disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the beneficiary feedback survey and
  the impact evaluation were not carried out.



c. M&E Utilization
  Data were used widely and for various purposes. The project used M&E data to update the results
  framework and to inform the mid-term review and the restructuring process. In the context of the results-
  based design, progress and achievement of DLIs were measured regularly through third-party
  verification.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated as Category B, partial assessment. Four environmental safeguards were triggered:
   (a) Environmental Assessment, OP/BP 4.01, (b) Natural Habitats, OP/BP 4.04; (c) Forests, OP/BP 4.36;
   and (d) Physical Cultural Resources, OP/BP 4.11. The main reason for the Category B rating, and the
   triggering of the specific safeguards, was that the project involved construction of school hubs and
   additional classroom facilities in urban and rural areas. The potential impacts could be caused by
   inadequate wastewater and solid waste management, health and safety measures, and potential
   construction in natural habitats or cultural sites. An Environmental and Social Management Framework was
   prepared for the whole project, while Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) were
   developed for each specific construction project. According to the ICR, some delays in the infrastructure
   projects were caused by the challenges faced in implementation and reporting on the ESMPs. These

                                                                                                 Page 12 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    TZ-Zanzibar Improving Student Prospects (P153277)



  issues were identified and addressed during the mid-term review. Local specialists were designated to
  address safeguard issues in the construction sites. In addition, a study was carried out to improve the
  design of future construction projects and provide critical insights related to environmental and social
  safeguards. At closing, the World Bank’s safeguard assessment did not identify any significant breach of
  policies.

  The project also included a grievance redress mechanism. The ministry set up an online platform to process
  grievances at the central level. At the school level, students could share their grievances through their
  student government representatives or through counselors stationed in the schools and in the Teacher
  Centers. Grievances were registered in logbooks. The task team reported that the project had only one
  major complaint linked to land use for one of the school hubs. This complaint was resolved in accordance
  with the corresponding safeguard policy.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Fiduciary responsibility was under the MoEVT. In the case of procurement, the Attorney General's Office
  was also tasked with clearing contracts before they were awarded. This additional step, as well as issues
  with institutional capacity within the ministry, resulted in delays, particularly in the evaluation and award
  stages. The task team provided tailor-made training on procurement policies and procedures and in the
  use of the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) tool. Notwithstanding these
  mitigation efforts, the project faced delays throughout implementation, including disruptions due to the
  COVID-19 pandemic and the transfer of trained staff in the ministry to other sectors. Still, thanks to the
  project closing date extension of 18 months, all contracts were satisfactorily procured and implemented.

  The overall performance of financial management was adequate. Unaudited interim financial reports (IFRs)
  were submitted on time, and the six audit reports carried out by the Controller and Auditor General during
  the life of the project were unqualified. Nonetheless, the project faced some internal control issues such as
  inadequate expenditure support documentation, capacity issues in the internal audit system, and weak
  capacity in the accounting team, leading to errors in the IFRs. The World Bank team provided frequent
  training to mitigate these weaknesses.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  While school hubs were designed to support a cluster of secondary schools with the purpose of
  strengthening SME student skills, these facilities have also provided services for other people in the
  community. According to the task team, they have become a resource for upper secondary schools and for
  community members. For example, hubs provide training for the community in the use of computer tools
  and information on agricultural practices, among others.



d. Other
   ---


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Zanzibar Improving Student Prospects (P153277)



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 27-29) presents several important lessons, some of which are restated below:

A clear PDO in combination with measurable and realistic indicators contributes
to successful achievement of project objectives. This project had clear objectives, and indicators
were defined at the correct outcome level. The project's design was informed by lessons learned
from other education projects in the country and globally. A previous project in Zanzibar had faced
difficulties with respect to indicators that were difficult to measure or where attribution to the project
was not clear. The project also focused on a segment of the education cycle and on specific areas
(math, science, and English) therein. This helped simplify project design and aided in targeting of
resources.

Retraining teachers is a viable means to increase the supply of teachers in subjects where
there is a shortage. This project supported the retraining of arts and language teachers through a
two-year program to increase the number of math and science teachers. This strategy led to an
improvement in the balance of teachers among subjects, resolving the oversupply of arts and
language teachers and reducing the shortage of math and science teachers. The impact at the fiscal
level was limited to the increase in salary of MSE teachers, a smaller fiscal impact when compared
to the alternative of mass recruitment of new teachers. In order to ensure that this process was
successful, the retraining program was rigorous, and it was achieved through a pairing of
international technical assistance and local expertise of the State University of Zanzibar’s School of
Education.

The provision of direct financing to schools, through School Improvement Grants,
contributes to increasing school autonomy and reducing parents’ out-of-pocket
expenditures. Under this project, school grants covered expenses that parents would otherwise
have had to pay. They also financed learning materials, textbooks, mock examinations, motivational
activities for students, remedial lessons, female hygiene products for students, and sporting events.




13. Assessment Recommended?


                                                                                                      Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       TZ-Zanzibar Improving Student Prospects (P153277)




  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well written, providing a clear and concise assessment. The theory of change was well
defined, the alignment of indicators with outputs and outcomes was well assessed, and there was a coherent
discussion of the project's underlying assumptions. The analysis of available data was well prepared, providing
substantive evidence leading to a focused assessment of achievement of the objectives. Lessons were
appropriately grounded in the project’s preparation and implementation as described throughout the
ICR. Given that four environment safeguards were triggered with potential adverse effects (inadequate
wastewater and solid waste management, health and safety measures, construction in natural habitats or
cultural sites) an explicit statement on satisfactory compliance with the World Bank’s safeguard policies was
warranted in the ICR (as was noted with compliance with FM and procurement). While the quality of the ICR
was substantial, it would have been beneficial if analysis of trends in the examination were presented, as well
as analysis of promotion/drop-out at the end of Form 2, given that this was identified as a critical issue in the
PAD.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 15
