     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernizing Higher Education Project (P128516)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023686

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P128516                                    Modernizing Higher Education Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Uzbekistan                                 Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-58040                                  28-Feb-2023                                            40,055,962.94

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 27-Apr-2016                                28-Feb-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            42,200,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                             42,200,000.00                                                 0.00

 Actual                                         40,055,962.94                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Katharina Ferl              Susan Ann Caceres            Eduardo Fernandez                 IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p.iii) and the Financing Agreement of April 11, 2017 (p.
   5) the objective of the project was “to strengthen the Recipient’s higher education system managerial
   capacity, and to improve both the labor market relevance and the learning environment of selected higher
   education institutions”.

   For the analysis in this ICRR, the PDO will be parsed as follows:


                                                                                                     Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernizing Higher Education Project (P128516)



        1. To strengthen the Recipient’s higher education system managerial capacity.
        2. To improve the labor market relevance of selected higher education institutions.
        3. To improve the learning environment of selected higher education institutions.

   Even though the target of PDO indicator 3 was reduced during the project restructuring in March 2020, this
   review will not conduct a split rating since a split rating would not impact the outcome rating since the original
   indicator target was exceeded by project closing.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  27-Apr-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Strengthening Higher Education Management (appraisal estimate US$4.30 million,
   actual US$3.82 million): This component was to finance two subcomponents:

   Subcomponent 1.1: Establishing a Higher Education Management Information System (HEMIS): This sub-
   component was to finance improvements in the management capabilities of the Ministry of Higher and
   Specialized Secondary Education (MHSSE) and Higher Education Institutions (HEIs), including
   development of a HEMIS and capacity building for its target users at HEIs and MHSSE.

   Subcomponent 1.2: Improving the Quality Assurance System: This sub-component was to finance the
   following activities: i) strengthening of HEIs to establish Quality Enhancement Cells (QECs) to take
   ownership of the self-assessment of the institution and its academic programs; ii) strengthening of the
   MHSSE to facilitate support of the HEIs to establish QECs, review self-assessment reports, and review and
   improve the university ranking system; and iii) strengthening the State Testing Center (STC) to carry out the
   function of an independent external quality assurance agency.

   Component 2: Improving the Learning Environment in Higher Education Institutions (HEIs)
   (appraisal estimate US$31.0 million, actual US$30.10 million): This component was to finance the
   following activities: i) the establishment and upgrading of modern basic teaching laboratories and advanced
   scientific research laboratories in Uzbek HEIs in priority areas of the economy; ii) the development and
   implementation of a modern curriculum optimizing the use of provided equipment; and iii) training of faculty
   and staff for optimal use of the equipment. The project supported the establishment of a national e-library
   (electronic library) in Uzbekistan to improve the learning and research environment at Uzbekistan’s HEIs.

   Component 3: Improving the Relevance of Higher Education (appraisal estimate US$4.0 million,
   actual US$4.0 million): This component financed the establishment of a Competitive Academic

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernizing Higher Education Project (P128516)



   Innovation Fund (AIF) to improve the labor-market relevance of higher education. Innovative projects were
   financed to strengthen the institutional and material basis for improving university-industry links, teaching
   and learning practices, and environment (i.e., materials for teaching and research) within HEIs.

   Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation (appraisal estimate US$2.90 million,
   actual US$1.32 million): This component financed incremental operating costs for the project, including
   a team of consultants to coordinate the project, ensure fiduciary compliance, and monitor. Given the low
   enrollment of women in higher education, a study of the social and cultural barriers was conducted to
   improve access- particularly in technical disciplines. Based on the recommendations, an outreach strategy
   was expected to be implemented.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Financing: The project was financed by an IDA credit in the amount of US$42.2 million, of which US$40.05
   million was disbursed, or 95 percent of the funds.

   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was supposed to contribute US$7.80 million, but this did not
   materialize. The intended contribution was to finance the second phase of the Academic Innovation Fund
   (AIF), which was not implemented during the project's lifetime. According to the World Bank team (February
   1, 2024), this resulted from the Task Team Leaders decision to merge two rounds in one considering the
   high-level quality proposals received in the first round. The entire $4 million allocated for the AIF was
   disbursed.

   Dates:

   The project was approved on April 27, 2016, and became effective on August 9, 2017. The internal
   government review was the reason for the long delay between approval and effectiveness. The project
   closed on its original closing date of February 28, 2023

   The project was restructured on March 22, 2020, to adjust the targets for one PDO indicator and three
   intermediate indicators, which needed to be adjusted to reflect implementation progress. For example, the
   cost of research labs was more expensive than estimated, given the narrow technical specifications and
   high international prices caused by the pandemic and the embargo of Russian supplies due to the war in
   Ukraine. The project supported 107 labs out of the 115 originally estimated.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. According to the PAD (para. 3), at the time of appraisal, investments in
education were key to the government of Uzbekistan’s plans for economic and social development. Yet,
higher education enrolment (9 percent) was low and characterized by low funding, quality, and limited
relevance to the changing needs of the country’s economy (para. 5). Also, to achieve the government’s
ambitious goal of reaching upper-middle-income status by 2030, Uzbekistan’s per capita income had


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 16
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Modernizing Higher Education Project (P128516)



to increase from US$2,090 (as of 2014) to about US$15,000 in less than two decades, requiring an average
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth rate of 6 percent per year.

Therefore, Uzbekistan needed to transform its current commodity-dependent economy into a competitive
industrialized economy. This transformation could only be achieved by taking advantage of high value-
added activities and industries, which required the development of a highly skilled workforce. According to
the PAD (para. 6), in May 2011, Presidential Decree No. 1533 was the first substantial directive in the field
of higher education, identifying the overall quality deficit and the disconnect between academia and industry
as key shortcomings of the higher education sector. The key challenges included (PAD para 10): (a)
access, (b) quality, (c) relevance, and (d) system management. 37.5 percent of students enrolled in Uzbek
universities were female in 2014-2015 academic year, which is lower than in Eastern European, Central
Asian, and OECD countries (PAD para. 12). In relation to quality, the higher education sector faced several
challenges including: i) lack of focus on the disciplines of science, technology, and engineering; ii) poor
laboratory infrastructure; iii) outdated curriculums; and iv) faculty lacking advanced qualifications and
training in their respective areas of specialization. Under Decree No. 1533, a high-ranking committee led by
the First Deputy Prime Minister and including all key ministers was tasked with improving the higher
education system, focusing on improving quality by upgrading laboratories for teaching and research in
technical fields.

Alignment with the government strategy. The objective of the project supported the government’s
Development Strategy (2022-2026) which aimed to: i) increase the access to quality HE; ii) have 10 HEI
prepared to enter international education rankings by 2026; iii) double the number of young people studying
at prestigious foreign universities and training 50 percent of youth in technical, sciences, and information
technology; iv) foster innovation by developing cooperation between industry and scientific institutions; and
v) achieve top 50 of the Global Innovation Index by 2030. The objective also supported the related National
Action Strategy on the Five Priority Development Areas (2017-2021), which emphasized the importance of
developing education and science through i) improving the quality and effectiveness of HEIs via
international standards of training and quality assurance; ii) stimulating research and innovation through the
creation of laboratories and high-tech centers at HEIs; and iii) strengthening educational institutions through
construction, repair, equipment and modern teaching and laboratory equipment.

Alignment with the World Bank strategy. The objective of the project aligned with the World Bank’s most
recent Country Partnership Framework (FY22-26) and objective 2.1 (improve access to quality education)
and its aim to “ensure that efforts to increase the coverage of higher education are boosted by more
qualified entrants”. Furthermore, the 2022 Systematic Country Diagnosis (SCD), which identified as one of
its key priorities as “to invest in people” and called tertiary education as one of Uzbekistan’s “most pressing
gaps”.

The objectives of the project addressed most of the key challenges. The ambition of the objectives was
highly aligned with the development problem and contextas well as World Bank and Government
Strategies. Thus, there was highl relevance of objectives for the government and Bank throughout the life of
the operation.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 16
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Modernizing Higher Education Project (P128516)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To strengthen the Recipient’s higher education system managerial capacity

               Rationale
               Theory of change: The project’s theory of change stated that project inputs/activities such as developing a
               Higher Education Management Information System (HEMIS), building capacity in the use of HEMIS at HEIs
               and MHSEE, training supervisory government staff in quality-assurance topics, as well as building capacity at
               the HEIs to establish Quality Enhancement Cells (QECs) and at the MHSEE to review such QECs were to
               result in increased capacity in HEIs and MHSEE and better utilization of HEMIS data and quality-assurance
               information These changes were to strengthen the managerial capacity of the Recipient’s higher education
               system. Important assumptions within the result chain were that the quality assurance process and utilization
               of the HEMIS data would become mechanisms for system improvement and managerial capacity.

               The theory of change was logical, but there were measurement weaknesses (see section 9a for more
               details).

               Outputs:

                     A HEMIS was developed and is operational in all public universities, achieving the target of a HEMIS
                      being operational and implemented in all public universities.
                     75 staff from State Inspection for Supervision of Quality in Education (SISQE) and experts were
                      trained in higher education quality-assurance-related topics, exceeding the target of 25 staff.
                     The project contributed to strengthening the capacity of the Ministry of Public Education (MoPE), the
                      MHSSE, SISQE, HEIS, and private sector partners. For example: i) introduction of QECs at scale
                      created a process to strengthen the individuals involved in QECs within HEIs; ii) utilization of a
                      competitive grant allocation mechanism fostered a culture of competition, collaboration, and
                      innovation which strengthened the system; iii) development of laboratories, a HEMIS, and an e-library
                      accompanying training provided a better learning environment, better data for decision making and
                      new learning tools; iv) training of MHSSE and SISQE staff in quality assurance abilities strengthened
                      the institutions' capacities; and v) creation of project management team within MHSSE built capacity in
                      project management, financial management, procurement, safeguards, monitoring and evaluation as
                      well in grant allocation.

               Outcomes:

                     57 percent of universities completed institutional self-assessment through QECs, exceeding the target
                      of 50 percent. QECs serve as central units responsible for monitoring and enhancing the quality of
                      education by developing and implementing quality assurance policies, procedures, and




                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Modernizing Higher Education Project (P128516)



       practices. However, the ICR did not provide additional evidence to demonstrate how these self-
       assessments improved HEIs and managerial capacity overall.

The project likely enhanced the managerial capacity of Uzbekistan's higher education system by
implementing a Higher Education Management Information System (HEMIS), enabling data-driven decisions,
training staff in quality assurance, and enhancing capabilities in conducting Quality Enhancement Checks
(QECs). However, the ICR failed to provide that completing institutional self-assessments resulted in
improvements in Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) or overall managerial capacity. Despite these
shortcomings, and considering that the delivered outputs are likely to contribute to enhanced capacity within
HEIs, the achievement of this objective is rated as Substantial, albeit only marginally so.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the labor market relevance of selected higher education institutions

Rationale
Theory of change: The project’s theory of change stated that project inputs/activities, such as pilot rounds of
improvement grants for HEIs, were to strengthen the institutional and material basis for improving university-
industry links, teaching, and learning practices and environments within HEIs. Other elements, such as
partnerships with private industry, were included to improve the relevance of HEIs.

The theory of change was logical, but the results chain could have been more robust in monitoring the labor
market relevance of higher education institutions beyond the use of perception surveys by incorporating the
monitoring of graduates' labor market outcomes.

Outputs:

      41 percent of eligible HEIs benefitted from grants of the Competitive Academic Innovation Fund (AIF),
       exceeding the target of 30 percent.
      All project supported HEIs incorporated citizen engagement into grant proposals under the AIF,
       exceeding the target of 75 percent of project-supported HEIs. AIF grants created new jobs and
       academic programs in biomedical engineering, introduced renewable energy programs throughout the
       country, which in turn supported the elaboration of new legislation in this area, financed modern
       equipment and licenses for computer design, and developed new laboratories and infrastructure.
      194 partnerships were established under the AIF, exceeding the target of 15 partnerships. The ICR
       (para 55) provided one example of how the partnership supported more relevant curricula in the HEI.
      A report on options to increase female enrolment was authored and used to inform selection criteria of
       grants under AIF, achieving the target of a report being issued.

Outcomes:



                                                                                                  Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Modernizing Higher Education Project (P128516)




      The index of labor market relevance of higher education perceived by students, civil society, and firms
       increased from 54.48 percent in 2016 to 78 percent in 2023, achieving the target of a 20 percent
       increase.

The project achieved all of its outputs and outcome targets. However, relying solely on perception surveys to
assess the relevance of higher education institutions in the labor market is insufficient. Ultimately, the acid
test for judging their relevance lies in the extent to which graduates secure employment and experience
improved incomes. Therefore, supplementing perception surveys with metrics that directly measure
graduates' employment outcomes and income levels would have provided a more conclusive evaluation of
relevance. Given this shortcoming, the achievement of this objective is rated Substantial, albeit only
marginally so.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve the learning environment of selected higher education institutions

Rationale
Theory of change: The project’s theory of change stated that project inputs/activities such as building and
equipping new laboratories for basic teaching and advanced scientific research, training staff to use new
infrastructure, reviewing and redesigning modern curricula at HEIs, and establishing an e-library were to
result in several outputs. These outputs were to include new libraries being built and equipped, staff being
trained in the use of new infrastructure, curricula at HEIs being reviewed and redesigned, and an e-library
being established.

While the theory of change displayed logical coherence, it could have benefited from enhanced measures to
track progress toward the aim of improved learning environments in selected higher education institutions.
This could have included measures such as student satisfaction surveys to gauge perceptions of teaching
quality, e-library resources, and overall experience in HEIs. Additionally, incorporating academic performance
metrics would have helped assess the contribution to learning outcomes. Moreover, it would have been
beneficial to include metrics to measure whether the revised and redesigned curricula were implemented as
planned by HEIs administrators and faculty. While the majority of the project’s financing, 75.2 percent, was
allocated to this objective, the indicator used to measure, the number of beneficiaries benefiting from the
project, does not effectively assess the achievement of this objective.

Outputs:

      112 basic teaching laboratories were established and incorporated into academic programs,
       exceeding the target of 100 basic teaching laboratories.
      7 advanced scientific research laboratories were established and incorporated into research
       programs, not achieving the original target of 15 laboratories and achieving the revised target of seven
       laboratories. In total, 119 modernized learning and research laboratories were established and


                                                                                                  Page 7 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Modernizing Higher Education Project (P128516)



                                     incorporated into revised academic programs, exceeding the original target of 115 laboratories and
                                     the revised target of 107 learning and research laboratories.
                                    Also, staff was trained in its usage. The World Bank team (April 12) reported the system unified
                                     information across the higher education institutions. Gaining access to such plethora of new learning
                                     materials improved learning environment for students in the selected HEIs and were widely used. Staff
                                     were also trained in its usage.
                                    The project supported the training of personnel, development of curricula and science programs, and
                                     organization of practical seminars on the effective use of the laboratory classes by cooperation
                                     amongst universities and research institutes.
                                    By early 2021, the curriculum and science programs for 72 training laboratories had been updated and
                                     improved and 40 curriculum and science programs were in progress. Also, specialists of suppliers
                                     conducted practical seminars on the use of training and laboratory equipment delivered to 112
                                     laboratories of 39 planned universities.
                                    The World Bank team (April 12, 2024) reported usage of these new facilities and equipment, including
                                     learning in better classrooms, newly enabled practice and research modules, extra-curricular
                                     internships, etc. in both audio-visual formats and in material documentation that improved the learning
                                     environment.

                            The project benefitted 843,302 beneficiaries, exceeding the original target of 621,000 beneficiaries and the
                            revised target of 420,000 beneficiaries. The participation of women in higher education increased from 37
                            percent in 2016 to 47 percent in 2023, exceeding the target of 40 percent. The ICR (para 65) noted that
                            students in foreign universities had to be absorbed by HEIs during the pandemic. The ICR did not discuss the
                            impact of these new students on quality in HEIs. To address the gender gap, the project implemented the
                            following key interventions: (i) a study to identify cultural, social, and financial barriers that hinder HE for
                            women; (ii) outreach activities to encourage female students to enroll in HEIs and especially hard sciences;
                            (iii) quotas for female faculty participation in training courses and grant applications; (iv) criteria favoring grant
                            proposals that specifically promote mechanisms for inclusion and empowerment of female students; (iv)
                            criteria favoring grant proposals that explicitly promote mechanisms for inclusion and empowerment of female
                            students.

                            Although the project successfully met all output targets, it did not include metrics to monitor progress toward
                            the goal of enhancing the learning environment in selected higher education institutions. Given this
                            shortcoming, the achievement of this objective is rated Substantial, albeit only marginally so.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            All three objectives were rated Substantial. The aggregation of achievements is indicative of a Substantial
                            rating for overall efficacy, but with caveats, as all objectives were Substantial, albeit only marginally so.


                                                                                                                                   Page 8 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Modernizing Higher Education Project (P128516)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The PAD (p. 57) conducted a cost-benefit analysis. The costs were defined as the cost of project disbursements
and service charges and cost of public spending on replacing and maintaining labs. The benefits were defined
as investment in innovation through competitive grants to increase university-industry links and establish
advanced laboratories. The analysis assumed that an improvement of the quality of higher education and skill
levels of graduates, wage premiums for higher education graduates were to increase, since employers were to
be willing to pay higher wage premiums for graduates with better skills. Additionally, the analysis assumed that
investments in technology and innovation were to improve productivity and, consequently, economic growth,
which were to translate into social returns. While the latter assumption is plausible, there may also be other
factors behind employers’ willingness to pay higher wages (such as scarcity of highly skilled graduates).

The analysis calculated a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$249.1 million, with US$274.2 million in benefits
against US$25.1 million in costs, yielding a benefit-to-cost ratio of 10.9 and an Internal Rate of Return (IRR)
of 26 percent. The analysis assumes a discount rate of 12 percent. This analysis indicated that the project was a
worthwhile investment.

The ICR (para. 40) conducted a similar cost benefit analysis with updated data. The analysis calculated a NPV
of US$297.6 million, a benefit-to-cost ratio of 11.4 (base case), and an IRR of 26 percent. The higher values are
a result of a larger number of beneficiaries than anticipated. However, as mentioned in the M&E section in more
detail, the number of beneficiaries might have been overestimated due to a lack of definition of “beneficiaries”.
Despite this, the analysis indicates that the project was a worthwhile investment.

Operational efficiency:

The project was able to achieve/exceed most of its original targets despite not spending funds in the amount of
US$2.1 million (5.1 percent of the estimated cost), which suggests targets were modest. Furthermore, according
to the ICR (para. 44) the project supported a small ICT unit in the MHSSE to transform into a robust department
that was able to develop and maintain the HEMIS through hiring consultants, training ministry staff, and
partnering with universities to benefit from their ICT capacity. The project also experienced delays, including a
12-months delay in signing the financial agreement and lengthy reviews of technical and procurement
documents. Also, the project experienced implementation bottlenecks related to the MHSSE and the PMT,
requiring technical and operational support as well as significant capacity building in project management,
monitoring and evaluation. Despite these challenges and the COVID-19 pandemic, the project was able to close
on time.

Overall, the project’s efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernizing Higher Education Project (P128516)



Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                              Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   50.20
Appraisal                                                26.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   71.70
ICR Estimate                                             26.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated High given its substantial alignment with the Bank’s most recent Country
Partnership Framework (FY22-26) and government strategies. Efficacy is rated Substantial. Efficiency is rated
Substantial, based on positive expected returns, with only minor negative aspects of implementation caused by
endogenous and exogenous factors that moderately reduced overall efficiency. The aggregation of these ratings
is consistent with a Satisfactory outcome rating, which is indicative of essentially minor shortcomings in the
project’s overall preparation, implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment: According to the ICR (para. 84), the government continues to remain committed
to the project’s objectives, as demonstrated through its partnership with the Islamic Development Bank and
the Asian Development Bank in purchasing and retrofitting laboratories and equipment for HEIs. Also, the
government and the Bank continue their cooperation through the Modernizing Uzbekistan National
Innovation System Project (P170206, financing amount US$50.0 million), which aims to improve the labor
market relevance, learning environment, and capacity of HEIs in Uzbekistan by financing research and
innovation partnerships and between HEIs and the private sector with its Research Excellent Program and
its Research Commercialization Program. Furthermore, the MHSEE has demonstrated its commitment to the
project’s objective by taking over the subscriptions and maintenance of the e-library. However, it will be
critical for the government and World Bank to continue its policy dialogue to develop a longer sequence of
HEI reform, change the regulatory framework, build a better tertiary system, and increase access.

Technical capacity: According to the ICR (para. 84), most of the capacity built under the project remains in
the relevant HEIs with some Project Management Team (PMT) staff working on other projects within the



                                                                                                  Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Modernizing Higher Education Project (P128516)



government. However, according to the Bank team (November 20, 2023), there is a high risk of staff
turnover, given the country’s propensity for frequent political changes.

Fiduciary risk/implementing capacity risk: According to the Bank team (November 20, 2023), future
projects will continue facing a fiduciary risk and institutional capacity for implementation risk, since the issues
observed at the project start with regards to effectiveness (e.g., lengthy government procedures, weak
fiduciary capacity) are also being experienced by other Bank projects implemented in Uzbekistan.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank team identified relevant risks such as fiduciary which was rated as high due to MHSSE’s lack
  of previous experience in Bank financing projects and weak public financial management and
  procurement capacity at the country level. Mitigation measures included financial management,
  disbursement, and procurement arrangements that were expected to be acceptable after a set of agreed
  actions had been met.

  Political and governance, macroeconomic, institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability,
  and social risks were rated as substantial. Mitigation measures included continuously assessing policy
  reforms, the government’s agenda to accelerate job creation, increase competitiveness, and promote
  increased productivity and diversification. Also, mitigation measures included close Bank supervision, as
  well as ensuring that project beneficiaries were covered by the International Labor Organization’s (ILO’s)
  Third Party Monitoring aimed at preventing child and forced labor. Furthermore, the project conducted
  broader awareness-raising activities with citizens.

  The Bank team did not identify the risk of lengthy government procedures that resulted in a 12-month lag
  in signing the financing agreement as well as delays in adopting a project operation manual, establishing
  the Project Management Team (PMT), and hiring the project coordinator. Moreover, as outlined in the
  ICR (paragraph 75), the selection of the implementing agency (MHSSE) aided in capacity building but
  presented challenges. Having the deputy minister of MHSS serve as the project director made each
  political reappointment intricate, particularly regarding procurement, payments, and obtaining stakeholder
  buy-in. The project also encountered delays when the deputy director faced time constraints or
  encountered less buy-in from relevant stakeholders.

  The project’s Results Framework had shortcomings in terms of selected indicators (see section 9a for
  more details) that impacted the measuring of the achievement of the objectives.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision

                                                                                                       Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernizing Higher Education Project (P128516)



 According to the World Bank team (November 20, 2023), the Bank conducted 14 supervision missions and
 ensured continuous supervision during the COVID-19 pandemic. Virtual missions were conducted regularly
 throughout the pandemic. The Bank team used ratings to signal implementation weaknesses to the
 implementing agency, which were addressed and ratings subsequently improved. The Bank team focused
 on achieving development outcomes in its supervision. However, monitoring and evaluation was weak at
 design and the restructuring and Mid-Term Review were not used as an opportunity to improve indicators
 and data to understand impact beyond outputs.

 When the World Bank team realized that costs for laboratories and equipment had increased substantially,
 it restructured the project to revise the targets. Also, when the project faced procurement-related delays,
 the World Bank team conducted a thorough review and analysis of major procurement packages and made
 recommendations (see section 10b for more details). In addition, the ICR (para. 44) notes that the World
 Bank team provided significant capacity building support in other areas such as project management,
 monitoring and evaluation, and technical and operational support.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s objective was clearly specified. The project's theory of change was logical, but the results
 framework used to measure it could have been more robust. For example, under objective 2, the results
 framework could have been more robust in monitoring relevance to student employment beyond perception
 surveys of relevance. Likewise, under objective 3, the results framework lacked metrics to monitor progress
 toward the goal of enhancing the learning environment in selected higher education institutions. In
 summary, the project largely measured the achievement of objectives 1 and 3 through indicators on the
 output rather than the outcome level.

 While most intermediate outcome indicators were adequate to measure the project’s contributions towards
 achieving the objective, some intermediate outcome indicators were not sufficiently defined, such as
 “number of partnerships established under the Academic Innovation Fund”, “number of beneficiaries,” and
 “assessment of options to increase female enrollment.” According to the ICR (para. 59), the ambiguity of
 these indicators might have resulted in overreporting certain results. Finally, the ICR (para. 79) stated that
 the project did not sufficiently measure the usage of some project activities, such as the new laboratories
 and equipment, as well as the HEMIS and e-library.




b. M&E Implementation

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernizing Higher Education Project (P128516)



  According to the Bank team (November 20, 2023), data quality was poor at the beginning of project
  implementation due to insufficient capacity. According to the ICR (para. 66), consultants were hired to
  assess the quality and implementation of QECs, laboratories, and the AIF and review these interventions'
  effectiveness and impact. Consultants were critical to drafting reports and communicating with the Bank.

  When the Results Framework was revised in 2020, the targets of one PDO indicator and two
  intermediate outcome indicators were decreased due to higher costs for laboratories and a fewer number
  of graduates. The ICR (para. 67) stated that these reductions might not have been necessary since the
  project ended up being able to surpass most of the original targets while having unused financing left.

  According to the Bank team (November 20, 2023), the indicators were mostly measured and reported
  within the expected time period. Most intermediate result indicators were reported bi-annually, with PDO
  indicators being measured less regularly. The Bank team further stated that the project’s M&E functions
  are likely to be sustained after project closure. For example, one of the key M&E tools developed by the
  project, the HEMIS, was established within the education system and stakeholders and should prove
  resilient.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the Bank team (November 20, 2023), HEMIS data were used to inform decision-making.
  For example, when programs were forced to move online due to the COVID-19 pandemic, HEMIS
  enabled key decisions like moving university applications online and tracking students’ progress as well
  as academic gaps. Similarly, the various studies under component 4 helped the PMT select AIF
  candidates and implementation of these projects. The gender study under component 4 also led to
  setting gender criteria in grant proposals and establishing a gender equality platform at the
  Ministry. However, no further steps were taken, as originally intended, to address barriers to women’s
  enrollment, particularly in technical subjects.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B, triggering the Bank’s safeguard policy OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental
   Assessment). The project developed an Environmental Management Framework, which defined
   responsibilities for environmental management and outlined a step-by-step procedure for site-specific
   environmental assessment. Also, during project implementation, the MHSSE developed an Environmental
   and Social Management Plan (ESMP) to assist in assessing expected levels of environmental restoration
   and impacts related to the construction and rehabilitation works. However, the ESMF did not include an
   equipment disposal scheme which did not allow for managing the scheme during implementation.

   In 2021, the safeguard rating was Moderately Unsatisfactory due to insufficient information on compliance.
   The Bank team addressed this by requesting information from the Ministry on ESMP preparation and

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Modernizing Higher Education Project (P128516)



  approval, supervision of ESMP implementation, whether EMPs have been included in bidding documents
  and contracts for civil works, and capacity-building activities on health and safety in laboratories.

  According to the ICR (para. 72), at the beginning of 2022, the PMT held monitoring meetings with
  contractors and local officials at project sites to present the Bank’s safeguard requirements and standards.
  As a result of these meetings, all laboratories developed ESMPs for their construction/rehabilitation works
  and completed the Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) training.

  The MHSSE developed a Grievance Redress Mechanism, which was mainly used by contractors. The ICR
  (para. 74) stated that no project-related complaints were received.

  When the project closed, the safeguard rating was Moderately Satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management:

  The PMT at the MHSSE was responsible for the project’s financial management. According to the ICR
  (para. 76), the Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) were submitted in a timely manner and were of adequate
  quality. Audited project financial statements for 2019 and 2020 were submitted with a delay. However, the
  project experienced payment delays to contractors due to the late acceptance of goods supplied under the
  project.

  The ICR (para. 76) stated that Bank reviews of internal controls indicated no signs of misstatements or
  internal control weaknesses. Also, the external auditor’s opinion was unqualified.

  When the project closed, Financial Management was rated Satisfactory.

  Procurement:

  According to the ICR (para.77), the project experienced delays in processing several contracts. Some
  delays were related to the lengthy internal coordination/approval processes and lack of understanding of
  the Bank procurement requirements by the Ministry. As a result, in 2018, the project’s procurement rating
  was downgraded from Moderately Satisfactory to Moderately Unsatisfactory. The Bank team conducted a
  thorough review and analysis of major procurement packages and made the following recommendations: i)
  better coordination between technical experts and procurement specialists to avoid delays in the
  preparation of technical specifications; ii) quick finalization of technical specifications for the advanced
  scientific and research laboratories; and iii) preparation of conflict management plans for major contracts.
  According to the Bank team (November 20, 2023), various procurement recommendations were mostly
  implemented. By the project's end date, these activities had been completed.

  When the project closed, procurement was rated Satisfactory.




                                                                                                 Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernizing Higher Education Project (P128516)



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                Relevance of objectives was
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory              rated high and efficacy and
                                                                                efficiency Substantial.
                                                                                Shortcomings in the design of
                                                                                implementation arrangements
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                and in the formulation of the
                                                                                results framework.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 33-34) included several lessons learned which were adapted by IEG:

      Separating the implementing agency from political cycles, bureaucratic delays, and
       weak incentives allows for more implementation autonomy that might positively
       impact project implementation. In this project, project implementation was closely linked to
       existing institutional arrangements within the government which allowed for capacity building.
       However, it also resulted in implementation delays due to leadership turnover, procurement
       challenges, and insufficient reward mechanisms for the PMT.
      Defining technical gaps during project design and then pairing technology upgrades
       with intense capacity building ensures the sustainability of modern infrastructure. In
       this project, the identification of technical gaps during the design stage allowed for funding
       and allocating time for user training appropriately.
      Investing in digitally enabled higher education might positively impact resilience of
       the higher education system. In this project, the COVID-19 pandemic demonstrated the
       importance of virtual tools such as the HEMIS for management and the e-library for learning
       to ensure the resilience of the higher education sector.



13. Assessment Recommended?



                                                                                                  Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Modernizing Higher Education Project (P128516)



  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR included an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation. The economic analysis was
adequate, and the lessons learned can be useful for future projects in this area. However, the ICR would have
benefitted from additional outcome data to demonstrate the achievement of the project objectives and from
being more candid about the lack of evidence. Also, the ICR did not explain why borrower contributions were
not made and why there was no second phase of the AIF. Overall, the quality of the ICR was Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                               Page 16 of 16
