     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PSEGR DPL (P164575)



                                                                             Report Number: ICRR0023909

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                            Operation Name
 P164575                                 PSEGR DPL

 Country                                 Practice Area (Lead)
 Serbia                                  Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                       Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-92350                             31-Dec-2022                                          93,082,931.20

 Bank Approval Date                     Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Apr-2021                            31-Dec-2022

                                        IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                       100,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                        100,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                      93,082,931.20                                             0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Dimitri Tsarouhas         Vandana Chandra            Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Serbia Public Sector Efficiency and Green Recovery (PSEGR) Development Policy Loan (DPL) aimed at
supporting efforts by the Government of Serbia (GoS) “to i) increase public sector efficiency and
transparency, and ii) initiate a green recovery,” [Program Document (PD), p. 4].



                                                                                              Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PSEGR DPL (P164575)



For the purpose of this ICRR, the program development objectives (PDOs) of the operation against
which outcomes will be assessed are taken to be the following:

      PDO1: Improve public sector efficiency and transparency;
      PDO2: Initiate a green recovery.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The operation was structured around two pillars encompassing the operation’s objectives, namely to: (i)
increase public sector efficiency and transparency, and (ii) initiate a green recovery (PD, p.17).


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

PSEGR consisted of an IBRD loan of EUR 82.6 million (US$100 million equivalent). The amount disbursed was
US$93 million. The difference between the amount approved and disbursed was due to the exchange rate
fluctuation between the USD and the Euro at the time.

The operation was approved on April 29, 2021, became effective on September 22, 2021, and closed as
envisaged on December 31, 2022.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Serbia, a middle-income country, received official candidate status for membership in the European Union
 (EU) in 2012, aspires to join the EU and reach EU income levels (ICR pg. 5). Since receiving the official
 candidate status for EU membership, efforts have been directed towards aligning Serbia’s legislation with the
 EU acquis and efforts have been made to improve living standards. GDP growth averaged 3.2 percent
 between 2015 and 2019, underpinned by a comprehensive fiscal consolidation program that brought down
 public debt from 70 percent of GDP in 2015 to 51.9 percent in 2019 (ICR pg. 4). However, these efforts were
 halted with the onset of the pandemic. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, a large fiscal support package
 of 11.6 percent of GDP was adopted in 2020, (ICR, p.5). Although the effort was largely successful in that
 GDP growth rates reached 7.7 percent in 2021 (PD, p. 4), it also meant that earlier fiscal consolidation efforts
 were reversed, and the fiscal surplus of 1.1 percent in 2017 turned into a fiscal deficit of 8.1 percent in 2021.
 The exhaustion of fiscal buffers meant that a fiscal consolidation effort was necessary to make the economy
 more resilient to external shocks.

 Prior to the pandemic, a diverse set of reforms identified and in progress were geared towards promoting
 faster growth. These included investments in the public and private sectors coupled with structural reforms in
 public administration governance, tax and subsidies policy, and the legislative and regulatory
 framework. These efforts were re-affirmed in 2020 when the new government declared an intention to
 accelerate reforms for EU accession and boosting resilience of the economy. Some of the priorities included
 efforts to sustain fiscal consolidation gains from 2014-19 by containing the public wage bill, increasing
 efficiency through further digitalization of government services, adopting better control and monitoring of the


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PSEGR DPL (P164575)



use of public funds and increasing transparency, as well as resolving issues of poorly targeted social safety
net spending that became more visible during the pandemic (ICR pg. 6).

Serbia signed the Sofia Declaration on the Green Agenda for the Western Balkans in 2020, which aligned the
country with the EU Green Deal, as the government committed to improving energy efficiency, reducing
emissions, reducing air pollution, increasing the share of renewables in its energy mix, minimizing waste, and
transitioning to a circular economy. The operation’s second objective, a transition to “green growth,” was
aligned with this direction. The carbon intensity of Serbia’s GDP was almost three times as high as the EU
countries’ average, driven largely by its heavy reliance on lignite for thermal power generation which led to air
pollution and was a hazard for public health. Moreover, increased air pollution was the top public health
concern in Serbia, particularly during the winter months when the demand for heating was the highest.
According to 2019 data reported by the World Health Organization, exposure to PM2.5 accounted for 3,585
premature deaths per year across 11 surveyed Serbian cities, including 1,796 in Belgrade. Serbia had one of
the worst air quality levels in the region; approximately 2.5 million citizens were estimated to live in regions
where the air contained at least one polluting substance in an amount deemed hazardous to human health.

Relevance to country development strategy

The objectives of the operation were relevant to the country situation and drew upon the government’s
Economic Reform Program (ERP) 2021-2023 as well as Serbia’s Fiscal Strategy for 2021-23.

Serbia’s reform agenda was set out in two flagship documents, the Fiscal Strategy and the ERP. The Fiscal
Strategy was the central strategic document that the government updated annually and used as the primary
guide for medium-term budgetary planning. The 2021-2023 Fiscal Strategy focused on preserving
macroeconomic stability through a fast recovery from the pandemic, a reduced fiscal deficit to curb public debt,
and implementation of structural reforms to improve the competitiveness of the private sector. The ERP was
prepared annually and built on the Fiscal Strategy. The 2021-2023 ERP focused on a set of structural reforms
related, inter alia, to the business environment, innovation, inclusion, and social protection. For this operation,
the most important structural reforms aimed at improving the competitiveness of the Serbian economy and
boosting private sector investment through improved access to finance and fostering a sustainable framework
for environmental management. The Sofia Declaration was European Union’s flagship initiative for
environmentally sustainable growth to which member states and candidate countries alike were committed.
Climate change related actions were anchored in the second National Communication on climate change
prepared by the Ministry of Environmental Protection (MoEP) and submitted to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 2017.

Alignment with Country Partnership Framework and Development Strategy:

The operation was aligned with the CPF (2016-2020) and built on the analytical findings of the 2020
Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD), the 2020 Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) and the Performance
and Learning Review (PLR) (2019). The operation was aligned with the broad areas of the CPF (2016-2020)
related to economic governance and the role of the state, private sector growth, and economic inclusion
climate change and disaster risks. The PLR (2019) reiterated CPF priorities, while the SCD (2020), stressed
environmental sustainability and climate action to mitigate the country’s vulnerability and improve governance.

The operation also contributed to the CPF FY2022-26, high-level objectives of greener and more resilient
growth and more inclusive service delivery.



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PSEGR DPL (P164575)



b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

The operation had a total of 8 Prior Actions (PAs), of which five were related to PDO1 and three to PDO2.

Table 1: Prior Actions for Serbia Public Sector Efficiency and Green Recovery DPL (PSEGR)

PDO1: Improve Public Sector Efficiency and Transparency
PA1: The Borrower has established the Public Procurement Portal to promote transparency and efficiency in
public procurement, as evidenced by the issuance of Rulebooks and Guidelines to regulate the implementation
of the Public Procurement Portal, pursuant to the provisions of the Law on Public Procurement.
PA2: The Borrower has introduced a new procedure for prioritizing and controlling recruitment in the public
sector, as evidenced by the issuance of the Decree on the Procedure for Obtaining Approval for New
Recruitment or Additional Temporary Employment with Budget Beneficiaries (Decree 05 No. 110-11166/2020-
2), duly published in the Borrower’s Official Gazette No. 159 on December 30, 2020.
PA3: The Borrower has mandated the establishment of the Social Card Registry for the consolidation of data on
social protection beneficiaries, as evidenced by the enactment of the Law on Social Card, duly published in the
Borrower’s Official Gazette No. 14, dated February 17, 2021.
PA4: The Borrower has established an independent Commission for State Aid Control and has made it
operational, as evidenced by: (i) the enactment of the Law on State Aid Control, duly published in the
Borrower’s Official Gazette No. 73/2019 on October 11, 2019; and (ii) the adoption of the founding statute of the
Commission for State Aid Control, duly published in Borrower’s Official Gazette No. 3 and 41, dated January 17,
2020 and March 24, 2020, respectively.
PA5: The National Bank of Serbia has published, on a dedicated section of its website, all the bylaws,
decisions, rulebooks, and summary of official opinions related to the implementation of the Law on Foreign
Exchange Operations.
PDO2: Initiate a Green Recovery
PA6: The Borrower has set the date of January 1, 2021, for the entry into force of regulations to limit sulfur
content in heavy fuel oil, as evidenced by the approval of the Rulebook on Technical and Other Requirements
for Liquid Fuels of Petroleum Origin, duly published in the Borrower’s Official Gazette No. 150/2020, dated
December 14, 2020.
PA7: The Borrower has adopted the National Plan for the Reduction of the Main Pollutant Emissions from Old
Large Combustion Plants, duly published in the Borrower’s Official Gazette No. 10/2020, dated February 6,
2020.

PA8: The Borrower has enacted the Law on Climate Change (published in the Borrower’s Official Gazette No.
26/2021 on March 23, 2021, and enters into force on March 31, 2021) which mandates the preparation and
adoption of the Low-Carbon Development Strategy and its Action Plan and the Climate Change Adaptation
Program, to establish systems to reduce GHG emissions and support climate adaptation in a cost-effective and
economically viable manner.


PDO1: Improve Public Sector Efficiency and Transparency




                                                                                                  Page 4 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PSEGR DPL (P164575)



PA1 supported the establishment of a public procurement portal which was expected to optimize public
spending by ensuring higher value for money spent on the public procurement of goods and services through
greater competition among firms. PA1 was in line with the OECD/SIGMA report on implementing the EU
directives on the selection of economic operators in public procurement procedures. The share of Serbia’s
public procurement market was rising and had reached 8.9 percent of GDP in 2021. As an applicant aspiring to
become a member of the EU, Serbia was obliged to align its legislative and regulatory framework with that of
the EU, and PA1 contributed to this goal by establishing a public procurement portal. Use of the portal was
expected to contribute to reduced bureaucracy and administrative costs for both the public and private sectors,
and enhanced competition among firms. The portal was the result of the Law on Public Procurement, which
simplified administrative procedures and enabled a greater number of SMEs to take part in bidding, thus
contributing to private sector development, and public sector efficiency and transparency. The results chain
(outlined in the theory of change (ICR p. 11)) to the objective of improved public sector efficiency and
transparency was clear. Relevance of PA1: Satisfactory (S).

PA2 supported the process for approval of new hiring in the public sector and a cap on new hiring as well as
clear reassignment rules (PD, p. 20, footnotes 33 and 34). These actions were expected to improve public
expenditure efficiency through better management of public sector employment, and control of the wage bill.
Despite a successful reduction in Serbia’s wage bill from 11 percent of GDP in 2014 to 9.5 percent in 2019 no
effective mechanism for controlling and prioritizing the recruitment of new employees was instituted during that
period, and the previously imposed hiring freeze was lifted on December 31, 2020. By imposing discipline in
public employment spending, PA2 would contribute to public sector efficiency. Relevance of PA2:
Satisfactory (S).

PA3: By establishing the Social Card Registry for the consolidation of data on social protection beneficiaries,
PA3 sought to improve targeting of social assistance, reduce exclusion and inclusions errors, and ultimately
strengthen the social safety net, while simultaneously increasing public spending efficiency. Serbia’s social
spending declined from 16.7 percent of GDP in 2014 to 14.4 percent of GDP in 2019. Nevertheless,
inefficiencies and issues of rational and fair distribution remained, rooted in the lack of consolidated data on the
socioeconomic status of existing and prospective beneficiaries. The 2021 Law on Social Card set the legal
basis for the full implementation of the Social Card registry to allow easier social screening and faster and more
appropriate government support to those in need, including those at risk of climate change-related disasters.
The efficiency of social spending is expected to increase with the establishment of the registry supported by a
detailed impact assessment on data protection requirements associated with the merging of databases that will
allow state authorities to identify eligible individuals. Establishing a social card registry was relevant to the
objective of improved public sector efficiency and transparency. Relevance of PA3: Satisfactory (S).

PA4 supported the establishment of an independent agency for state aid control, thus improving the provision
and monitoring of state aid and enforcing robust state aid rules. According to Serbia’s Ministry of Finance, state
aid-to-GDP was about three times larger than in the EU (in 2018, it amounted to 1.9 percent of GDP, compared
to 0.76 percent, on average in the EU). The 2019 CEM noted that most subsidies and tax incentives benefited
SOEs, thus allowing for market distortions and inefficiency. At the same time, state aid control had been
relatively weak. Although Serbia passed the Law on State Aid Control in 2010, which established an institutional
and regulatory framework and a commission with the authority to approve state aid and order the recovery of
aid granted unlawfully, four out of the five members of the commission were appointed by aid-granting
ministries which limited the commission’s independence. Through the new Law on State Control, PA4 made a
contribution to the objective by envisaging an independent Commission for State Aid Control, authorizing




                                                                                                     Page 5 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PSEGR DPL (P164575)



Parliament to appoint its President and Members, regulating the Commission’s budget and staffing, and
mandating the preparation of new by-laws. Relevance of PA4: Satisfactory (S).

PA5 supported improved transparency on the legal framework and practices for international financial and
capital transactions. Serbia’s Law on Foreign Exchange Operations defined most transactions. For transactions
not explicitly regulated, existing provisions were used or interpreted by the National Bank of Serbia (NBS) as
needed. In the past, there was ambiguity about foreign exchange operations as the opinions by the NBS were
issued on a case-by-case basis and were not available to other entities facing similar issues. By publishing all
the legislation, and summary of relevant official opinions previously issued to businesses, banks and individuals
related to the Law on Foreign Exchange Operations, PA5 contributed to enhanced public sector
transparency. Relevance of PA5: Satisfactory (S).

PDO2: Initiate a Green Recovery

PA6 supported a regulation that sought to limit the use of sulfur content in heavy fuel oil (HFO). HFO in Serbia
had traditionally been rich in sulfur content (more than 3 percent), with its combustion resulting in elevated
levels of sulfur dioxide (SO2) emissions. This PA was therefore important in assisting Serbia in its efforts to
reduce air pollution caused by burning HFOs with more than 1% of sulfur. The new Rulebook on liquid fuels
(which entered into force on January 1, 2021, thus limiting the sulfur content of HFO to 1 percent, supported by
this PA, is expected to contribute to cleaner HFOs overtime and a reduction in air pollution. The PA is a step in
the right direction; however, enforcement and measurement are other important components for full
implementation as highlighted in the PD (pg. 26). Relevance of PA6: Satisfactory (S).

PA7 supported the implementation of a directive that would contribute to Serbia’s efforts to reduce air pollution
caused by emissions of nitrogen oxide from Old Large Combustion Plants. Serbia faces a severe air pollution
problem, with power plants contributing an estimated 20 to 40 percent of the country’s air pollution. Serbia’s
environmental record was marred for long by its high dependence on lignite to fuel its economy, and given that
lignite is rich in sulfur, Serbia is among the major emitters of SO2 globally. The draft National Emissions
Reduction Plan for Major Pollutants from Old Large Combustion Plants (NERP) was prepared in 2016 and
adopted in 2020. Its adoption was an important step in regulating emissions of large combustion plants (LCPs)
and hence contribute to the objective of a green recovery. The NERP was a mechanism envisaged by the LCP
Directive of the European Union and incorporated into the Energy Community Treaty. The adoption of the
NERP was expected to make a meaningful contribution to a substantial reduction in air pollution and therefore
enabling a pattern of economic growth in line with the PDO’s green recovery ambitions. Relevance of PA7:
Satisfactory (S).

PA8 supported the legal framework for addressing climate change challenges through the enactment of the
Law on Climate Change. The Law on Climate Change is a framework law that provides a basis for the
preparation and adoption of the Low-Carbon Development Strategy and its Action Plan and the Climate Change
Adaptation Program. The law was also an important framework for the establishment of a system for GHG
emission reduction and adaptation to climate change, fulfilling the obligations of the UNFCCC and the Paris
Agreement, as well as a basis for the revision and monitoring of the NDCs implementation as an obligation
under the Paris Agreement (PD, pg. 28). The overarching goal, however, was to support Serbia’s EU
membership aspirations and the transposition of the EU aquis into national legislation. While PA8 by itself was
insufficient to achieve the objective, it can be considered a satisfactory step towards the objective, if adequately
implemented. Relevance of PA8: Satisfactory (S).




                                                                                                     Page 6 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PSEGR DPL (P164575)



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Table 2: Results Indicators (RIs) by Objective and PAs; baseline and target values; status and
achievement

                                       Baseline   Target                     Actual as
                                                                   Actual at           RI
Results Indicator Associated RI        (including (including                 % to
                                                                   target              achievement
(RI)                PA(s)    relevance units and  units and                  targeted
                                                                   date                rating
                                       date)      date)                      change
PDO1: Improve Public Sector Efficiency and Transparency
RI1a: Share of
                                                                               More than
completed public                                                   98.7
                                       0 percent  85 percent                   100% of
procurement                                                        percent
                                       (2019)     (2022)                       targeted
transactions in the                                                (2022)
                                                                               change
public sector       PA1      S                                                             High
conducted using
the Public
Procurement
Portal

RI1b: Average
                                                                              0% of
number of bids per
                   PA1       MS        2.5 (2019)   2.8 (2022)     2.5 (2022) targeted     Negligible
public procurement
                                                                              change
procedure

RI2: The share of
new hiring in the
public sector done
under the new
                                       0 percent
procedure, as set                                               100            100% of
                                       (2020)       100 percent
in the new Decree, PA2       MS                                 percent        targeted    Substantial
                                                    (2022)
and in light of                                                 (2022)         change
keeping the
expansion of new
permanent staff to
less than 1 percent
RI3: Percentage of PA3       MS        0 percent    50 percent     100         200% of     Substantial
beneficiaries from                     (2020)       (2022)         percent     targeted
various social                                                     (2022)      change

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PSEGR DPL (P164575)



protection
registries whose
information is
verified and
updated through
the Social Card
Registry
RI4: Volume of
state aid (as
percent of GDP),
excluding de
minimis aid,
recorded by the
Commission for
State Aid Control
in a publicly                      0 percent
                                                                            350% of
available list of                  (2020)       1 percent       3.5 percent
                    PA4     S                                               targeted          High
support schemes                                 (2022)          (2022)
                                                                            change
containing
information on the
amount of aid,
grantor, legal
basis, and main
criteria for
compatibility under
the State Aid
Control Law
RI5: The number
of requests for
                                                                          230% of
opinions related to
                    PA5     S      164 (2019)   130 (2021)      74 (2022) targeted            High
the Foreign
                                                                          change
Exchange
Operations Law
PDO2: Initiate a Green Recovery
RI6: Estimated      PA6     MU     1,300 tonnes 0 tonnes                       Not
national emissions                 (2019)       (2021)                         verified (no
of sulfur dioxide                                               Not            data)
from the estimated                                              verified (no
use of heavy fuel                                               data)                         Modest
oil with 3 percent                 61,899
sulfur content                     tonnes                                      no target
                                   (2020)       no target set                  set
                                                                25,727
                                                                tonnes
Alternative                                                     (2021)
indicator:
Consumption of
heavy fuel oil with

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PSEGR DPL (P164575)



more than 1
percent sulphur
content for energy
production




RI7: Estimated
emissions of
nitrogen dioxide
from large
combustion plants
(equal to or
                                                                                    Not
greater than 50                            48,241.56               Not
                                                       34,150.79                    Verified
MW)                                        tonnes/year             Verified
                                                       tonnes/year
                                           (2020)
                                                       (2021)
                     PA7       MU
Alternative
                                                                                                Modest
indicator:                                 73,397
                                                         no target set              no target
                                           tonnes                        68,438
                                                                                    set
Emissions of
nitrogen dioxide
from the energy
sector (tonnes)


RI8: Number of
new by-laws
                                                                                    83% of
adopted for the
                  PA8          S           0 (2019)      6 (2022)        5 (2022)   targeted    Substantial
implementation of
                                                                                    change
the Law on
Climate Change


The operation consisted of 9 RIs. PA1 had 2 related RIs, while the other PAs each had one RI. Four RIs
are rated Satisfactory, Three Moderately Satisfactory and Two Moderately Unsatisfactory. The overall
outcome is Moderately Satisfactory.

RI1a sought to measure the share of public procurement transactions that was completed using the public
procurement portal. The RI measured progress in PA1 toward the objective of strengthening public sector
transparency in public procurement, using credible baseline data and target. Relevance of RI1a:
Satisfactory (S).

RI1b also measured progress in public procurement, with a focus on the average number of bids. The
decision to bid for a tender is influenced partially by the method of bidding (manual or electronic). Other
factors such as price, cost, and the cost-quality ratio are not captured by the number of bids as measured

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PSEGR DPL (P164575)



by RI2 (PD, p. 19). Therefore, RI1b fell short of measuring the full impact of PA1 on PDO1. Relevance of
RI1b: Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

RI2 sought to measure the effect of the 2020 Decree on new recruitment in terms of the share of hiring
that was done in accordance with the new procedures adopted. While RI2 sought to capture the expected
impact of PA2 on PDO1, reference to “new permanent staff” did not specify the baseline and target
adequately as it remains unclear from what point in time the staff hired is considered new. Relevance of
RI2: Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

RI3 tracked the implementation of PA3 (implementation of a new Social Registry) using the share of
beneficiaries whose data had been verified and updated through the Social Card Register. However,
reference to “various social protection registries” left room for interpretation as to the exact target of this RI
without a specific number of the exact registries that would be reviewed to gauge progress in the
‘implementation’ of the registry. Relevance of RI3: Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

RI4 integrated both aspects of PA4 in terms of measuring the effect of the setup and operationalization of
the newly formed Commission for State Aid control. The indicator was measurable, and suitable for
monitoring implementation of the PA. Relevance of RI4: Satisfactory (S).

RI5 directly, and credibly, measured the impact of PA5 (the publication, by the NBS, of all laws, by-laws
and regulations pertaining to the Law on Foreign Exchange Operations, satisfying a long-standing request
by the business community in Serbia and enhancing transparency and efficiency. Both baselines and
target were clear and measurable. Relevance of RI5: Satisfactory (S).

RI6 was intended to measure the outcomes derived from the introduction of PA6, namely of a Rulebook
that would assist the regulations-based reduction in sulfur dioxide. However, the baseline and target were
not credible, since the calculation involved in the indicator relied on non-replicable modelling. At the time
of ICR preparation, an alternative indicator, which was more relevant to measuring progress towards the
objective was used. The alternative indicator was measurable and readily available on a government
portal (see discussion in Section 5). Relevance of RI6: Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU).

RI7 attempted to measure the impact of PA7 and the adoption of the National Plan for the Reduction of
the Main Pollutant Emissions from Old Large Combustion Plants. Nevertheless, the baseline and target
relied on modelling estimates (like RI6), which could not be verified. Therefore, RI was not a credible
measure of PA7’s contribution to PDO2. Just as in the case of RI6, an alternative indicator was used
during the preparation of the ICR. Relevance of RI7: Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU).

RI8 directly measures progress made by the GoS in implementing legislation (the Climate Change Law)
that would facilitate progress towards PDO2. Both baseline and target were clear and verifiable.
Relevance of RI8: Satisfactory (S).




                                                                                                        Page 10 of 17
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  PSEGR DPL (P164575)




   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Improve Public Sector Efficiency and Transparency (PAs 1-5, RIs 1-6).

               Rationale
               RI1a: The targeted percentage of public procurement transactions conducted using the public procurement
               portal had been exceeded by the target date, reaching 98.7 percent. As of July 2020, all new procurement
               procedures were being conducted through the online portal, with only a handful being completed under the
               former public procurement procedures, (3,399 contracts out of 251,949 in 2022). Rating: High.

               RI1b: The average number of bids per public procurement procedure remained unchanged (2.5 bids) from
               the baseline to target date, registering no progress towards the target of 2.8 bids. Rating: Negligible.

               RI2: Following the introduction of a new procedure for prioritizing and controlling recruitment in the public
               sector, the target set to make sure that all new hires will be subject to the new procedure was fully met by the
               target date. The share of public sector employment in total employment declined from 28.6 percent in 2019 to
               27.1 percent in 2022, and the wage bill as percent of GDP increased only marginally from 9.5 to 9.8 percent.
               In 2022, Serbia also introduced a new fiscal rule which limits the public sector wage bill to 10 percent of GDP.
               In 2023, the deadline for the application of the Decree was extended further from December 31, 2023, to
               December 32, 2026. Rating: Substantial.

               RI3: The social card registry became fully operational in March 2022 and by the time of project completion
               had exceeded the targeted number of registered beneficiaries, reaching 175,000 in total. The register is
               linked to other government registers for more accurate information on existing and potential beneficiaries,
               with the consolidated data on beneficiaries contributing to the ability to resolve some issues of spending
               inefficiencies. As of April 2022, 100 percent of social beneficiaries were included in the register (ICR pg. 14).
               Rating: Substantial.

               RI4: The volume of state aid recorded in a publicly available database rose from 0 percent at baseline to 3.5
               percent by the target date (2021), exceeding the set goal of 1 percent. High level of state aid provided and
               recorded was in part due to COVID-19 support, but also due to the increased capacities of the Commission
               for State Aid Control (ICR pg. 9). Rating: High.

               RI5: Following the publication, by the NBS, of all laws pertaining to the Law on Foreign Exchange Operations,
               the number of requests for relevant opinions was almost halved (from 164 in 2019 to 81 in 2021 and 74 in
               2022), exceeding the set target. Rating: High.



                                                                                                                  Page 11 of 17
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         PSEGR DPL (P164575)




                      Rating

                      Moderately Satisfactory

                      OBJECTIVE 2
                      Objective
                      Initiate a green recovery (PAs 6-8, RIs 6-8)

                      Rationale
                      RI6: RI6 was originally defined as “estimated national emissions of estimated use of heavy fuel oil with 3
                      percent sulfur content” and the target was set to 0 tons in 2022. At project end, it was not possible to assess
                      the results as modelled results were not published and could not be verified. The ICR presented an
                      alternative indicator “consumption of heavy fuel oil with more than 1 percent sulphur content for energy
                      production”. While no target was set for this alternative indicator, the data show some progress, as
                      consumption of heavy fuel oil with more than 1 percent sulphur content for energy production declined from
                      61,899 tonnes in 2020 to 25,727 tonnes in 2021, the latest data available. Rating: Modest.

                      RI7: RI7 was also defined as “estimated national emissions” of nitrogen oxide from large combustion plants.
                      Like RI6, these were modelled estimates that were not published and verifiable. An alternative RI was
                      presented at completion to measure emissions of nitrogen dioxide from the energy sector. Emissions of
                      nitrogen dioxide declined from 73,397 tons in 2020 to 68,438 tons in 2021 (the latest data available). Rating:
                      Modest.

                      RI8: The number of by-laws implemented at project completion was five, falling short of the target set of six.
                      At the time of preparation of the ICR, the MoEP was in the process of adopting the rulebook enabling the
                      operationalization of a national Monitoring Reporting and Verification System (MRV) IT platform as well as the
                      GHG permitting system by end-2023. The MoEP also merged several bylaws out of the initial 12 bylaws
                      indicatively foreseen at the time of the adoption of the Climate Change Law in order to streamline the
                      preparation of secondary legislation (ICR pg. 16). Rating: Substantial.




                      Rating

                      Moderately Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

As each of the two objectives is rated Moderately Satisfactory, the overall Efficacy rating is also Moderately
Satisfactory.



                                                                                                                        Page 12 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PSEGR DPL (P164575)




Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory


6. Outcome

Rationale

Relevance of PAs was Satisfactory, a Moderately Satisfactory rating for Efficacy yields an overall outcome
rating of Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Political Risk: The operation has supported ambitious reforms on major policy areas, especially regarding
state aid policy and the establishment of a new legal and regulatory framework to tackle air pollution and
make climate change an integral part of the country’s new model of economic development aligned with its
EU ambitions. These require sustained political commitment on the part of the government and the
willingness to challenge established ways of doing things in public administration. The government elected in
2020 has demonstrated such commitment, yet the reform efforts of this operation are subject to external
political risk as well, as evidenced by the 2022 energy crisis and its implications for sustaining the green
transition.

Technical Risk: some of the “green” policy reforms of the operation require a high level of institutional
capacity to implement and sustain these reforms over time. WB TA in combination with further external
support will be necessary to maintain momentum.




 8. Assessment of Bank Performance

 a. Bank Performance – Design

 Rationale


Analytical underpinnings: The rationale for each policy action was well documented based on prior
analytical work by the World Bank, the European Union, the OECD, the World Health Organization,
USAID, and the GoS. The project team also included TA work carried out during program implementation

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PSEGR DPL (P164575)



(PD, Table 5, p. 30). The first pillar on public procurement and civil service recruitment was supported by
two OECD/SIGMA report published in 2018 on “Implementing the EU Directives on the Selection of
Economic Operators in Public Procurement Procedures” and ““Principles of Public Administration for EU
Candidate Countries and Potential Candidates” as well as the same organization’s Monitoring Report for
Serbia from 2019. The pillar was also supported by the European Commission’s Serbia Progress Report of
2020 on a new hiring procedure. Regarding the social card registry, state aid and the Foreign Exchange
Law, the operation was supported by the World Bank’s 2019 report on Strengthening Social Protection for
Disaster Response, the 2019 EC Progress Report, the 2019 Country Economic Memorandum for Serbia,
and the 2019 USAID report on The Effects of Foreign Exchange Liberalization. The second pillar was
supported by the WHO’s 2019 report Health Impact of Ambient Air Pollution in Serbia: A Call to Action, the
2020 report by the Center for Research on Energy and Clean Air Ranking of the World’s Sulfur Dioxide
Hotspots, the World Bank’s 2020 Rapid Diagnostics on Air Pollution, the 2015 SCD for Serbia and its 2020
update as well as the Republic of Serbia’s 2017 Nationally Determined Contribution and the same year’s
Second National Communication under the UNFCCC.

Quality-at-entry: RI1b, RI6 and RI7 were not carefully designed. Given that PDO2 entailed a total of three
result indicators, two of which relied on modeling estimates that could be neither measured nor verified.

Risk identification and mitigation: the program document assessed the overall risk to the program as
moderate, even though the operation began at a time of global uncertainty in the context of the then
ongoing pandemic and associated macroeconomic risks. The operation considered the possibility of an
economic slowdown in Serbia and its main trading partners, but the effects of such a slowdown, and the
post-2022 crisis associated with the war in Ukraine, were mitigated by the actions included in this operation
and the effects they were expected to have on long-term growth prospects and the improvement in the
country’s regulatory environment. These risks were also mitigated by the actions of the government of
Serbia, since COVID-19 related fiscal contraction was substantially lessened by extensive fiscal support in
2021.

Stakeholder consultation: the GoS engaged in extensive consultations prior to the operation with NGOs
and representatives from academia. Prior to the onset of the pandemic such stakeholder consultations
took place in person and in several locations in Belgrade and outside the capital, with government
representatives presenting draft law proposals and obtaining feedback. Such consultations were quasi-
formalized in the case of the public procurement law, with a summary report published following the
adoption of the law and highlighting areas where the consultation process led to legislative amendments.
According to the PAD, “more than 60 percent of new laws and amendments to the existing laws in 2020
were adopted with prior public consultations” (PAD, p. 32).

Coordination with development partners: the results chain incorporated extensive coordination with
development partners, especially the IMF on state aid and a revamped wage bill for the public sector; the
European Union with respect to both transparency and the initiation of a green model of economic
development premised on analytical work by the OECD/SIGMA and the EU acquis, and USAID on foreign
exchange liberalization. The Bank team also engaged in extensive dialogue with private sector
associations with respect to the drafting of legislation on foreign exchange and the publication of opinions
by the National Bank of Serbia, the American Chamber of Commerce (AmCham) in Serbia, the Serbia
Chamber of Commerce, and the National Alliance for Local Economic Development (NALED).




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PSEGR DPL (P164575)



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Monitoring and coordination with partners: the Bank team maintained close dialogue with counterparts
throughout the operation which helped to achieve substantial results. Furthermore, keeping the dialogue open
helped the government to recognize implementation challenges, and resolve them more efficiently through
technical assistance that was mobilized quickly. The TA was well targeted to the client’s needs, with shared
leverage and technical support efforts by the French Development Agency (Agence Française de
Développement, AFD) in policy areas targeted under Objective 2. Close and regular coordination with
development partners helped steer the reform process which was supported by co-financing and associated
incentives to maintain the reform momentum by partners such as AFD.

Adaptation: when implementation delays emerged, especially with respect to actions on Objective 2, the Bank
was able to quickly mobilize TA to remove bottlenecks.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

As both design and implementation are rated as Satisfactory, overall Bank Performance is rated Satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The ICR did not include data on poverty and the anticipated social exclusion impact of the program. This may be
due to the lack of reliable data, given that the latest poverty data for Serbia dated back to 2017. The ICR
referred to the positive impact of the operation expected from benefits associated with the establishment of the




                                                                                                 Page 15 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PSEGR DPL (P164575)



new Social Registry, mentioning that by July 2023, there were 106,838 cases of beneficiaries (ICR, page 17
being notified that they could exercise the right on a certain social benefit, such as child allowance.



b. Environmental

There is no data on the expected environmental impact of the program (ICR, p. 32). The ICR makes extensive
reference to the positive impact that is associated with expectations stemming from actions related with Objective
2, especially the improved legislative, regulatory and institutional framework for environment protection and climate
change. As a co-signatory of the 2015 Paris Agreement, Serbia has committed to a 33.3 percent decrease in
greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 compared with 1990 levels.



c. Gender

The operation was not designed to have any specific gender effects.



d. Other

The operation led to a strengthening of the country’s regulatory framework and institutional capacity in some
policy areas. This is especially true regarding state aid because of the establishment of an independent
Commission for State Aid Control. A new legal and institutional framework for climate change has been
established in Serbia, and the number of full-time staff placed under the Climate Unit of the Ministry of
Environment (MoEP) has benefitted from a two-fold increase.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR provides a compact summary of the context at appraisal and rationale for the operation, explains the
evolution of the PDOs, and offers an extensive narrative approach for most, though not all, of the results. It
discusses all prior actions and their relevance linked to a “theory of change” (results chain) through a Table
devoted to that purpose. The ICR further includes comments by the GoS and the AFD, which co-financed the
operation. ICR evidence is generally of high quality with relevance to PAs for both objectives. The results chain
is divided into each of the two pillars of the operation. The efficacy section (Achievement of Objectives) is
extensive and in line with ICR Guideline which is also true for the sections on other outcomes, Bank
performance, and lessons. The section on risks associated with the operation could have been more detailed.
Although not all results indicators are adequately discussed, the ICR adopts an approach of explaining and
analyzing RI shortcomings, especially regarding RI6 and RI7 which were deemed inadequate. The lessons
section is extensive and goes into some detail in identifying areas of improvement for future operations.


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PSEGR DPL (P164575)



A section on the next phase of WB engagement outlines the link between the operation and a new
programmatic Green Transition DPF series (P177410).



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreement/Comments
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR includes several lessons which this review acknowledges. One additional lesson is presented below:

     1. Accurately assessing progress in development outcomes hinges on the ability to measure and validate
       result indicators against the PAs and the results chain. The design of operations should consider the
       availability of relevant data, including collection and reporting before incorporating into the design of an
       operation.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                      Page 17 of 17
