     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Timor Leste Road Climate Resilience Proj (P125032)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023845

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P125032                                    Timor Leste Road Climate Resilience Proj

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Timor-Leste                                Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82900,IDA-53030,IDA-60120,IDA- 31-Dec-2015                                                80,578,229.35
 H6830

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 17-May-2011                                31-Dec-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            20,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             94,922,428.94                                              0.00

 Actual                                         80,596,761.09                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Azada Hussaini              Fernando Manibog             Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was to deliver sustainable climate resilient road infrastructure on
   the Dili-Ainaro corridor, as written in the Legal Agreement (page 4) and the Project Appraisal Document
   (PAD,page 4).




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Timor Leste Road Climate Resilience Proj (P125032)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The original project design included three components:

   Component A: Climate Resilient Road Infrastructure (US$15.13 million at approval, US$105 at the 2013
   Additional Financing (AF), US$140 million at the 2017 AF, US$125 million at closing). This
   component focused on enhancing the climate resilience of selected sections of the Dili-Ainaro corridor to
   mitigate the impact of heavy rainfall. It included two main phases: Phase I addressed urgent repairs to
   damaged road and drainage structures to prevent further deterioration, and Phase II involved more
   comprehensive rehabilitation of selected road sections, including drainage and environmental protection
   enhancements. Supported by international consultants and local staff, this component was divided into two
   consultancy roles for each phase.

   Following the 2013 restructuring, Component A activities were expanded. Instead of rehabilitating "selected
   sections", the entire road from Dili to Ainaro was to be upgraded. The 2017 restructuring also added an
   indicator to track "increased drainage in good condition" along the entire corridor.

   Component B: Climate Responsive Maintenance and Emergency Planning Response Systems
   (US$6.88 million at appraisal, US$1 million at the 2013 AF, US$0 million at the 2017 AF, US$0 at closing).
   This component aimed to ensure the sustainability of the road infrastructure through maintenance and
   emergency response systems. Activities included Performance-Based Maintenance (PBM) contracts during
   the construction and defects liability period, extending the ADB Road Maintenance Program to the Alieu
   and Ainaro districts, designing emergency planning and response systems, and pilot testing these systems
   along the Dili-Ainaro corridor.

   The scope of activities under this component changed with the two restructurings. Instead of a maintenance
   contract covering 20-30 km of the corridor for an undefined period, a three-year routine maintenance
   contract was extended for the entire 110 km corridor. The second restructuring cancelled activities related
   to establishing an emergency planning and response system because as mentioned in the ICR (page 11)
   the conditions for success of this effort were not in place, and a donor-driven platform was expected to
   contribute to this through broader efforts. The project replaced these activities with provisions for a one-year
   defect liability and two-year maintenance under civil works contracts.

   Component C: Project Support and Training (US$ 0.99 million at appraisal, US$1.99 million at 2013 AF,
   US$4.49 million at 2017 AF, US$3 million at closing). This component supported project implementation
   through the Project Management Unit (PMU) established for the ADB Road Network Development Project,
   to ensure it could meet the additional requirements of this World Bank project. It included a training program




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Timor Leste Road Climate Resilience Proj (P125032)



  for Ministry of Infrastructure (MOI) staff and contractors, focusing on the maintenance of mountainous roads
  and emergency response strategies.

  Component D, Feasibility Studies and Detailed Design. This component was introduced in the 2013
  restructuring (US$0 million at appraisal, US$2 million at 2013 AF, US$3.80 million at 2017 AF, US$1.5
  million at closing). This component aimed to support feasibility studies and detailed design of additional
  segments linked to the Dili-Ainaro corridor.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Costs: The total project cost at appraisal was US$23 million (PAD Data Sheet). The project
  received two AFs which brought up the total approved amount to US$149 million. The actual project cost at
  completion was US$129.9 million according to ICR Annex 3, while the ICR data sheet notes a total
  disbursed amount of US$ 131.5 million.

  Bank Financing: The original US$20 million in IDA financing was supplemented twice. In 2013, an
  additional financing of US$25 million in IDA credit and US$15 million in IBRD loan was provided to expand
  the project scope. In 2017, US$ 35.20 million in IDA credit was provided due to lack of government
  financing and because of cost-overruns caused by Covid-19 lockdowns and other factors. This brings up
  the total approved Bank financing to US$ 95.3 million. At the time of completion, a total of US$80 million in
  Bank financing was disbursed (ICR data sheet).

  Borrower Contribution. The Borrower’s original commitment of US$3 million (PAD page 6). In 2013, the
  borrower committed an additional US$47 million to component 1 activities. The 2017 AF included a
  borrower contribution of US$ 3.93 million (AF paper page 6). The total borrower contribution at completion
  stage was US$51 million (ICR data sheet and Annex 3).

  Dates: The project was approved on May 17, 2011 and became effective on August 30, 2011. A mid-term
  review was carried out on December 12, 2014. The original closing date of December 31, 2015 was
  extended multiple times for a total of 7 years. The actual closing date was December 31, 2022.

  Restructurings: The project was restructured six times introducing the following changes:

  October 22, 2013: Level 2 restructuring to provide an Additional Financing (AF) of US$40 million through
  an IDA credit and IBRD loan. The borrower also contributed an additional US$47 million. The restructuring
  expanded the scope of component 1 and 2 and upgraded activities from emergency repair of selected
  sections to full upgrading of the entire corridor. An additional component was also added to carry
  out feasibility studies and detailed designs. Other changes included revisions to the Results Framework
  (RF) and extension of the loan closing date for three years.

  May 5, 2014: The restructuring and AF in October 2013 necessitated the reallocation of financing proceeds
  due to expansion of the project's scope and duration. This was originally delayed given uncertainty around
  road costs. Consequently, Category 2 of the original IDA Grant was adjusted to cover the detailed design
  and supervision of the entire corridor. The reallocation from Category 1 to Category 2 did not affect the
  PDO.




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Timor Leste Road Climate Resilience Proj (P125032)



   April 27, 2017: A level 2 restructuring and AF of US$35 million (IDA) was completed to address a financing
   gap as the Government of Timor-Leste (GoTL) did not allocate funds for upgrading section 2 of the Dili-
   Ainaro corridor due to reduced revenues and other investment priorities. The AF also addressed a cost
   overrun of approximately US$8 million, arising from higher-than-anticipated costs for feasibility studies,
   road designs, civil works, supervision, training, and the impact of currency devaluation, partially offset by
   underspending in emergency response system design. The restructuring also introduced some changes
   including revising the description of project activities, adjusting costs per component, adjusting
   disbursement estimates, changing indicator descriptions, and extending the closing date from December
   31, 2018, to December 31, 2021.

   December 9, 2020: Level 2 restructuring was completed to extend the project closing date from December
   31, 2020 to June 30, 2021 to facilitate the disbursement of the remaining balance to pay for retention and
   performance-based maintenance for select sections, in response to procurement delays and Covid-19
   impacts.

   June 7, 2021: Level 2 restructuring was done to extend the project closing date from June 30, 2021 to
   December 31, 2021 to allow for disbursement of the remaining balance and cover project expenses, in
   particular payments for retention and performance-based maintenance for select sections.

   November 2, 2021: Level 2 restructuring was done to extend the project closing date from December 31,
   2021 to December 31, 2022 for three reasons: i) to finish upgrading selected areas delayed due to COVID-
   19 restrictions, adverse weather, and construction setbacks; ii) to repair damages from Tropical Cyclone
   Seroja; and iii) to use project savings towards Feasibility Studies and Detailed Engineering Designs.

   Split Rating: The PDO remained unchanged through the restructurings. The scope of the project increased
   to rehabilitate the entire Dili-Ainaro corridor rather than selected sections. The results indicators were
   revised accordingly with higher targets assigned to reflect the increased level of activities or to better clarify
   indicators. A split evaluation was therefore not necessary.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context: Timor-Leste's road network, which dated back to colonial times, was poorly
maintained and often impassable, especially during the rainy seasons. This led to frequent landslides and
infrastructure failures, resulting in the isolation of communities and significant hindrances to
transportation. The Dili-Ainaro Road, critical for connecting agricultural areas with Dili and the southern
coast, suffered from poor maintenance, and faced more intensive landslides, collapsed drainage, and
severely deteriorated road surfaces. The road's condition remained largely unattended since the country's
independence, posing challenges for traffic demand due to proposed oil and gas developments in the
south. Country climate change assessments indicated likely increase in extreme rainfall events which would
lead to increased slope instability events.

Previous Bank Experience: This was the World Bank’s first project in the transport sector in Timor
Leste. The PAD reflected on lessons learned from the Bank’s extensive global experience in transport


                                                                                                       Page 4 of 16
                                          Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                          Timor Leste Road Climate Resilience Proj (P125032)



                   sector. It drew on the Bank-financed Justice for Poor Project in Timor Leste and from its collaboration with
                   the Asian Development Bank.

                   Alignment with Country Priorities: The PDO aligned with the government's development priorities in the
                   Strategic Development Plan (SDP) 2011–2030. This plan aimed to elevate Timor-Leste to upper-middle-
                   income status, eradicate extreme poverty, and foster a diversified economy. The SDP acknowledged the
                   importance of the road sector in achieving national integration and it underscored the need for upgrading
                   and maintaining existing infrastructure, specifically citing the Dili-Ainaro corridor. Additionally, the PDO was
                   in alignment with the Transport Sector Master Plan (TSMP) of 2018, which outlined a strategy for
                   developing a core road network to enhance land connectivity and improve access to rural and remote
                   areas. The PDO's emphasis on climate-resilient infrastructure was also consistent with the government's
                   climate change policy, as reflected in the updated Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) 2022–2030.
                   This policy highlighted investments in climate-resilient infrastructure, including the World Bank's support for
                   such developments in the Dili-Ainaro corridor.

                   Alignment with World Bank Country Strategy: The Bank's Interim Strategy Note (2010-2011)
                   emphasized road rehabilitation as a crucial element of growth-enhancing infrastructure, vital for spurring
                   non-oil economic growth and overcoming challenges in agricultural productivity and national skills
                   development. The latest Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the period FY2020 to FY2024
                   articulated rural road rehabilitation as a priority more explicitly. The CPF included an objective on improving
                   access and quality of connective infrastructure in digital and transport sectors. The project was listed as an
                   ongoing operation that would help achieve this CPF objective.

                   Level of the PDO: The PDO "to deliver sustainable climate-resilient road infrastructure on the Dili-Ainaro
                   corridor" went beyond tracking outputs such as road infrastructure development. It also
                   captured sustainability and climate-resilience aspects. Given this was the Bank's first transport project in
                   Timor Leste, the project was pitched at an appropriate level of ambition.

                   Overall, the project was well-aligned with country and Bank priorities and pitched at an appropriate level of
                   ambition. Therefore, Relevance is rated as High.


                   Rating Relevance TBL




                   Rating
                   High


          4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)



          NO EFF AVAILABLE TBL




          No information available
OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale


                                                                                                                             Page 5 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Timor Leste Road Climate Resilience Proj (P125032)



Theory of Change (ToC)

Project activities included: rehabilitating the Dili-Ainaro road; constructing slope stabilization structures;
repairing damaged road and drainage structures; repairing pavements; hiring international consultants to
oversee repairs and improvements, establishing a performance-based maintenance contract with a
contractor, designing an emergency planning and response system, and pilot testing of this emergency
planning and response system.

These activities were expected to improve road infrastructure along the Dili-Ainaru corridor and establish
maintenance arrangements for the entire corridor. In the medium term, this was expected to reduce the
impact of the high-volume and high-intensity rainfall on this road corridor. In the long run, the investments
were expected to reduce road closures due to flooding and heavy rainfall and increase access to economic
activities and social services.

Overall, the causal pathways from inputs to expected results were valid. The ToC relied on a few
assumptions: adequate institutional and technical capacity to achieve and maintain results beyond the project
cycle, high-quality construction material and process that could withstand high-intensity rainfall, fully staffed
and functional PMU, long-term retentions of government staff, timely approval and payment of procurement
packages. Some of these assumptions proved to be inaccurate. The PMU faced staffing challenges,
particularly with regard to safeguards and procurement experts. The implementing agency's capacity to
handle multiple large contracts was inadequate, creating significant implementation delays.

The project achieved the following results:

Outputs:

      Road roughness was reduced from an International Roughness Index (IRI) of 9 to an IRI of 3.4,
         exceeding the original target of 6.5 and the revised target of 3.5.
      Drainage infrastructure was improved for 110 kilometers of road, up from a baseline of 0 kilometers
         and exceeding the original target of 15 kilometers. This indicator was later articulated in terms of
         the percentage of roads with improved drainage.
        Slope protection was improved in 1,350 locations, exceeding the original target of 25 locations and the
         revised target of 820 locations.
        Average Daily Traffic (ADT) increased by 250 percent between 2014 to 2023. Road traffic could be
         mostly linked to growth in population and economic activity rather than road improvements under the
         project. Nonetheless, this indicates the road served its purpose and was being used for transport and
         commuting.
        A performance-based maintenance (PBM) contract was in effect for the entire corridor. The PBM
         provided routine maintenance for 2 years after the 1-year defect liability expired. Following this period,
         GoTL’s Maintenance Department (DRBFC) is expected to lead maintenance responsibilities. GoTL
         approves a maintenance budget annually, but it is not deemed sufficient to meet all routine
         maintenance requirements (as TTL discussed with IEG on January 17).
        Performance certificates were signed by the supervising consulting engineer and district road
         supervisors. In 2016, the project procured nine two-year PBM contracts for about 400 km of roads.




                                                                                                      Page 6 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Timor Leste Road Climate Resilience Proj (P125032)




      All grievances were registered, responded to, and/or resolved within the stipulated service standards,
       exceeding the target of 75%. There were 53 grievances reported, of which 4 were related to
       environmental, health, and safety issues, 43 were social issues, and 6 were issues of resettlement.

Outcomes:

      The drainage infrastructure improved from a baseline of 20% of the corridor to 99% of the corridor,
       exceeding both the original target of 50% and revised target of 90%. The corridor's drainage was
       assessed by comparing the proportion of lined ditches, pipe culverts, and box culverts in top condition
       to the total planned or constructed. To qualify as “in good condition,” these drainage systems needed
       to be clear of silt, debris, and obstacles, and free from erosion, and the culverts had to be intact,
       clean, and securely embedded in the surrounding material.
      The number of incidents requiring emergency repairs reduced from 53 incidents per year to 3
       incidents in 2022, exceeding both the original target of 30 and the revised target of 15. The PAD
       reports this indicator in terms of percentage, while the ICR reports in terms of numbers.
      Roads in good and fair condition as a share of total classified roads increased from a baseline of 10%
       to 99.6%, exceeding both the initial target of 50% and the revised target of 90%.

The ICR also provided anecdotal evidence from a few interviews conducted by the World Bank during the
ICR mission to capture the impact of enhanced road connectivity on the rural population’s access to
economic opportunities and social services. The findings include reduced transport costs, improved air
quality, reduced number of vehicle repairs, improved public transport options, better access to healthcare and
improved economic activity. However, the reliability and attribution of these outcomes require further
assessments as the project lacked specific baselines and targets for these issues and the findings were
based on limited number of beneficiary interviews rather than systematic, representative surveys.

Overall, the project achieved and, in some cases, exceeded its initial and revised targets related to climate-
resilient road rehabilitation. The project benefited about 452,000 people accounting for 34% of the country’s
population. It rehabilitated 110 kms of road along the Dili-Ainaro corridor, ensuring 99% of drainage along the
corridor was in good condition, and reducing emergency repair incidents significantly.

The scope of activities related to maintenance and sustainability reduced over the two restructurings such
that the design and piloting of an emergency response system was cancelled in 2017. Some activities under
Component D related to feasibility studies were also cancelled due to procurement delays. PBM activities
also reduced during implementation. While the project originally planned independent multiyear PBM
contracts with provisions for early emergency response by community or small contractors, these activities
were replaced with a one-year defect liability and two-year maintenance under civil works contracts. Following
this period, routine maintenance responsibilities are expected to be transferred to the Maintenance
Department in the Ministry of Public Works. The 2017 AF paper (page 11) mentioned that GoTL allocates an
annual budget to road maintenance, but the ICR alludes to inadequate maintenance resources as a recurring
challenge in the country. The ICR also emphasized (page 31) the need for strengthening the routine
maintenance system and establishing a system for financing and implementing periodic maintenance. The
ICR also notes that the sustainability of the project is not clearly reflected in the indicators beyond the implicit
aim of having a year-accessible corridor, as in drainages and roads in good and fair condition, with a reduced
number of incidents requiring emergency repairs. Two indicators related to the second component on
maintenance were dropped in the restructurings, “performance-based maintenance contracts” and the



                                                                                                      Page 7 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Timor Leste Road Climate Resilience Proj (P125032)



  “emergency planning and response system pilot”. This weakened the project’s ability to track sustainability of
  results.

  Overall, the project mostly achieved its targets on road rehabilitation. However, the scope of activities related
  to maintenance and sustainability were reduced over the two restructurings such that the design and piloting
  of an emergency response system was cancelled, and the independent multiyear PBM contracts with
  provisions for community-based early emergency response were replaced with defects liability under the
  construction contracts. The project did not include institutional development and technical capacity
  development in related government agencies. Therefore, the project’s efficacy is rated Substantial with
  moderate shortcomings.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis. The economic analysis at the project's completion showed a significant improvement in its
financial metrics, with the Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) rising to 21% from an EIRR of 18% at
appraisal stage; and the Net Present Value (NPV) of US$59.40 million up from US$2 million at appraisal stage.
These rates were also up from earlier assessments in 2013 and 2017, which showed lower EIRR and NPV
values. The analysis followed the same methodology throughout the project's life, centered on Component A
factoring in actual construction and maintenance costs, traffic data, and a 21-year period from 2014 to 2034
using a 12% discount rate. The enhanced EIRR at completion partly stemmed from reduced construction costs
and increased traffic. Despite delays caused by various factors, including the departure of consultants, a tropical
cyclone, and the COVID-19 pandemic, the project completed most activities by the end of 2022.

Administrative Efficiency. The project was implemented over more than ten years and was extended multiple
times for seven years for various reasons, including limited implementation readiness, increased scope of
activities, financing gaps, and cost overruns. While the project was initially extended due to the increased scope
of work, the last three extensions in 2020 and 2021 were carried out in response to disbursement delays, the
government's lengthy internal approval process, and partly due to the COVID-19 lockdown. Component costs
increased from the initial appraised amount, including the cost of project implementation support, from less than
US$1 million at appraisal to US$3.04 million at completion. The extensions and higher costs led to some value
added in terms of more comprehensive road rehabilitation activities. However, the scope of activities related to
maintenance, institutional development, and community engagement was reduced despite increased costs and
the more than doubling of the implementation time period. The ICR articulates a continued concern about the
lack of capacity in these areas. Given these inefficiencies and their effect on the PDO’s sustainability
objective, the efficiency rating is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


                                                                                                      Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Timor Leste Road Climate Resilience Proj (P125032)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      75.00
Appraisal                                                   18.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      93.00
ICR Estimate                                                21.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The overall outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory. The project objective remains relevant to the current
development priorities of the GoTL and the World Bank. The project made substantial progress toward
rehabilitating climate-resilient roads along the Dili-Ainaor corridor, but it had shortcomings in terms of its
sustainability objective. The ex-post economic analysis of activities financed by the project demonstrated a
positive economic return with modest implementation efficiency due to significant delays and the low
achievement of maintenance, institutional development, and community engagement despite increased costs
and implementation time period.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial Risks. The PAD discussed the lack of resources within GoTL to carry out routine maintenance.
Government financing, which was committed during the first restructuring, failed to materialize due to
revenue loss and other more urgent priorities, which in part led to the second AF. There is a high risk that
budget allocation to routine maintenance will fall short in the future. Although donor support was discussed at
the time of appraisal, it is unclear how long these arrangements are in place and to what extent they will
cover long-term maintenance and repair needs.

Technical risks. As discussed in section 4, the scope of activities related to maintenance and sustainability
was reduced over the two restructurings such that the design and piloting of an emergency response system
were canceled, and the independent multiyear PBM contracts with provisions for community-based early
emergency response were replaced with defects liability under the construction contracts. The project did not
include institutional and technical capacity development in related government agencies. There was also
a high turnover of government staff. There is a substantial risk that a lack of technical capacity will
jeopardize the project outcomes.

Climate and environmental risks. As discussed in project documents, Timor Leste faces a higher intensity
of rainfall due to climate change. There is a high risk of related erosion and landslides along the rehabilitated

                                                                                                       Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Timor Leste Road Climate Resilience Proj (P125032)



corridor. While the project has ensured climate-resilient infrastructure, including drainage and slope
stabilization structures, there is a high risk that higher-magnitude climate events and increased traffic will
degrade the road structures.

Social Risks. The ICR discussed improved socio-economic outcomes for the rural population based on
selective interviews. At the same time, transport studies have shown that ensuring access to improved
infrastructure for the poor population also requires further investments and policy actions to improve the
availability of affordable public transport options with flexible routes and frequencies, as well as adequate
safety and security along the route. There is a moderate risk that the poor, particularly women and children
are unable to use the road infrastructure due to factors such as gender-based violence or sexual harassment
on the road and lack of safety and security.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was prepared within four months to meet the IDA cycle deadlines. Feasibility studies were
  delayed, and the scope of component activities was kept broad with the aim to further define details
  through additional financing and restructurings. Nonetheless, the project managed to complete the
  Resettlement Action Plan, gender assessment, Environmental Management Plan, and a baseline survey
  in the first year of implementation. The restructurings helped define a more specific scope of activities to
  achieve the PDO. This approach allowed for flexibility and enabled the project to use supervision and
  implementation tools overtime. At the same time, more frontloading of the preparation before approval
  could have reduced the need for multiple restructurings.

  The project design considered lessons learned from previous transport projects in the country (financed
  by ADB and other donors) and the Bank's global experience. These included: i) community ownership
  and participation in routine maintenance, ii) the need for land acquisition and compensation mechanism,
  iii) the need for grievance redress mechanism, and iv) the importance of a road maintenance program.
  The initial project design incorporated actions aligning with these lessons learned, although the
  restructurings reduced the scope of community-based maintenance and long-term maintenance support.

  While a social survey was carried out during implementation, the project was not informed by a detailed
  sector and poverty analysis of the target areas. The M&E design had shortcomings in capturing the
  project outcomes of improved sustainability.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team carried out regular supervision missions and sight visits to address implementation
 challenges. Over the 12-year implementation period, the project experienced high TTL turnover (6 TTLs)

                                                                                                       Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Timor Leste Road Climate Resilience Proj (P125032)



 which posed challenges especially given the FCS environment. There were additional implementation
 challenges stemming from local capacity constraints and further delays caused by the COVID-19
 pandemic. The PMU was nearly dissolved. The Bank team used project supervision tools as
 needed including adjusting safeguards and fiduciary ratings, conducting regular missions, carrying out
 restructurings, cancelling activities when bottlenecks were not resolved, and conducting trainings. The ICR
 did not discuss the frequency of trainings carried out to improve client capacity.

 The cancellation of some activities under Component D, Feasibility Study and Detailed Engineering
 Design, as well as the activities under Component B, Emergency Response System, were in part caused
 by lack of adequate preparation time and support to client. The restructurings were used to address some
 of the shortcomings in the M&E design although there was a missed opportunity to introduce new
 indicators to explicitly capture the project's sustainability outcomes.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The formulation of the project objective, "to deliver sustainable climate resilient road infrastructure on the
 Dili-Ainaro corridor" was at an outcome level. The original RF included indicators to track climate resilience
 as measured by improved drainage condition, reduced road roughness, and improved slope protection.
 The sustainability of the project is not clearly reflected in the indicators beyond the implicit aim of having a
 year accessible corridor, as in drainages and roads in good and fair condition, with a reduced number of
 incidents requiring emergency repairs. The RF included a few indicators on sustainability tracking
 milestones related to PBM and maintenance arrangements which were also subsequently dropped.

 The ICR also notes that there was room for improvement of proposed indicators and their
 monitoring/evaluation method. The data collection responsibility ended up relying on unclear mechanisms
 or the supervision consultant's visual surveys, thus not necessarily a simplified reporting system, especially
 given the FCS context. Due to the weak design of the M&E data collection mechanism, the project
 systematically experienced delays with timely reporting since the initial years of implementation.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project revised the results framework during the two restructurings in 2013 and 2017 to reflect the
  revised scope. Targets were increased for road rehabilitation, sections of roads in good condition,
  number of locations with improved slope protection, number of sections with drainage in good condition,
  in line with expanded scope of activities.



                                                                                                      Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Timor Leste Road Climate Resilience Proj (P125032)



  For the indicator "Dili-Ainaro corridor is adequately maintained", the original project end target of
  "Maintenance included in the ICB contract" was insufficient to assess maintenance adequacy and was
  replaced with a new target: "85 percent of the road under PBM/defects liability period is compliant with
  the contractual service level on an annual basis." As discussed in section 4, indicators that tracked PBM
  implementation and emergency planning system were dropped in the restructurings, which weakened the
  project’s ability to track the milestones towards sustainability of results.

  The restructurings also addressed some of the shortcomings in the original design. Changes included
  rephrasing a few indicators to capture desired outcomes better, i.e., revising ‘"Improvement in climate
  resilience of the Dili-Ainaro corridor" was renamed to "Increase in drainage in good condition on the Dili-
  Ainaro corridor" to reflect better what the indicator measures. The PAD initially lacked a definition for the
  indicator "Reduction in the number of incidents requiring emergency repairs on the Dili-Ainaro corridor"
  and was later defined as conditions requiring heavy equipment and/or labor mobilization, with an updated
  baseline.



c. M&E Utilization
  The project discussed involvement of various donors and stakeholders in transport sector. It is unclear to
  what extent the project data were used to inform transport sector deliberations in the country. There
  were delays in reporting results in a timely manner; quarterly progress reports were constantly overdue.
  The project team mentioned (during an IEG interview on January 17, 20204) that the project M&E data
  contributed to improving data collection in the transport sector. The mechanisms for tracking road traffic
  and road roughness have now been extended to assess the entire country and are being used for other
  donor-funded transport projects.

  Overall, the M&E quality is rated Modest, because there were significant shortcomings in the M&E
  design and implementation making it difficult to adequately assess of the achievement of project
  objectives and test the links in the results chain. The ICR partly addressed this shortcoming by carrying
  interviews during the completion mission to reflect on outcomes achieved, however this was not a
  representative sample.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Safeguards: At the appraisal stage, the project design triggered three policies: Environmental Assessment
   (OP/BP 4.01), Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10), and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The
   construction of new roadside drainage systems and slope stabilization potentially involved land claimed by
   customary groups. The project carried out community consultation and prepared the Environmental
   Management Plan (EMP), a Resettlement Policy Framework, and established a Grievance Redress
   Mechanism (GRM).



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Timor Leste Road Climate Resilience Proj (P125032)



  Under resettlement, a total of 1,184 people were directly affected and received compensation. The GRM
  recorded and addressed 53 grievances, from which 4 grievances related to environmental, health & safety
  issue, 43 social issues and 6 issues of resettlement. The project TTL confirmed to IEG (on January 17,
  2024) that no special measures were necessary for the mitigation of risks under the Indigenous People
  policy as the majority of the country's population was classified as indigenous.

  A risk assessment for gender-based violence (GBV) was undertaken in 2019. Although this was quite late, a
  GBV action plan was added and activities were introduced to train workers, improve community awareness,
  and share information material. One GBV incident was reported and addressed at the time of completion.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement: A procurement plan was prepared in line with World Bank's guidelines. The project faced
  procurement delays due to lack of qualified staff in the government. The team responded by downgrading
  the procurement rating to MS in 2014, and later to MU in 2022 due to delays in selecting consultants
  for Feasibility Study and Detailed Engineering Design. This affected project implementation as the related
  activities were then cancelled. In 2018, an investigation by the Bank's Integrity Vice Presidency revealed
  fraud by an international consulting firm. The team debarred the firm for 15 months. Procurement was
  rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory at the project closing.

  Financial Management: The project audits were cleared and unqualified. In the last two years of
  implementation, the PMU faced challenges in FM. Factors included: the lack of staff with an accounting
  degree and experience contributed to delays in IFRs and audit reports; government bureaucracy and
  inadequate signatories to access funds when necessary; and lack of a proper filing system. FM was rated
  as Moderately Unsatisfactory at the project closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The road construction along the improved corridor, particularly near schools, could potentially lead to
  increased safety concerns due to unimplemented safety audit recommendations, resulting in more traffic
  incidents, especially involving motorbikes. While these incidents mostly led to minor injuries, the higher
  speed and volume of traffic heightened the need for additional footpaths and traffic calming measures
  around schools.

  Despite lacking a specific component for institutional capacity strengthening, the project indirectly
  contributed to institutional development in Timor-Leste. This was achieved through the establishment of a
  compensation mechanism for affected people, which was later replicated in other donor-funded and
  government projects, and by laying the groundwork for institutional strengthening in future projects.

  The ICR mentions that the project has reduced transport costs, through decrease in vehicle repairs and an
  increase in lorry and minivan usage, thereby boosting the local economy, private sector, and labor market
  with new businesses like restaurants and shops. Residents benefited from employment during construction
  and reduced vehicle operating costs, while improved road access enhanced healthcare accessibility and


                                                                                                 Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Timor Leste Road Climate Resilience Proj (P125032)



   business efficiency, as exemplified by a long-term resident who switched from walking to using public
   buses for market trips, saving up to four hours per journey.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                       IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  Efficiency was rated Modest due
                                                                                  to the significant delays that
                                                                                  more than doubled the
                                                                                  implementation timeline and the
                                                                                  reduction of activities on
                                                                                  maintenance, institutional
                                                                                  development, and community
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                  engagement despite increases
                                                                                  in financing. Efficacy was rated
                                                                                  Substantial with moderate
                                                                                  shortcomings in achieving the
                                                                                  sustainability objective. These
                                                                                  lead to an overall outcome rating
                                                                                  of MS.
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

Alternative cost-effective road maintenance programs could be identified to supplement the
contractors’ defect liability coverage. The PAD discussed experience from community-based
rural access road programs supported by the ILO, the ADB, and the EU which showed both the
important contribution made to the income of the participating groups, and also the strong
community support for the road programs on account of the enhanced accessibility provided by the
roads. World Bank projects in India and Nigeria have implemented maintenance models using
women-led groups. The project dropped the participatory activities during implementation but the
model can be considered in future operations.

A longer preparation and implementation period can reduce the need for multiple
restructurings. The project was prepared in record time which helped to take advantage of IDA
funds prior to the cycle closure but this led to a broadly defined project scope and unrealistic timeline



                                                                                                     Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Timor Leste Road Climate Resilience Proj (P125032)



which was corrected over multiple restructurings. Each restructuring required time and resources to
be diverted from implementation and supervision.

The Bank's safeguards policies could help improve client capacity. The project’s safeguards
actions helped the client put in place a resettlement compensation mechanism, grievance redress
mechanism, and gender-based violence response and mitigation system that lasted beyond the
project cycle and was expanded to other client projects. It was helpful that transport
sector stakeholders were well-coordinated and continue to support various aspects of institutional
development.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project. The ICR, including its annexes, presents an adequate
base to support the achievements reported. The ICR is candid about implementation issues and unintended
outcomes, both positive and negative. It provided detailed information on safeguards mitigation measures,
such as the number of cases under GRM and affected people compensated through the RAP.

The ICR is internally consistent for the most part, although there were a few discrepancies; for example, the
target for the indicator of drainage quality was 50% in the PAD, while the ICR reported an original target of
20%. Additionally, there was a slight inconsistency in Bank financing between the data sheet and Annex 3.
Also, the ICR could have elaborated on how the cancellation of specific activities such as feasibility studies,
community-based monitoring, and emergency response planning systems affected project objectives,
particularly the sustainability aspects.

Overall, the ICR quality is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Timor Leste Road Climate Resilience Proj (P125032)




                                                                                  Page 16 of 16
