     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Liberia Forest Sector Project (P154114)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023895

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                    Project Name
 P154114                                       Liberia Forest Sector Project

 Country                                       Practice Area(Lead)
 Liberia                                       Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                              Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A2427                                      30-Jun-2020                                         36,699,999.99

 Bank Approval Date                            Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Apr-2016                                   30-Jun-2023

                                               IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              36,700,000.00                                    36,700,000.00

 Revised Commitment                               36,700,000.00                                    36,700,000.00

 Actual                                           36,699,999.99                                    36,699,999.99




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally                 Avjeet Singh                   Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) for the Liberia Forest Sector Project (LFSP) as articulated in the
   Grant Agreement (GA, page 7) was identical to the one stated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD,
   paragraph 26) and aimed to achieve:

   "Improved management of, and increased benefit sharing in, targeted forest landscapes."



                                                                                                     Page 1 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Liberia Forest Sector Project (P154114)



   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on the following two Objectives:

   1. To achieve improved management of targeted forest landscapes.

   2. To achieve increased benefit sharing in targeted forest landscapes.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following four components:

   1. Strengthened Regulatory and Institutional Arrangements for Implementation of Reducing
   Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation and fostering conservation, sustainable
   management of forests, and enhancement of forest carbon stocks (REDD+) (appraisal cost: US$8.00
   million, actual cost: US$8.53 million). This component financed Technical Assistance (TA), consultants,
   and non-consultant services, goods, works, trainings and workshops, and operational costs needed to
   reform and harmonize the existing legal regime and to strengthen institutional and professional capacities
   for improved management of forest landscapes. It included two sub-components:

   1.1. Strengthened Capacity in Institutions (Public, Private, Civil Society Organizations - CSOs) for
   Improved Management of Forest Landscapes. This was through: (a) Support for existing multi-
   stakeholder coordination mechanisms established as part of the REDD+ readiness process and
   Sustainable Forest Management (SFM); (b) Both core and targeted support of the Forestry Development
   Authority (FDA ) and Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to enhance core institutional capacities for the
   project’s implementation and for SFM, together with targeted support for those agencies responsible for
   project-specific activities, such as the Land Commission (LC)7; Ministry of Agriculture (MoA); Ministry of
   Lands, Mines, and Energy (MLME); and the Liberia Institute of Statistics and Geo-Information Services
   (LISGIS), (c) Deconcentrating FDA and EPA resources and capabilities through the provision of goods and
   works for renovation and construction of regional offices and operating costs to introduce a service delivery
   orientation in support of protected areas and community forest management. Interagency task teams will
   also be resourced and deployed under the leadership of the FDA to enable responsible ministries (the MoA,
   LC, MLME, and LISGIS) to execute their technical and operational responsibilities in the field, (d) The
   establishment of partnerships between the FDA and local service delivery providers (whether community-
   based organizations (CBOs)/CSOs, vocational training institutes, or small and medium enterprises) to
   support local communities in their forest management activities, and (e) The professional development of
   FDA and EPA staff, through skills development and training, work placements, and study tours, and
   curriculum development of regional agriculture and forestry training institutes (FTIs).



                                                                                                   Page 2 of 25
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Liberia Forest Sector Project (P154114)



1.2. Legal Reform. This supported the Government of Liberia (GoL) in the process of relevant legal reform
and effective implementation of REDD+ related laws and policies, such as harmonization of the Community
Rights Law (CRL); the National Forest Reform Law (2006); the Land Rights Policy (2013); and their
attendant regulations, in coordination with ongoing projects that are addressing similar issues.

2. Strengthened Capacity for Management of Targeted Forest Landscapes (appraisal cost: US$23.80
million, actual cost: US$22.29 million). The component financed TA, works, goods, training and
workshops, sub-projects, and operational costs for land use planning, conservation, community forestry,
sustainable agroforestry, and forest management to support local communities and their organizations
within the targeted landscapes to improve the sustainable management and conservation of natural
resources and improve the economic and social benefits derived from them. It included the following four
sub-components:

2.1. Improved Land Use Planning. This supported the preparation of the current land use map at the sub-
national (for the targeted landscapes) and national levels.

2.2. Strengthened Management of Protected Areas of Targeted Forest Landscapes. This supported
the enlargement, strengthened on-the-ground management, and financing of Liberia’s protected area
network, detailing adequate resources necessary to safeguard selected existing and future protected areas
within the targeted landscapes and complementing the support received from other sources.

2.3. Community Forestry in Targeted Forest Landscapes. This supported activities on a demand-driven
basis to assist forest communities to: strengthen community governance and institutions to manage
community forestlands and common pool resources (in accordance with the CRL and the Land Rights
Policy); promote and support productive natural resources management (NRM) investments; and improve
livelihoods by creating jobs opportunities, and improve income from the use of communities’ customary
lands and forest resources.

2.4. Strengthened Capacity for Sustainable Agriculture. This promoted sustainable agricultural
practices and reduces slash-and-burn agriculture in the targeted landscapes. Using a demand-driven
approach and structured economic interest groups within the targeted communities in Grand Gedeh, River
Gee, and Bomi Counties, agroforestry and food crop cultivation will be supported for farming households
within the communities.

3. Forest Monitoring Information System (appraisal cost: US$2.30 million, actual cost: US$2.38
million). This component financed TA, goods, workshops, and operational costs to support the following
two sub-components:

3.1. Measurement, Reporting and Verification (MRV) and Reference Level Development.
This supported the establishment of a successfully tested and operational national system for MRV.

3.2. Development of an information system for safeguards. This financed the operationalization and
update of an information system on safeguards being designed with the support of the Forest Carbon
Partnership Facility (FCPF).

4. Project Management, Monitoring and Communication (appraisal cost: US$3.40 million, actual
cost: US$3.57 million). The component provided support for office operating costs for the existent FDA-
REDD+ Implementing Unit as well as the operation costs for joint quarterly meetings to be held by the
implementing agencies. It also supported the operationalization of an M&E system and the implementation

                                                                                             Page 3 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Liberia Forest Sector Project (P154114)



  of a communication strategy to inform different and diverse stakeholders about the project and its results,
  building on results achieved with FCPF support as well as through other projects.

  Revised Components. The ICR did not report any revisions to the components. That said, it is worth
  mentioning that the Restructuring Paper (paragraph 8, 2020) stated that "using project funds, the Ministry of
  Mines and Energy (MME) has embarked on an education program aimed at training artisanal/small-scale
  miners on forest-smart mining approaches. Support has also been provided under the project to MME for
  formation and strengthening of artisanal mining cooperatives. Interested farmers in both landscapes (North-
  West and South-East) are being supported to establish viable livelihood schemes such as in food (cassava,
  maize, rice, cowpea) and tree (cocoa) crop farming systems and bee-keeping activities which would also
  contribute to reducing pressures on existing natural forests while providing additional incomes to rural
  communities fringing PAs."



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost was estimated at US$36.70 million. The actual cost as reported by the
  ICR (Data Sheet, page 2) was US$36.70 million.

  Financing. The project was financed through a Grant worth US$36.70 million. This amount was fully
  disbursed (ICR, data sheet, page 2).

  Borrower Contribution. The project was fully financed through a Trust Fund Grant.

  Dates. The project was approved on April 19, 2016 and became effective about four months later on
  August 30, 2016. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on May 13, 2019, which was about three
  years after effectiveness. While the PAD did not specify a date for the MTR, this Review finds that the MTR
  was timely conducted relative to other World Bank-funded operations. The project closed on June 30, 2023,
  which was three years after the original closing date on June 30, 2020. According to the ICR (paragraph
  11), the extension of the closing date by three years was to accommodate significant implementation delays
  including delays related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The project was restructured twice (both were Level 2
  restructuring) as follows:

  1. On November 6, 2018, when the amount disbursed was US$7.56 million in order to revise the Results
  Framework (RF) and modify the project's approach. The main change in the project approach was the
  abandonment of the 9 step process that aimed to strengthen community forest management. The 9 step
  process was adopted by a limited number of communities, resulted in significant implementation delays,
  and was leading to unanticipated negative outcomes. Alternatively, the project adopted a bottom-up
  demand-driven CDD plus value chain approach. A split rating will be applied to assess the final project
  outcome since substantial changes were introduced to the RF at the first restructuring.

  2. On May 12, 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$14.10 million, in order to revise the Results
  Framework, change the implementation schedule and extend the closing date by 36 months from June 30,
  2020 to June 30, 2023.




                                                                                                   Page 4 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Liberia Forest Sector Project (P154114)



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. At appraisal, Liberia had 4.3 million hectares (ha) of lowland tropical forest,
accounting for 43% of the remaining Upper Guinea forests in West Africa. While the area diminished to
14.3% of its original size, there were still significant evergreen forests in the southeast region and mountain
forests in the northwest region. In 2011, the forest sector contributed 15.2% to the country's gross domestic
product, and it continued to provide vital resources for the rural population. However, expanding agricultural
and mining activities posed a growing threat, leading to an annual deforestation rate of 0.61% between
1990 and 2010. This project aimed to help the Government of Liberia to improve management of, and
increase benefit sharing in, targeted forest landscapes, with the long-term aim of reducing Deforestation
and Forest Degradation.

Previous Bank Experience. The World Bank has a rich experience in designing and implementing forest-
related projects across different regions. The preparation of the LFSP benefitted from lessons from several
pieces of analytical work conducted for the forest sector (PAD, footnote#10). This included the Bank's
(2010) “Mainstreaming Social and Environmental Considerations into the Liberian National Forestry Reform
Process - A Strategic Environmental Assessment for Implementation of the 3Cs of the Forest Reform Law
2006”, and the Bank's (2012) “Windows of Opportunity for Liberia’s Forestry Sector. Results of the Poverty
and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) of Liberia’s Forest Sector Policy Reforms”, among others. Also, LFSP
was informed by the implementation of other projects in the region in related areas, and the World Bank-
Forest Carbon Partnership Facility’s experience with REDD+ in at least 37 countries in the world, which put
the Bank in a strong position to design and oversee the implementation of the LFSP.

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the Bank’s corporate goals of
ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity. Supporting the forest sector would directly
contribute to achieving the Bank’s corporate goals targeting the poorest population in the country. At the
same time, creating an enabling policy, legal, and institutional conditions for community forestry would have
a direct impact on shared prosperity through allowing local communities concrete opportunities to manage
and derive economic benefits from sustainable forest management (SFM) and conservation. The PDO was
also in line with the Bank's Country Partnership Strategy (CPS, FY2013-FY2017) for Liberia. The objective
of the CPS was to support the government’s Agenda for Transformation (AfT) contributing to sustained
growth, poverty reduction, and shared prosperity, while addressing fragility and building resilience. The
project would support the forest sector through the REDD+ agenda, which would support the preparation
and validation of a strategy to reduce emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (D&FD).

At project completion, the PDO remained in line with Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF,
FY2019-FY2024) for Liberia. The overarching goal of the CPF was to support Liberia as it strives to achieve
pro-poor, private sector-led growth underpinned by human-capital development, institutional capacity-
building, infrastructure development, and economic diversification. The CPF emphasized that productivity
growth and economic diversification were both essential to reduce Liberia’s vulnerability to external shocks,
and the Government needed to promote sectors with high employment and poverty-reduction potential,
including agriculture and forestry. The CPF also noted that there were opportunities in the forest sector to
support community-based natural resource management, which would require strengthening local
production and marketing of wood and wood-based products and referred specifically to LFSP. The LFSP
sought to create opportunities for employment, livelihood support, and income generation, and overall
improved management of forests, thereby directly contributing to the CPF’s goals. That said, the ICR noted

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 25
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Liberia Forest Sector Project (P154114)



               that the project activities were modified as part of the 2018 and 2020 restructuring to emphasize a pro-poor
               approach and "better align" the project with the Bank's Country Partnership Framework which emphasized
               a pro-poor approach (ICR, paragraph 17).

               Consistency the Government Strategies/Priorities. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with Liberia’s
               second Poverty Reduction Strategy (AfT, 2012). The priority objectives of AfT were sustained economic
               growth, poverty reduction, and shared prosperity, while also addressing persistent fragility and building
               resilience. The LFSP was specifically aligned with the pillar related to economic transformation as well as
               the environment cross-cutting issue. The AfT also recognized that due to its vast forest reserves, the
               country was in a position to benefit from carbon sequester programs if the markets develop.

               At project completion, while the PDO continued to be in line with Government priorities for the forestry
               sector, the ICR (paragraph 14) reported that "there was a sharp decline in government and executing
               agency ownership of project objectives." The LFSP served as a key vehicle for the implementation of the
               2014 partnership agreement between the Government of Liberia and the Government of Norway that aimed
               to improve forest governance, strengthen law enforcement, and support reduction of GHG emissions from
               D&FD by 2020. This agreement was subsequently extended to 2025 and continues to be under
               implementation. LFSP was designed to help Liberia achieve Phase II of the REDD+ process to advance the
               country’s efforts to achieve access to certified carbon emission reduction payments, Phase I was completed
               under the earlier World Bank-managed Forest Carbon Partnership Facility-financed project.

               Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. While the PDO statement was clear and focused, it
               was ambitious given the FCS status of the country. At completion, while the PDO continued to align with
               the Bank strategy, Government ownership of the project objective declined, as noted above. Therefore, the
               Relevance of Objectives is rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To achieve "improved management of targeted forest landscapes."

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported the following activities:

                             1. Strengthened regulatory and institutional arrangements for the implementation of REDD+. The main
                             expected outputs included: State of Environment Report for Liberia produced, technical expertise and
                             operational resources provided to the FDA to review Community Forest Management Plans (from the
                             safeguards perspective), operational protocols and procedures developed for land boundary demarcation,

                                                                                                                             Page 6 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Liberia Forest Sector Project (P154114)



community forest management planning, and agroforestry enterprise development, technical and operational
resources provided to the Land Commission (LC) to enable boundary demarcation and land use planning in
the designated protected areas and community forests, technical capacity built in the Liberia Institute of
Geoinformation Services for monitoring of forest cover and land use changes, three FDA regional offices
constructed in Bomi, Lofa, and Grand Bassa, at least four Forestry Training Institutes supported in curriculum
development for Sustainable Forest Management (SFM), at least 10 core and specialized trainings conducted
for FDA/EPA staff, at least six FDA/EPA staff provided with regional work placement opportunities to enhance
staff skills in protected area and community forest management, at least six coaching and mentoring
arrangements (or twinning partnerships) established to support on-the-job skill development of staff, three
regional study tours conducted with a focus on protected areas management and community forestry,
procedures for future award of concessions reviewed and established, technical review mechanism for review
and approval of logging concessions established. The expected outcome was strengthened regulatory and
institutional arrangements for implementing REDD+.

2. Strengthened management of targeted forest landscapes. The main expected outputs included: national
land use map produced, road map for national land use planning produced, Lake Piso Multiple-Use Reserve
boundary signposted, Sapo National Park boundary cleared, Wonegizi Nature Reserve boundary marked with
temporary markings, Management Plans for Sapo National Park and Wonegizi Nature Reserve produced,
Management Plan summaries for Sapo, Gola, Grebo, Wonegizi, and Lake Piso produced, 120 FDA staff
working in protected areas trained in sustainable protected area management, Pre-gazettement activities
conducted for Foya and Kpo Mountains, Grand Kru-River Gee, Gbi, and Senkwehn Proposed Protected
Areas, Conservation Trust Fund for Liberia designed, Study on tourism and ecotourism potential in targeted
landscapes produced, and 12 junior forest officers trained (on-boarding training). The expected outcome was
strengthened capacity for the management of targeted forest landscapes.

3. Strengthening Forest Monitoring Information Systems to establish and support an operational and
successfully tested national system for Measurement, Reporting, and Verification (MRV) and an information
system for safeguards. The main expected outputs included: four regional working groups on MRV
established, activity data on forest degradation assessed and estimated, historical Greenhouse Gas (GHG)
inventories for Land Use, Land Use Change, and Forestry / Agriculture, Forestry, and Other Land Use
(LULUCF/AFOLU) assessed and streamlined, independent verification of Emissions Reduction (ERs)
conducted, an information system for safeguards set up and tested, and national guidelines on community
consultation in forestry projects developed. The expected outcome was a strengthened forest monitoring
system. All the aforementioned activities/outputs/outcomes were expected to contribute to achieving
improved management of targeted forest landscapes. The anticipated long-term impact was reduced
deforestation and degradation in targeted forest landscapes.

The ToC reflected relevant activities that were connected to the outputs, outcomes in a plausible causal
chain. However, the ToC lacked the critical assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the stated
objective.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      The development of a Strategic Vision and Plan for FDA was completed (ICR, paragraph 24).
      Demarcation of Gola NP with community involvement and recruitment of 20 field staff with another 12
       extension agents under recruitment to support field operations ICR, paragraph 24).



                                                                                                Page 7 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Liberia Forest Sector Project (P154114)




      11 government institutions were provided capacity-building training for forest management,
         substantially exceeding the original target of 7.
        National and sub-national coordination mechanisms and forest governance mechanisms were
         established in an open, accountable, and transparent manner (target achieved).
        Forest Policy reforms in place (target achieved).
        Follow-up actions on forest logging concessions were not applied (target not achieved).
        Community Forest Management Agreements were endorsed (target achieved).
        4 land use plans were designed (target 30, target not achieved).
        3 PAs had gazettement plans (target: 4, target 75% achieved).
        341,226 ha of Protected Areas (PAs) with Gazettement Plans (Target: 320,000, target exceeded).
        5 proposed protected areas had completed biodiversity and socioeconomic studies to assess the
         feasibility of protected areas establishment areas with biodiversity-friendly environments were
         established (target: 5, target achieved).

Outcome

      The PDO was to be measured through three PDO outcome indicators: 1. The area in targeted forest
         landscapes managed according to agreed criteria in hectares (original target: 600,000 actual achieved
         at project closing: 542,292 ha), 2. METT scores of the four Protected Areas within the targeted forest
         landscapes: for Sapo NP: 69 compared to an original target of 65 and a baseline of 55, Lake Piso: 61
         compared to an original target of 74 and a baseline of 49, Wonegizi NR: 61 compared to an original
         target of 65 and a baseline of 39, Gola Forest NP: 65 compared to an original target of 70 and a
         baseline of 48, and 3. People in and around protected and community forest areas in targeted
         landscapes who participated in consultations on forest management- which was presumably intended
         as an indicator of both objectives improved management and increased benefit sharing in the targeted
         forest landscapes (14,166 compared to an original target of 75,000).

         Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project provided support to eleven government institutions
         to strengthen their capacity to improve the management of forest resource management. The project
         provided training sessions on M&E, extension services, nursery facilitation, safeguards, geographic
         information systems, and gender mainstreaming in REDD+ implementation. Overall performance with
         respect to forest management against the original targets was substantial. This resulted in substantial
         achievements under the first and second PDO indicators. However, the project achievements under
         the third outcome indicator were modest. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was
         achieved is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Liberia Forest Sector Project (P154114)



To achieve improved management of targeted forest landscapes.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). The PDO was not revised and the same ToC stated above applies. It is worth
noting that after restructuring the project dropped the 9-step approach to adopt a bottom-up CDD a bottom-up
demand-driven CDD plus value chain approach to strengthen community forest management.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      In the SE, among the three counties (Sinoe, Grand Gedeh, and River Gee) where the project was
         active,11 all 8 of the planned customary land formalization (CLFs) were completed as were 7
         participatory land use planning (PLUPs) while 1 PLUP was partially completed (ICR, paragraph 30).
        In the NW, 10 of the CLFs and 7 of the PLUPs were completed while 3 CLFs and 3 PLUPs were
         ongoing, and 3 PLUPs were pending at the time the project closed.
        11 government institutions received capacity building training for forest management exceeding the
         target of 7.
        Coordination mechanisms were established (target achieved).
        Reforms in Forest Policy were achieved.
        No new logging concessions approved until key pre-conditions met (achievement was 50%).
        Community Forest Management Agreements were approved, no number provided (target achieved).
        4 areas had participatory mapping and zoning substantially achieving the end target of 5.
        3 PAs had gazettement plans (target achieved).
        341,246 ha of PAs with gazettement plans exceeding the target of 200,000 ha (target exceeded).
        5 PAs had studies completed (target achieved).
        MRV system was operational (target achieved).
        Reference Level for REDD+ was established (target achieved).
        Safeguards information system was piloted (target achieved).

Outcomes

      By project completion, 542,292 ha were under sustainable management substantially achieving the
       end target of 665,259 ha (PDO outcome indicator 1). Also, 542 ha were under land conservation
       agriculture, which was below the target of 717 ha (PDO outcome indicator 2). 1,329 ha of land were
       under agroforestry which was below the end target of 2,542 ha (PDO outcome indicator 3),
       and 125,217 ha were under improved natural resource management which was below the end target
       of 200,000 ha (PDO outcome indictor 4). The project substantially achieved its end target for PAs
       under improved management with 415,204 ha compared to an end target of 462,000 ha.
      Improved forest management was evidenced through improved METT scores in four project
       areas: METT score for Sapo NP reached 69 exceeding the end target of 60, METT Score for Lake
       Piso MUR reached 61 exceeding the end target of 55, METT Score for Wonegizi NP reached 61
       exceeding the end target of 55, and METT Score for Gola Forest NP reached 65 exceeding the end
       target of 60 (PDO outcome indicator 6). Finally, the number of people consulted on forest
       management reached 14,166 significantly exceeding the end target of 5,000 (PDO outcome indicator
       7).



                                                                                                Page 9 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Liberia Forest Sector Project (P154114)



Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project provided capacity building to relevant government
institutions including to the FDA, EPA, Ministry of Mines and Energy, Ministry of Agriculture, Liberia Institute
of Geoinformation Services, Liberia Land Authority, Ministry of Finance and Development Planning (MFDP),
and Ministry of Internal Affairs (MIA), Forestry Training Institute, the University of Liberia, and Tubman
University exceeding the target. This positively contributed to the operationalization of national and
subnational coordination and forest governance mechanisms in an open, accountable, and transparent
manner (ICR, paragraph 33). However, the project showed mixed results where monitoring data on
participatory land use planning (PLUP) and customary land formalization (CLF) in the SE and NW cluster
areas showed positive outcomes, but actions involving the legal and regulatory measures for the forest sector
in Liberia were either still ongoing or outstanding as of early 2023 (ICR, paragraph 29). In the SE, among the
three counties all 8 of the planned CLFs were completed, as were 7 PLUPs while 1 PLUP was partially
completed. In the NW, implementation was slower among the 4 beneficiary counties where 10 of the CLFs
and 7 of the PLUPs were completed while 3 CLFs and 3 PLUPs were ongoing, and 3 PLUPs were pending at
the time the project closed. A notable achievement under the project was legal and policy reforms, where the
Land Rights Act was passed into law in September 2018 and a Land Use Planning and Management
Framework was published in January 2020. Also, no new industrial logging concessions were awarded as
only one of the preconditions—presentation of the second Concessions Review—was met shortly before the
project closing date. The target for participatory mapping and zoning incorporated as part of the CFMPs was
underachieved. Overall, the revised project performance indicators show largely positive results. While none
of the PDO indicator targets for land under sustainable management were fully achieved, the updated
average METT scores for all four existing project PAs, as well as the number of people in and around
community forest and PAs who have participated in consultations on forest management, were exceeded. In
addition, three new gazettement packages for protected areas were presented to the President’s office shortly
before project closing, greatly exceeding the revised target for the area to be protected and even marginally
above the initial target of 340,000 ha. Therefore, the efficacy with which the revised objective was achieved is
rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To achieve increased benefit sharing in targeted forest landscapes.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported the following activities:

1. Improved land use planning through the preparation of current land use maps at the subnational (for the
targeted landscapes) and national levels. The expected outputs included a national land use map produced,
and a road map for national land use planning produced.

2. Support the establishment of management plans and livelihood restoration. The project with participation
from local communities would support the preparation of a new MP for the Wonegizi Nature Reserve and an
update of the MP for Sapo National Park. The project also would provide livelihoods-related support during
project implementation to people affected by project-induced restrictions of access to natural resources within

                                                                                                 Page 10 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Liberia Forest Sector Project (P154114)



protected areas. The expected outputs included management plans for Sapo National Park and Wonegizi
Nature Reserve produced, and management plan summaries for Sapo, Gola, Grebo, Wonegizi, and Lake
Piso produced.

3. Support community forestry in targeted forest landscapes to strengthen community governance institutions
to manage community forestlands and common pool resources (in accordance with the CRL and the Land
Rights Policy); promote and support productive natural resources management investments based on an
integrated 3Cs approach at the level of community lands, of which forest will be a significant land use
component; and improve livelihoods by creating job opportunities and improving income from the use of
communities’ customary land and forest resources. The expected outputs included: Up to 70 communities
supported to conduct a Socioeconomic Profile Reconnaissance Survey, Up to 40 Community Action Plans
produced, Up to 40 Community Land Use Plans prepared in a participatory manner, Up to 40 community
training exchanges organized, Up to 40 communities supported on timber and non-forest timber products
certification, Between 20 and 40 TSPs trained and included in the roster, study on domestic timber and its
role in D&FD completed, and study on charcoal market and its role in D&FD completed.

4. Strengthen Capacity for Sustainable Agriculture through promoting sustainable agricultural practices and
reducing slash-and-burn agriculture in the targeted landscapes. The expected outputs included: 3,000
farmers supported on tree crops establishment through individual grants, 1,500 farmers supported on
conservation agriculture through provision of inputs, and 30 FOs provided with post-harvest equipment. All
this combined would contribute to the outcome of achieving and increased benefit sharing in targeted forest
landscapes.

The activities reflected in the ToC were directly connected to the outputs and the outcome in a plausible
causal chain. However, the ToC lacked a reference to the critical assumptions that underpinned the
achievement of the stated PDO. The above-mentioned ToC was reconstructed through using information
under the detailed project description (PAD, Annex 2). The original ToC reported in the PAD did not clearly
reflect the activities that would contribute to achieving the stated PDO.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      8,026 forest users of which 2,361 were females were trained which was below the overall original
       target of 20,000 and the female target of 8,000 (target not achieved).
      804 people were employed in forest product production & processing which significantly below the
       original target of 8,000 (target not achieved).
      9 community forestry enterprises were established exceeding the original target of 8 (target
       exceeded).
      1,980 smallholder tree crop farmers had access to finance, inputs, markets, and technologies because
       of the project support, which was below the original target of 3,000.

Outcome

      The main PDO indicator in this connection was number of the people (including women) in targeted
       forest and adjacent communities with an increased monetary and non-monetary benefits with an
       original end target of 75,000 including 30,000 females and the reported achievement at completion
       was 79,070 of which females were 38,820.



                                                                                                Page 11 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Liberia Forest Sector Project (P154114)



Summary of Efficacy Assessment. As noted above, more people and women than that anticipated in the
PAD directly benefited from the project per the main outcome indicator on people in targeted forest and
adjacent communities with an increased monetary and non-monetary benefits. However, only 40% (out of a
target of 20,000) were trained in forest management, and 10% (out of a target of 8,000) were employed in the
production and processing of forest products. Overall, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is
rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To achieve increased benefit sharing in targeted forest landscapes.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). The PDO remained the same, but the associated indicator targets in the RF were
revised.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      8,026 forest users of which 2,361 were females were trained which exceeded the overall revised
       target of 4,000 and the female revised target of 1,000 (target exceeded).
      804 people were employed in forest product production and processing which was below the revised
       target of 2,000 (target not achieved).
      9 community forestry enterprises were established exceeding the original target of 8 (target
       exceeded).
      12,365 farmers were reached of which 3,870 were females exceeding both the overall target of 10,200
       and the female target of 1,000 (target exceeded).

Outcome

      The performance of the project after restructuring point to increasingly positive results in terms of
       benefit sharing. Based on the 2023 beneficiary survey results, 79,070 people (including
       38,820 women) in targeted and adjacent forest communities with increased project-associated
       monetary and/or non-monetary benefits which exceeded both the overall end of project target of
       75,000, and the 30,000 end of project target for women. However, only around 40% of the target for
       people employed in forest product generation and processing was achieved. The number of
       community forestry enterprises establishing joint ventures with other communities or other enterprises
       reportedly reached 9, slightly exceeding the target. A total of 30 community exchanges were created
       in the SE and NW clusters, and the targets for total and female farmers benefited with agricultural
       services or assets by the project were surpassed and significantly exceeded, respectively.
      A beneficiary survey that was conducted in four project locations included 511 household heads, of
       which about 40% were women, reported that 57.8% of all respondents (including 60.6% of female
       respondents) reported that their household incomes improved due to project activities. While 99.6%

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 25
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Liberia Forest Sector Project (P154114)



                                     affirmed that they received at least some benefits due to the project. Thus, the project appears to have
                                     had a significant positive impact on the beneficiary communities.
                                    Notable achievements by the project not captured by the RF included: Funding of small infrastructure
                                     investments (rehabilitation of schools and health clinics, repair of bridges, provision or repair of water
                                     supply systems, use of solar energy, among others) to communities in both targeted forest areas
                                     based on local priorities. Also, local artisanal miners benefitted from the project through training on
                                     improved mining practices, the formation of cooperatives, and promotion of alternative livelihoods
                                     among other means as part of its efforts to reduce pressure on local forest resources (ICR, paragraph
                                     34).

                              Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project supported increased benefit sharing in targeted forest
                              landscapes through the provision of training and alternative employment opportunities to beneficiaries. The
                              project also supported the establishment of community forest enterprises and supported small farmers.
                              Despite the limited time after restructuring to implement the cluster approach, the evidence point to the
                              success of the project in increasing benefit sharing. The project exceeded its PDO outcome target as noted
                              above, and the results of the beneficiary survey point to a positive impact by the project on the beneficiary
                              communities. However, the project achieved only 40% of the target for people employed in forest product
                              generation and processing. Overall, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial
                              with moderate shortcomings.



                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings. The project's overall performance with
                            respect to forest management was substantial and the intended outcomes were substantially achieved.
                            Also, the project performance in relation to increased benefit sharing was Substantail. However, fewer people
                            and women than that anticipated in the PAD directly benefited from the project and only 40% were trained in
                            forest management, and 10% were employed in the production and processing of forest products.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings. The project's overall performance with
                            respect to forest management was successful and the project outcome indicators showed largely positive

                                                                                                                                Page 13 of 25
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Liberia Forest Sector Project (P154114)



  results. While none of the PDO indicator targets for land under sustainable management were fully achieved,
  the updated average METT scores for all four existing project PAs, as well as the number of people in and
  around community forest and PAs who have participated in consultations on forest management, were
  exceeded. In addition, three new gazettement packages for protected areas were presented to the
  President’s office shortly before project closing, greatly exceeding the revised target for the area to be
  protected and even marginally above the initial target of 340,000 ha. While monitoring data on participatory
  land use planning (PLUP) and customary land formalization (CLF) in the SE and NW cluster areas showed
  positive outcomes, actions involving the legal and regulatory measures for the forest sector in Liberia
  were either still ongoing or outstanding as of early 2023. The evidence provided in the ICR also pointed to the
  success of the project in increasing benefit sharing. The project exceeded its PDO outcome target, and the
  results of the beneficiary survey point to a positive impact by the project on the beneficiary communities.
  However, the project achieved only 40% of the target for people employed in forest product generation and
  processing.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

ex ante

     The economic analysis in the PAD did not estimate an overall economic rate of return (ERR) for the
        project investments. The economic analysis focused on component 2. Particularly, quantifiable benefits
        were estimated for activities involving three sub-components: management of community forestry,
        rehabilitation of tree crops and agriculture, and strengthening and expansion of protected forest areas
        generating carbon benefits.
       The economic analysis in the PAD compared the estimated total project benefits discounted at 10% over
        a 25-year period with both the estimated costs of component 2 (Strengthened Capacity for Management
        of Targeted Forest Landscapes (US$23.8 million) and the entire project (initially US$37.5 million) and
        concluded that the project would be economically viable.
       The economic analysis was based on the net present value (NPV), which reflected the flow of inflation-
        adjusted costs and benefits, discounted over time to reflect the investment cost to permit comparison
        with alternative potential uses of the grant funds. With regard to monetary benefits a calculation was
        done based on the target values for the employment to be created for the production and processing of
        forest products. This was calculated to have an NPV of US$56 million at a 6% rate.
       The sub-component that promoted sustainable agriculture and particularly the rehabilitation of tree crops,
        the NPV was US$59 million at a 6% rate. An analysis of the value of the incremental carbon
        sequestered, assuming a blend of 50% hardwoods and 50% softwoods, was US$21 million annually for
        the protected areas covered by the project. However, the PAD did not fully clarify how the stream with
        respect to sustainable agriculture was estimated.
       These figures together amounted to US$136 million, which greatly exceeds the proposed grant to
        implement component 2, US$24 million, or even the total project budget of US$37.5 million. If a discount

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 25
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Liberia Forest Sector Project (P154114)



      rate of 10% were to be used (due to increased risk for forestry operations), the benefits would be US$66
      million.
     The benefits from the rehabilitation of tree crops and sustainable agriculture could be estimated at
      completion because there was no end-of-project data available since the corresponding indicator used to
      estimate the benefits for the rehabilitation of tree crops and sustainable agriculture was dropped at the
      time of the first restructuring.
     Overall, the ex-ante assumptions were overly optimistic. The NPV estimates for the employment that was
      expected to be generated in forest products and processing, as well as for the monetary benefits from
      rehabilitated tree crops and sustainable agriculture, were all overestimated.

ex post

     The economic analysis in the ICR attempted to follow the same methodology at appraisal to ensure
        comparability and consistency. The net present value (NPV) estimates are presented in the Table below
        compared with those estimated in the PAD at a 10% discount rate:

                                     ex ante
                                                     ex post (US$) % of ex ante
Variable                             estimates (PAD)
                                                     (ICR) (US$)   Estimates
                                     (US$)
Community forestry -
                                     33,766,000       3,565,000       10.6%
employment in forest products
Carbon benefits from
                                     14,200,000       15,967,191      112.5%
strengthened PAs
Sustainable agriculture and
                                     18,000,000       10,332,000      57.4%
rehabilitation of tree crops
Total                                65,966,000       29,864,191      45.4%

     As shown above except for carbon benefits, the NPVs for the two other activities were significantly lower
        than the appraisal estimates, and the overall NPV was just 45.4% of the appraisal estimate. It is worth
        noting that according to the ICR (paragraph 39), the actual figure for sustainable agriculture and tree
        crop rehabilitation was an estimate and actual monitoring of project activities in the project areas
        suggested that a much lower figure was more likely than the one estimated above.
       The ICR attributed the lower NPVs at completion mainly to lower actual employment in forest products,
        which was just 804 compared with the initial target of 8,000.
       The ICR used an alternative methodology (which was not considered at the design stage) to estimate
        carbon sequestration benefits by applying the social shadow price of carbon. The ex-post NPV of the
        shadow cost of carbon was US$747,315,038. This value corresponded to 77% of the NPV retroactively
        calculated for ex-ante estimation of the gazettement process. The ICR (paragraph 41) reported the
        available forest monitoring data through 2021 indicated that the project did not reduce carbon emissions
        from deforestation and forest degradation. The ICR also reported that forest degradation in the SE
        between 2018 and 2021 increased relative to the 2013-2017 baseline (paragraph 41).
       The benefits from the rehabilitation of tree crops and sustainable agriculture could not be estimated at
        completion because there was no end-of-project data available, and the corresponding indicator used to
        estimate these benefits was dropped at the time of the first restructuring.
       Implementation efficiency. The project experienced significant implementation delays and a slow
        disbursement rate. The closing date was extended by 36 months. Delays stemmed from implementation

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Liberia Forest Sector Project (P154114)



       difficulties, limited internal coordination, procurement delays, and logistical challenges. There were
       delays due to COVID-19 restrictions which were beyond the project control. Finally, the project
       significantly exceeded its management and communications cost allocation by 40%, with an actual cost
       of US$3.6 million compared to an estimated cost of US$2.6 million for component 4.

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. The overall NPV estimate at completion was significantly lower than the
estimate at appraisal. The project also experienced significant implementation delays and slow
disbursement, and there were cost overruns related to component 4. Therefore, Efficiency is rated Modest due
to the significant shortcomings, as noted above.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?           Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   0
 Appraisal                                                0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
 ICR Estimate                                             0
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Before Restructuring

Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial with moderate
shortcomings. The project's overall performance with respect to forest management was substantial and the
intended outcomes for two out of three indicators were substantially achieved. While the project performance in
relation to increased benefit sharing was substantial, there were moderate shortcomings in relation to forest
training and employment. Efficiency was rated Modest.

Based on the assigned rating to the three outcome criteria, Outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

After Restructuring

Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial. Overall Efficacy was Substantial with moderate shortcomings.
The project's overall performance with respect to forest management was encouraging, and the project outcome
indicators showed largely positive results. While none of the PDO indicator targets for land under sustainable
management were fully achieved, the updated average METT scores for all four existing project PAs, as well as
the number of people in and around community forests and PAs who have participated in consultations on
forest management, were exceeded. In addition, three new gazettement packages on protected areas were

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Liberia Forest Sector Project (P154114)



presented to the President’s office shortly before project closing, greatly exceeding the revised target for the
area to be protected and even marginally above the initial target of 340,000 ha. The evidence provided in the
ICR points to the project's success in increasing benefit sharing. The project exceeded its PDO outcome target
and the results of the beneficiary survey point to a positive impact of the project on the beneficiary communities.
However, the project achieved only 40% of the target for people employed in forest product generation and
processing. Efficiency was rated Modest. The overall NPV estimate at completion was significantly lower than
the estimate at appraisal. The project also experienced significant implementation delays and slow
disbursement, and there were cost overruns related to component 4.

Based on the assigned rating to the three outcome criteria, Outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory. Given
that the outcome rating is the same at Moderately Satisfactory both pre- and post-restructuring, the overall
outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory. It is noted that ~20% ($ 7.56 million) was disbursed at the time of
restructuring.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following risks could potentially impact the Development Outcome:

1. Financial risk. In the absence of additional donor support, there will be a need to continue funding the
REDD Implementation Unit (RIU) and Measurement, Reporting, and Verification (MRV) team. However,
financing ended at the time of project closing, as did much of that for the NGOs implementing the cluster
approach in the southeast and northwest. The lack of funding resulted in the dismissal of the incremental
staff hired and trained under the project for FDA and EPA when the project closed. The active participation of
representatives of the GoN and other bilateral donors, including the EU and USAID, as well as the Global
Environment Facility (GEF) Secretariat, in the recent Forest and Climate Resilience Forum and the
reportedly strong interest of the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning in all activities related to
climate change, including the potential for receipt of results-based emissions reduction payments, are
expected to lead to additional financial returns from SFM, as well as from a new regional West African forest
management project currently reportedly under preparation by the Bank that will include Liberia, in the years
immediately ahead.

2. Technical risk. Continued data gathering by FDA and Liberia Institute of Geoinformation Services will be
needed to ensure timely monitoring and assessment of changes in D&FD that require both the analysis of
satellite images and specialized staff. Some of these and other project-supported activities, including work in
the SE and NW by the Sustainable Trade Initiative and the Society for Conservation of Nature Liberia
may continue to be funded for some time through other Norwegian grant resources.

3. Institutional risk. It is critical to ensure the continuity of the REDD+ process and the transition from
Phase II to Phase III when forest communities become eligible to receive certified emissions reduction
payments for reduced D&FD in the SE and NW areas. At the same time, this depends largely on continued
financial support to further advance the policy and institutional reform agenda. This includes the completion
and consolidation of the results of the project for the establishment of new PAs, follow up to the
recommendations of the second Forest Concessions Review, and to implement other pending actions. A

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Liberia Forest Sector Project (P154114)



potential new Bank Development Policy Operation (DPO), currently under preparation, in combination
with the recently initiated United Nations Development Programme community forestry project and a GEF
forest conservation operation for the NW (under preparation by Conservation International) could potentially
provide further support for the forestry sector. The ICR (paragraph 74) noted that a new Government will be
formed in early 2024 with new priorities, policies, and actions that could potentially impact the forestry
sector.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic relevance and approach. The project was strategically relevant and in line with the
            Government priorities with regards to the reduction of emissions from deforestation and forest
            degradation and to foster conservation, sustainable management of forests, and enhancement of
            forest carbon stocks (REDD+). The PDO was also in line with the Bank strategies (see section 3
            for details). The project was informed by several analytical studies as noted in section 3.
           Technical, financial, and economic aspects. The PAD did not explicitly identify Liberia’s FCV
            status as a key design element. The project had an ambitious PDO with a complex design that
            included multiple activities. The original project design featured a 9-step process to enable
            communities to manage their own forest resources. This process did not yield the expected
            results, as the majority of communities chose commercial logging rather than conservation. The
            design also featured a landscape approach to guide improvements in ecosystems and livelihoods.
            This approach was complex, and its implementation required multi-institutional interventions and
            cross-sectoral coordination. The PAD included an economic analysis that was overly optimistic
            and lacked an overall economic rate of return. Overall, the project design was complex for an FCV
            context.
           Poverty, gender, and social development aspects. The design considered gender aspects
            during implementation and featured a socially inclusive approach. This aimed to
            include vulnerable or traditionally excluded social groups such as women as partners in the
            planning, operation of funds, and the deployment of support for various activities under the
            various components of the project. The M&E Results Framework was designed to generate
            gender-disaggregated data to demonstrate the benefit going to both women and men. While the
            project did not specifically track poverty reduction, the project activities related to benefit sharing
            were expected to improve local livelihoods.
           Environmental and Fiduciary aspects. The project had adequate environmental and social
            safeguards arrangements. Fiduciary arrangements anticipated weak capacity as a potential
            concern. Procurement was challenging and delays were experienced throughout implementation.
           Implementation arrangements. The implementation of the LFSP was built on the REDD+
            management structures already established for the REDD+ strategy. The FDA was
            responsible for overall project implementation. However, implementation arrangements were
            complex and involved multiple agencies at the regional and local levels.
           Risk assessment. Ten risks were identified at the appraisal stage with an overall risk rating of
            Substantial. Three risks related to Political and Governance, institutional capacity, and the
            depreciation of the Norwegian currency were all rated high. Fiduciary and environmental risks
            were rated Substantial. While the political and governance risk was rated high, this risk lacked

                                                                                                        Page 18 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Liberia Forest Sector Project (P154114)



         practical mitigation measures, particularly to mitigate a change in the government commitment to
         natural resource management. Finally, the risk related to the project design itself was not
         anticipated as the original 9-step approach proved to be counterproductive.
        M&E arrangements. The FDA coordinated M&E activities and was responsible for ensuring that
         data and information were produced on time and were of adequate quality. M&E design had
         shortcomings related to the Theory of Change and the Results Framework. Also, the indicators to
         assess improved benefit-sharing objectives were not clearly defined, and some benefits were not
         captured by any indicators in the RF, for example, the support to artisanal miners (refer section
         9).

  Summary of Quality-at-Entry (QAE) Assessment. The project was strategically relevant with an
  ambitious PDO. The project design was overly complex and included multiple activities that
  required multi-institutional interventions and cross-sectoral coordination. Environmental and fiduciary
  aspects were adequate, and gender was adequately captured. While the risk assessment was thorough
  and included relevant mitigation measures, the risk related to the project design itself was not
  anticipated. M&E design had notable shortcomings related to the ToC and the RF as noted above.
  Overall, QAE reflected moderate shortcomings and is therefore rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The project was implemented under an FCV environment which proved challenging and
          demanding. The Bank conducted 15 implementation support missions over the duration of the
          project. The project was headed by three TTLs and two co-TTLs over the seven-year course of
          project implementation. Staff continuity at the Monrovia office benefitted the project with respect to
          both procurement and safeguards.
         The Bank provided close supervision and implementation support when needed (ICR, paragraph
          70). As part of the 2018 restructuring, the Bank halted the 9-step process. This was a step in the
          right direction because the 9-step process was not was not only slowing implementation but also
          leading to counterproductive results. This process was replaced by a more effective cluster
          approach, implemented by experienced NGOs already working in the project’s forested landscapes.
         The Bank could have used the second restructuring in May 2020 to further revise the RF so as to
          align it with what was happening on the ground. The performance indicators did not fully reflect
          actual project performance and results on the ground, especially during the latter stages of
          implementation.
         Additional Bank support after the MTR helped the RIU improve its M&E activities and
          implement two beneficiary surveys. This partially compensated for the lack of the impact evaluation
          that was anticipated in the PAD.
         Staff changes during implementation contributed to procurement delays in relation to the cluster
          approach. Delays were exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic and seasonal accessibility
          restrictions in the project areas.



                                                                                                    Page 19 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Liberia Forest Sector Project (P154114)



 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. The Bank supervision guided the project
 implementation under a challenging FCV environment. The Bank was proactive in restructuring the project
 once it became evident that the original 9-step approach was not generating the desired results. However,
 the Bank could have further used the second restructuring to better align the RF with the activities on the
 ground. Overall, the Quality of Supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 Based on the assigned ratings for QAE and Quality of Supervision, the Overall Bank Performance is rated
 Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD included a theory of change (ToC) which was reiterated by the ICR. However, the ToC in
        the PAD/ICR did not clearly show how inputs were connected to outputs, and how these would
        generate the desired outcomes/PDOs in a plausible causal chain. This Review reconstructed the
        ToC for each objective based on the detailed project description in the PAD (Annex 2) and the
        Results Framework.
       The PDO was assessed based on the following five PDO outcome indicators: 1. Community forest
        area in targeted forest landscapes managed according to defined criteria (ha), 2. Management
        Effectiveness Tracking Tool (METT) score of protected areas within targeted forest landscapes 3.
        People in targeted forests and adjacent communities with increased monetary or nonmonetary
        benefits from forests 4. People in and around protected and community forestry areas in targeted
        landscapes who participated in consultations on management of forests, and 5. Direct project
        beneficiaries. While the outcome indicators were relevant, the indicators to assess improved
        benefit-sharing objectives were not clearly defined.
       The Results Framework (RF) included 17 intermediate results indicators (IRIs) to track the progress
        of the different project activities. Most IRIs were measurable, connected to the project activities, but
        some reflected ambitious targets. Several IRI lacked clarity and were later revised as part of the
        2018 restructuring (see below for details).
       Overall, M&E design was complex and tracking such relatively large number of IRIs in an FCV
        environment with limited capacity proved challenging. Also, some benefits were not captured by any
        indicators in the RF, for example, the support to artisanal miners.




b. M&E Implementation


                                                                                                    Page 20 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Liberia Forest Sector Project (P154114)



        While the FDA coordinated M&E and ensured that the required information was produced on time
         and with sufficient quality, reporting was often problematic and of uneven quality (ICR, paragraph
         62). Reporting improved in the last two years of implementation after the Bank team added an
         experienced M&E consultant and the RIU hired a local M&E specialist in November 2021.
        A notable shortcoming was the failure to update the RF after the MTR to reflect the new project
         approach (cluster approach), and the provision of small infrastructure improvements by the
         project.
        The Bank consultant prepared a detailed M&E Handbook for the project, performed an M&E
         Capacity Assessment, built data collection tools, provided capacity strengthening guidance to the
         project. The consultant also oversaw the beneficiary surveys coordinated by the RIU’s M&E
         specialist in 2022 and 2023, which partially compensated for the lack of a final impact evaluation.
        The PDO and the IRIs were revised as part of the 2018 restructuring. The first PDO outcome
         indicator, "Community forest area in targeted forest landscapes managed according to defined
         criteria (ha)," was disaggregated into five subcategories with five new PDO indicators (ICR, Annex
         1). Also, the original PDO indicator, "People in targeted forest and adjacent communities with
         increased monetary or non-monetary benefits from forests, of which female (%)," was replaced by
         two new indicators, as noted in the ICR (Annex 1). The target of the Management Effectiveness
         Tracking Tool (METT) and the People in and around protected and community forestry areas in
         targeted landscapes who participated in consultations on the management of forests were both
         revised. There were also changes in the original Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs), some of
         which were revised for greater precision. In addition, one of the original IRIs was dropped
         altogether, another was replaced, and new ones were added, while still others had their original
         target values significantly reduced (ICR, paragragh14). These changes aimed to facilitate tighter
         monitoring and better reflection of the project activities and their attribution to the project
         outcomes. Also, other project-supported activities including the support to artisanal mining and
         financing infrastructure were not captured by any indicators.



c. M&E Utilization
       According to the ICR (paragraph 63) while monitoring data provided information on slow
         disbursements and lagging implementation, it was of "limited usefulness for project
         management."
        The findings of the two beneficiary surveys were not comparable as both featured different
         questions. The findings of the 2023 survey were utilized in the ICR.

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. M&E design was complex for an FCV setting and some
  benefits were not captured by any indicators in the RF. Implementation was challenging and reporting
  was often problematic and of uneven quality, and M&E utilization was limited as M&E data were
  of limited usefulness for project management. The RF was subsequently revised to address some
  design shortcomings but fell short on providing a comprehensive solution for M&E weaknesses.
  Therefore, the Quality of M&E is rated Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

                                                                                                 Page 21 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Liberia Forest Sector Project (P154114)




10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
        Environmental Category and Safeguards. The project was classified as a Category B - partial
          assessment as none of the planned project investments or activities were expected to generate
          significant adverse environmental impacts. Five environmental and one social safeguard policies
          were triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Forests (OP 4.36), Natural Habitats (OP
          4.04), Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09), Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11), and Involuntary
          Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Pest
          Management Plan (PMP), and a Process Framework (PF) were prepared.
         Compliance with Environmental and Social Safeguards. Environmental risks identified in the
          project areas included unsustainable forest-harvesting practices and potential conversion of natural
          forests or wetlands for agricultural expansion. According to the ICR (paragraph 65) "environmental
          safeguard compliance was closely supervised by both the recipient and the Bank" and "activities
          proceeded in accordance with the provisions of the ESMF and the Process Framework." While the
          project triggered OP/BP 4.12, no physical displacement was expected due to PA management
          activities. According to the ICR (paragraph 66), "some complaints were registered in the Feedback
          and Grievance Redress Mechanism (FGRM), but they were reportedly followed up and properly
          addressed." Finally, the ICR did not explicitly report that the project complied with the Bank's
          triggered safeguard policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
        Financial Management (FM). FM arrangements were adequate and met the minimum
          requirements according to Bank policy for IPF (ICR, paragraph 68). FM performance experienced
          minor shortcomings, including delays in the settlement of advances, a few late submissions of
          interim financial reports, management failures to respond to audit queries, and inaccurate
          presentation of committed and uncommitted balances. Despite the afore-mentioned shortcomings,
          the FM provided timely and reliable information required to manage and monitor project. FM
          benefitted from the Bank's recommended mitigation measures to maintain a sound FM system.
          This ensured that the project funds were utilized for the intended purposes. While there were no
          ineligible expenditure declared, some payment delays occurred (ICR, paragraph 68). Overall, FM
          performance was rated Moderately Satisfactory at project closing.
         Procurement. The project followed the World Bank procurement regulations and documents (ICR,
          paragraph 67). However, procurement delays were experienced throughout implementation. The
          project competitively hired two national procurement consultants to assist the RIU during project
          implementation. While the Bank’s introduction of Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement
          resulted in initial procurement difficulties, the consultants were able to utilize it with Bank support.
          Despite that some contracts were awarded late; all were completed before the project closed.
          Procurement experienced a number of challenges including: "(a) low responses to procurement
          opportunities from consulting firms; (b) some terms of reference were not well prepared, causing
          delays; and (c) some budgets in Procurement Plans were poorly estimated, causing suppliers’ and


                                                                                                    Page 22 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Liberia Forest Sector Project (P154114)



           consultants’ financial bids/proposals to be at variance (ICR, paragraph 67)." Procurement was rated
           as Moderately Satisfactory at project closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                  IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                                                               QAE had moderate
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory        Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               shortcomings.
Quality of M&E                   Modest              Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included six lessons, the following three are emphasized with some adaptation of language:

1. In complex, politically sensitive, risky implementation environments, proactive and
adaptive management is critical for project success. The project ownership and political
commitment of the FDA during LFSP preparation differed significantly from the political landscape
during implementation. The project transitioned from a planned 9-step process to a cluster approach
for enhanced CFM. Responding to community demand with small-scale social infrastructure
investments, coupled with ongoing awareness and PLUP activities, resulted in substantial post-MTR
improvements. This shift not only promoted better sharing of benefits but also increased the chances
of sustainable CFM. Engaging multiple stakeholders, including various government agencies in the
region, broadens ownership at different levels, reducing the risk of unintended deviations. It became
evident that, even when government agencies aim to lead, additional technical support through TA
or project resources is essential while building government technical capacity. In all, a realistic
assessment of implementation timeframes, including the possible impact of changes in institutional,
administrative, and political circumstances, is always needed.

2. Designing a clear RF and substantively modifying the RF following the MTR ensures that
the RF accurately reflects the evolving nature of the project and aligns with the achievements

                                                                                                 Page 23 of 25
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Liberia Forest Sector Project (P154114)



identified during the MTR or other critical project milestones. The sharp and abrupt decline in
the Government’s interest in transitioning from concessional forestry to CFM was impossible to
foresee and reflect in the first restructuring. However, if adequate intermediate results indicators
were introduced at the design stage, the RF would have captured project progress and
achievements better. The absence of a second substantive restructuring based on the MTR
prevented the World Bank from fully adjusting the project's RF to capture the eventual achievements
of the revised approach. Future interventions should prioritize timely and thorough revisions of the
RF, particularly after significant changes in project strategy or approach.

3. Forest projects need to invest in adaptive technology and accommodate changes in
management trends to enhance the effectiveness of implementation. The global attention on
the value of forest carbon stock has changed the interest of governments in the traditional forest
concession. While not anticipated during the project design as well as in MTR, LFSP piloted the use
of technologies such as drones, Geo-enabling initiative for Monitoring and Supervision (GEMS) and
Kobo Toolbox software for forest inventory and better real-time monitoring of the implementation of
project activities. The use of such technologies proved to be useful in the context of limited transport
access and during the COVID-19 restrictions. The project also conducted a major concession review
with a list of policy recommendations that considered the global trend in forest management as well
as Liberia's local political context. Forestry projects' design and implementation arrangements need
to accommodate the changing landscape of forest management to enhance the effectiveness of the
implementation.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

      Quality of Evidence. The ICR was results-oriented and included evidence to assess the project
       outcomes based on the results framework.
      Lessons. Lessons mostly reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.
       However, no details were provided on the use of GEMs and Kobo Toolbox in the main text of the ICR.
      Conciseness. Most sections were concisely written.
      Consistency with guidelines. The ICR was consistent with OPCS guidelines and used the available
       data to justify most of the assigned ratings. The ICR candidly reported on most shortcomings.
       However, there is a slight discrepancy between the total costs at approval in the datasheet and Annex
       3. The ICR lacked an explicit statement on compliance with the Bank's safeguard policies.

 Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. The ICR reported relevant lessons that were based on the
project experience. Most sections were concise and reflected relevant information. Also, in Annex 1 it was not
clear whether the targets for listed outputs were achieved or not. Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated
Substantial with moderate shortcomings.




                                                                                                    Page 24 of 25
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Liberia Forest Sector Project (P154114)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                         Page 25 of 25
