     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sri Lanka Financial Sector Modernization (P159303)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023943

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P159303                                     Sri Lanka Financial Sector Modernization

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Sri Lanka                                   Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-60060                                   31-Dec-2022                                           8,953,590.15

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 05-Apr-2017                                 30-Jun-2023

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             75,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              75,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                           8,955,424.48                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Antonio M. Ollero           Avjeet Singh                  Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (page 5), the project development objective of the Sri Lanka Financial
   Sector Modernization Project was to contribute to increasing financial market efficiency and use of financial
   services among micro, small and medium enterprises and individuals.

   This ICR Review assesses the development objectives as:



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sri Lanka Financial Sector Modernization (P159303)



   1. To increase financial market efficiency.
   2. To increase the use of financial services among micro, small, and medium enterprises and individuals.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had three components.

   Supporting Selected Mid-Level Reforms through Results-Based Financing (US$15.5 million estimated
   at appraisal, US$7.7 million disbursed by closing) adopted a results based approach to achieving a set of
   policy reforms in banking, the equity market, the bond market, insurance, and pensions. Disbursements for
   an Eligible Expenditure Program (of budgetary expenditures) would be made against the achievement of
   the targets for five disbursement linked results / disbursement linked indicators: (a) Disbursement Linked
   Indicator 1 (DLI1) – the adoption of a consolidated risk-based approach to supervision of
   financial institutions; (b) DLI2 – the establishment of the Financial Consumer Protection Authority, across
   all financial services, as an independent authority or as an authority under Central Bank of Sri Lanka;.(c)
   DLI3 – the adoption of a diversified investment strategy and the establishment of an information system for
   the management of Employees Provident Fund assets (investments) and liabilities (collections); (d) DLI4 –
    the establishment of the Delivery versus Payment mode of settlement for corporate securities; and (e) DLI5
   – the restructuring of the National Insurance Trust Fund by separating the insurer's underwriting and
   reinsurance businesses.

   Strengthening the Regulators’ Institutional Capacity, Upgrading the Legal and Regulatory
   Framework, and Modernizing the Financial Market Infrastructure (US$59 million estimated at appraisal,
   US$1 million disbursed by closing) was structured as a standard investment project financing (for the
   provision of goods, non-consulting services, consulting services, incremental operating costs, and training
   and workshops) to support: (a) strengthening the supervisory and regulatory capacity of the Central Bank by
   supporting its core functions and developing the financial market infrastructure for fund settlements and
   securities settlements; (b) strengthening the supervisory and regulatory capacity of the Securities and
   Exchange Commission of Sri Lanka by implementing regulatory, infrastructure, and capacity measures; and
   (c) strengthening the supervisory and regulatory capacity of the Insurance Regulatory Commission of Sri
   Lanka, formerly the Insurance Board of Sri Lanka, by enhancing the regulatory and supervisory framework
   and the related information technology infrastructure.

   Project Implementation and Monitoring (US$812,500 estimated at appraisal, US$50,000 disbursed by
   closing) supported the Project Steering Committee and Central Project Coordination Unit to manage and
   coordinate technical operations, financial management, procurement, social and environmental issues,
   and monitoring and evaluation.


                                                                                                 Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Sri Lanka Financial Sector Modernization (P159303)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The project was estimated to cost SDR 55.4 million (US$75 million equivalent) at appraisal.

  Financing. The project was financed by an IDA credit of SDR 55.4 million (US$75 million equivalent) to the
  Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. The amount of US$15 million was earmarked to be disbursed
  upon the fulfillment of five Disbursement Linked Results (consisting of 13 sub-results) (see Section
  2.D). Only US$8.96 million (12 percent) of the total IDA credit was disbursed by closing, including
  US$7.7 million for the full achievement of two and the partial achievement of another two of the five
  Disbursement Linked Results. A front-end fee of US$19,000 (one quarter of one percent of the credit
  amount) was fully paid.

  Borrower Contribution. There was no borrower financial contribution to the project.

  Dates. The project was approved on April 5, 2017, became effective after 10 months on February 22,
  2018, and closed on June 30, 2023, six months after the original closing date of December 31, 2022

  Restructuring. The project was restructured twice (both were Level II restructurings).

        The first restructuring on February 15, 2020 (after the mid-term review on September 16, 2019), with
         US$6.7 million disbursed (8.9 percent of the original project cost): (a) dropped the fourth outcome
         (PDO-level) indicator associated with the objective to increase financial market efficiency –
          “increased financial soundness of micro-finance institutions” – because the responsibility for
         supervising the microfinance sector was taken away from the Central Bank in anticipation of a
         repeal of the Microfinance Act (Act 6 of 2016); and (b) made "minor revisions" to the wording of two
         Performance Based Conditions (2.1 and 3.1).
        The second restructuring on December 14, 2022 (after a Government request to cancel US$58.8
         million of the project funds on February 17, 2022, a Government request to revoke the cancellation
         due to the macroeconomic crisis and following portfolio reviews in April and May 2022, and a new
         Government request to repurpose the project funds instead on December 5, 2022): (a) extended the
         project closing date by six months to June 30, 2023 to complete project activities that were delayed
         because of the COVID-19 pandemic and the ensuing economic crisis, and to prepare a new project
         component establishing of a Trade Financing Guarantee Scheme with joint Bank and International
         Finance Corporation (IFC) support: and (b) planned to extend the project by another 18 months
         conditional on the Trade Financing Guarantee Scheme being fully prepared (as a new project
         component) and operationalized. But, with the planned Trade Financing Guarantee Scheme neither
         prepared nor operationalized by June 30, 2023, this additional component (which would have been
         covered by a third restructuring) never materialized.

  Although the fourth outcome indicator was dropped, the change does not warrant a split evaluation as it did
  not lower the project's scope or ambition. There was a strong case for dropping the indicator (because the
  responsibility for supervising the microfinance sector was taken away from the Central Bank in anticipation
  of a repeal of the Microfinance Act) and the change did not alter the project objective.




                                                                                                 Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sri Lanka Financial Sector Modernization (P159303)



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Sri Lanka, which had grown a robust 6 percent annually in 2011-2015 (versus 4.9 percent for all lower-
middle-income countries), needed to build a competitive, diversified, and well-regulated financial system if it
were to more effectively and efficiently mobilize financial resources to fund investment by the private sector
and sustain its economic growth path into the medium term. Banks dominated the financial sector (two-
thirds of sector assets) but focused mainly on large firms and failed to service small and medium
enterprises. The equity and corporate debt markets remained underdeveloped, with stock market
capitalization at 24 percent of GDP in 2015 (versus 51 percent for all lower-middle-income countries) and
with the corporate bond market thin on issuers, instruments, and investors. Overall, domestic credit to the
private sector stood at a comparatively low 39 percent of GDP in 2015 (versus 43 percent for all lower-
middle-income countries and 46 percent for South Asia).

This operation supported three approaches to modernizing the financial sector – (a) upgrading the legal and
regulatory framework for the financial system and strengthening the institutional capacity of the financial
system supervisors; (b) modernizing the financial market infrastructure for fund settlement and securities
settlement; and (c) liberalizing financial markets. These strategies were directed at the objectives
to increase financial market efficiency and to improve financial inclusion among micro, small, and medium
enterprises and individuals.

Binding Constraints to Development. The project objectives were relevant to addressing several of the
binding constraints to the development of the financial sector.

      The Sri Lanka Systematic Country Diagnostic - Ending Poverty and Promoting Shared Prosperity
       (2015) identified several weaknesses in financial intermediation: (a) there were deficiencies in the
       legal framework governing lending activities, including an outdated Secured Transactions Law; (b)
       the credit infrastructure was deficient, lacking a movable collateral registry and sufficient credit
       information; (c) the banking sector was uncompetitive and dominated by state ownership, while the
       non-banking sector was under-developed; (d) commercial banks lacked the ability and the incentive
       to serve new markets segments, particularly small and medium enterprises (SME); (e) SMEs
       continued to cite poor access to finance as a binding constraint to doing business. This Bank
       operation focused on a select set of constraints and their associated reforms (see Section 2.D),
       while the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the Asian Development Bank (ADB), and the
       Government would tackle the other issues.
      The Financial Sector Assessment Program - Development Module (2015) recommended reforms at
       three levels: (a) at high-level policy – strengthen state-owned financial institutions governance,
       integrate the supervisory structure and improve supervisory governance, and rationalize and
       consolidate state financial support programs (credit lines and partial credit guarantee schemes); (b)
       at mid-level policy – establish an institutional and legal framework for financial consumer protection,
       improve the investment management of pension provident funds, and remove the monopoly of
       state-owned insurance companies (the Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation and the National Insurance
       Trust Fund) in the insurance business with the Government; and (c) at the technical level – upgrade
       the legal and regulatory framework, introduce risk-based and consolidated supervision, increase the
       supervisory capacity to assess and monitor risks, enforce regulations across all financial subsectors,



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Sri Lanka Financial Sector Modernization (P159303)



                                        and improve the financial market infrastructure. The first component of this Bank operation
                                        supported mid-level policy reforms, while the second component supported technical-level reforms.

               Bank Group Country Strategy. The project objectives were aligned with the Bank Group country strategy
               in Sri Lanka, both at appraisal and at closing.

                                       The Country Partnership Framework for the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka for the
                                        Period FY17-FY20 (2016) (CPF 2016) committed Bank Group support to the country's development
                                        priorities, organized around three pillars - Improving macro-fiscal stability and
                                        competitiveness; Promoting inclusion and opportunities for all; and Seizing green growth
                                        opportunities, improving environmental management, and enhancing adaptation and mitigation
                                        potential. The project objectives were aligned with the first pillar, specifically with CPF Objective 1.4
                                        to "Enhance financial inclusion and financial sector efficiency."
                                       The Country Partnership Framework for the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka for the
                                        Period FY2024-FY2027 committed Bank Group support to the country's development priorities,
                                        organized around two high-level outcomes: Economic stabilization and private sector job creation
                                        and Protected and enhanced human and natural capital. The project objectives were aligned with
                                        the first high-level outcome, specifically with CPF Objective 3 to "Strengthen the investment climate
                                        and increase the resilience and efficiency of the financial sector."

               The project had a strong rationale and was well aligned with the country's and the Bank's
               priorities. However, the COVID-19 pandemic and the macroeconomic crisis reoriented the Government's
               efforts toward crisis management response rather than the development priorities supported by the project
               during implementation. Overall, the relevance of objectives is rated as substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase financial market efficiency.


                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. This project supported three strategies to improve financial market efficiency (as well as
                             to improve financial market inclusion). The first – upgrading the legal and regulatory framework for the
                             financial system and strengthening the institutional capacity of the financial system supervisors – involved the
                             adoption of a consolidated and risk-based approach to the supervision of all financial institutions, with the
                             Central Bank as the lead consolidated supervisor; the alignment of the legal and regulatory frameworks for


                                                                                                                                       Page 5 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sri Lanka Financial Sector Modernization (P159303)



the banking, securities, and insurance industries with the international standards set by the Bank for
International Settlements (BIS), the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), and
the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS); institutional capacity building at the Central
Bank, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Insurance Regulatory Commission, as supervisors
of the banking, securities and insurance industries; and the creation of a Financial Consumer Protection
Authority/Department. The second – modernizing the financial market infrastructure for payments and
settlement – involved upgrading the Real Time Gross Settlement System (for fund settlement), upgrading the
Scripless Securities Settlement System and Central Depository System (for securities settlement and
custody), adopting the Delivery versus Payment method (for securities settlement), and establishing a Central
Counter Party System (for securities clearing and settlement). The third – liberalizing financial markets –
 involved introducing policy and operational innovations in government securities trading in the secondary
market, in pension investment at the Employees Provident Fund, and in the insurance underwriting and
reinsurance businesses at the National Insurance Trust Fund.

These project interventions would lead to two outcomes. The first of these outcomes – greater financial
market efficiency – would be evidenced, at the output level, by a functional consolidated risk based
supervision of the financial system; the observance of the relevant Basel Core Principles of Effective Banking
Supervision (2012), the IOSCO Objectives and Principles of Securities Regulation (2017), and the IAIS
Insurance Core Principles (2019); the adherence by the Real Time Gross Settlement System, the Scripless
Securities Settlement System, and Central Depository System of the CPSS-IOSCO Principles for Financial
Market Infrastructure (2012); an operational Delivery versus Payment and Central Counter Party System; a
revised investment strategy at the Employees Provident Fund; and a restructured National Insurance Trust
Fund. At the outcome level, greater financial market efficiency would mean increased transactions of retail
electronic payments on the modernized financial market infrastructure, increased trading of government
securities on the secondary market, and increased insurance market penetration.

The theory of change underlying the objective to increase financial market efficiency is logical. Most of the
output and outcome indicators are fully adequate to measure the impact of the project activities and to reflect
progress toward achieving the efficiency objective. However, including two output indicators, both macro-
financial variables – corporate debt and stock market capitalization, both in percent of GDP – raise attribution
issues. These indicators reflect capital market depth, but capital market development is generally driven by
economic growth, a stable macroeconomic environment, and a certain threshold level of development of the
financial sector, apart from robust legal and institutional development. Hence, the impact of the project
measures on these results, if they are achieved, should be partly discounted.

Outputs. The project achieved two and partially achieved one of the five disbursement-linked results to
increase financial market efficiency. It also achieved three and partially achieved three of the ten other
intermediate results to increase financial market efficiency.

of which, Disbursement Linked Results

      The consolidated risk-based approach to the supervision of financial institutions was adopted,
       achieving the target for DLI1: (a) the Financial Sector Oversight Committee agreed on the designation
       of the Central Bank as the lead consolidated supervisor, as evidenced by a Memorandum of
       Understanding among the Central Bank, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and Insurance
       Regulatory Commission signed in December 2018; (b) the Memorandum of Understanding was
       implemented, as confirmed by the Chairman of the Financial Sector Oversight Committee; and (c)


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sri Lanka Financial Sector Modernization (P159303)



        based on the Memorandum of Understanding, the Central Bank produced three consolidated
        supervision reports, as confirmed by the Chairman of the Financial Sector Oversight Committee.
       The establishment of the Financial Consumer Protection Authority, across all financial services, as an
        independent authority or as an authority under Central Bank was partly completed, only partially
        achieving the target for DLI2: (a) the Monetary Board of the Central Bank issued a decision to
        establish a department for consumer financial protection within the central bank – the Financial
        Consumer Relations Department; (b) however, the Financial Sector Oversight Committee and Ministry
        of National Policies and Economic Affairs had yet to agree, through a Memorandum of Understanding,
        that the Central Bank would take the lead on financial consumer protection across all sector and
        would initiate efforts to set up a joint grievance address mechanism and joint ombudsman. As it stood
        at closing, the new Financial Consumer Relations Department could only govern consumer financial
        protection matters pertaining to banks and finance companies directly supervised by the Central
        Bank. It lacked jurisdiction over financial consumer protection issues in the insurance industry or the
        capital markets.
       The information system for managing Employee Provident Fund assets (investments) and liabilities
        (collections) was not established, and a diversified investment strategy for the Fund was not adopted,
        failing to achieve the target for DLI3.
       The Delivery versus Payment method of settlement for corporate securities – in which a cash payment
        must be made before, or simultaneous with, the delivery of a security – was established at the
        Colombo Stock Exchange in August 2021, achieving the target for DLI4: (a) the Securities and
        Exchange Commission and the Colombo Stock Exchange adopted rules and regulations to enable the
        settlement of corporate securities on a Delivery versus Payment basis; (b) the Colombo Stock
        Exchange completed a Business Continuity Planning Test of the Delivery versus Payment
        arrangement; and (c) the Securities and Exchange Commission conducted onsite
        and offsite inspections and audits to ensure that the Delivery versus Payment was
        operational. Adopting the Delivery versus Payment is a preparatory step to the rollout of the Central
        Counter Party System for securities clearing and settlement, which is expected in the second quarter
        of 2024, according to the ICR.
       The restructuring of the state-owned National Insurance Trust Fund, the country's only reinsurer, by
        separating the firm's underwriting and reinsurance businesses was only partly completed, only
        partially achieving the target for DLI5: (a) the National Insurance Trust Fund Board issued a
        decision separating the Fund's underwriting and reinsurance businesses; (b) however, the Insurance
        Regulatory Commission had yet to issue no-objection ruling on the decision; and (c) the Ministry of
        National Policies and Economic Affairs had yet to submit a Cabinet memorandum requesting the
        approval of the proposed restructuring.

of which, Other Intermediate Results

     The Central Bank had undertaken consolidated risk-based supervision of banks on both a solo and
      group-wide basis and had performed risk assessments on a stand-alone and consolidated basis
      following the Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision (2012) of the Basel Committee on
      Banking Supervision of the BIS. The Bank Supervision Department of the Central Bank completed
      two risk-based examinations in 2022 and one risk-based examinations in 2023 (with two additional
      ones in the pipeline), exceeding the target to complete two such reports.
     The Securities and Exchange Commission's regulatory framework and supervisory practices showed
      "greater observance" of the IOSCO Objectives and Principles of Securities Regulation (2017) by
      closing. Parliament enacted the Securities and Exchange Commission of Sri Lanka Act (Act 19

                                                                                                 Page 7 of 20
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Sri Lanka Financial Sector Modernization (P159303)



     of 2021), in September 2021, incorporating most of the principles prescribed by IOSCO, partially
     achieving the target that the Securities and Exchange Commission observe at least 28 of the 38
     IOSCO principles. In the baseline, only three of the 38 IOSCO principles were fully implemented, 13
     were broadly implemented, and 17 were partially implemented, while six were not implemented and
     one was not applicable. A formal assessment is required to confirm the achievement of the target,
     hence only a partial achievement can be credited with the passage of the Securities and Exchange
     Commission of Sri Lanka Act and the set of implementing regulations covering rules on market
     intermediaries and collective investment schemes, among others.
    The Insurance Regulatory Commission's regulatory framework and supervisory practices did not
     demonstrate a "significantly high level of observance" of the IAIS Insurance Core Principles and
     Common Framework for the Supervision of Internationally Active Insurance Groups (2019) by closing,
     failing to achieve the target. The proposed Insurance Industry Act, which would have provided the
     legal framework for the observance of the IAIS principles, was not enacted. In the baseline, six of the
     26 IAIS principles were largely observed, and three were partially observed. The target was to have
     at least 12 of the IAIS and six partially observed. Meanwhile, actuarial consultants have been
     assisting in improving regulatory practices at the agency, preparing guidelines for the review of
     insurance products, according to the ICR.
    The regulatory and supervisory framework for financial consumer protection, which did not exist in the
     baseline, was established but was yet to be operational by closing, only partially achieving the target
     for an established and operational framework. The Monetary Board of the Central Bank approved the
     Financial Consumer Protection Regulations on July 18, 2023, and the Financial Consumer Relations
     Department published the regulations in the Government Gazette on August 9, 2023. The regulations
     were expected to be in use post-closing.
     The new Real Time Gross Settlement System – the system for the real-time settlement of payments,
     transfer instructions, or other obligations individually on a transaction-by-transaction basis – and the
     Scripless Securities Settlement System and the Central Securities Depository System went live in
     March 2024, achieving the target that the systems be operational. This project aimed to upgrade the
     Real Time Gross Settlement System, originally established in 2003, by providing it with multi-currency
     settlement and convertibility features and by adopting ISO 20022, the emerging global standard
     prescribed by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) for electronic data interchange
     among financial institutions. Consulting services obtained under the project delivered the diagnostics
     for the upgrade. The Central Bank subsequently completed the upgrade using its own funds to
     procure the financial technology solution from Montran Corporation (of the United
     States). The Scripless Securities Settlement System and the Central Securities Depository System
     were modified for compatibility with the new Real Time Gross Settlement System. Some 32 financial
     institutions are expected to use the new system.
    The Real Time Gross Settlement System observed or broadly observed all 17 principles applicable to
     real-time gross settlement systems in the Principles of Financial Market Infrastructures (2012) of
     the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and the Technical Committee of the International
     Organization of Securities Commissions, achieving the target. Separately, the Scripless Securities
     Settlement System and the Central Securities Depository observed or broadly observed all 18
     principles applicable to securities settlement systems and central securities depositories in
     the Principles of Financial Market Infrastructures, achieving the target. The determinations were
     made in self-assessments completed by the Central Bank. The assessments were reviewed by the
     World Bank, according to the ICR.
    The target to establish a Central Counter Party System for the securities market – an entity that
     interposes itself between counterparties to contracts that are traded in one or more financial markets,

                                                                                               Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sri Lanka Financial Sector Modernization (P159303)



       becoming the buyer to every seller and the seller to every buyer – was only partially achieved: (a) the
       policy framework for the Central Counter Party System was approved; (b) the Colombo Stock
       Exchange was in the process of acquiring the required information technology (IT) infrastructure; and
       (c) the system was expected to become operational by the second quarter of 2024. The target was to
       have the Central Counter Party System operational by closing.
       Outstanding corporate debt dropped from 1 percent of GDP in the baseline to 0.93 percent of GDP at
       closing, failing to achieve the target increase to 15 percent of GDP. This indicator was meant to
       measure the depth of the capital market.
      Year-end stock market capitalization dropped from 27 percent of GDP in the baseline to 18.8 percent
       of GDP by closing, failing to achieve the target increase to 50 percent of GDP. This indicator was also
       meant to measure the depth of the capital market.
      The share of government securities in the investment portfolio of the Employees Provident Fund – the
       country's largest social security system, a defined contribution scheme – was largely unchanged from
       an estimated 90-95 percent in the baseline to 93.9 percent at closing, failing to achieve the target
       reduction to less than 89 percent. A new investment strategy allowing for more diversified
       investments at the Employees Provident Fund was not developed, retaining the old strategy -
       investment in foreign instruments was not allowed, limiting the holdings to domestic issues, which,
       however, were limited given the small size of the market and recent downgrades of listed companies.

Outcomes. The project achieved one of three outcome targets defined for the objective to increase financial
market efficiency – the trading of central government bonds in the secondary market increased.

      Retail electronic payment transactions on the modernized infrastructure (measured by ratio of the
       number of cards issued under the National Card Scheme to total debit cards in the system)
       dropped from 1 percent in the baseline to 0.63 percent by closing, failing to achieve the target
       increase to 15 percent. According to the ICR, the demand for national cards was low because of
       strong competition from international cards and the lack of incentives to use domestic cards.
      The participation (i.e., trading) of central government bonds in the secondary market (measured by
       secondary market trades in value terms) increased by 396 percent from Sri Lankan rupee (LKR) 6,591
       billion in the baseline to LKR 26,080 billion by closing exceeding the target increase of 5 percent.
      The share of newly issued insurance policies by private insurance companies (measured by insurance
       premiums to GDP) increased slightly from 1.05 percent in the baseline to 1.10 percent by closing,
       failing to achieve the target increase of 3 percent. This indicator measures insurance penetration (i.e.,
       the level of development of the insurance sector in a country). According to the ICR, the COVID-19
       pandemic and the ensuing economic crisis adversely affected the results.

Summary. The project had a mixed record of achievements with reforms to increase financial market
efficiency. Key regulatory and supervisory reforms were completed – the Central Bank, in coordination with
other regulators, adopted a consolidated risk based supervision of all financial sectors; Parliament enacted
the Security and Exchange Commission Act and the Securities and Exchange Commission issued secondary
regulations to regulate securities intermediaries and issuances better; and the Central Bank created the
Financial Consumer Relations Department for financial consumer protection. However, the proposed
Insurance Industry Act was not passed, which would have helped align supervisory practices by the
Insurance Regulatory Commission to international standards. Major financial market infrastructures for
securities settlement, clearing, and custody were upgraded – the Real Time Gross Settlement System, the
Scripless Securities Settlement System, and the Central Securities Depository observed the Principles of
Financial Market Infrastructures; the Delivery versus Payment method of settlement was adopted for

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sri Lanka Financial Sector Modernization (P159303)



corporate securities, and the policy framework for the Central Counter Party System was
approved. However, the IT hardware and software to support the infrastructure innovations were not
procured, and that which was – the IT for the Real Time Gross Settlement System – was obtained with the
Central Bank's own funds and not the project funds. An important market was liberalized -– secondary
market trading of central government securities accelerated. But there was no progress in other markets –
 the Employees Provident Fund failed to adopt a diversified investment strategy and the National Insurance
Trust Fund was not restructured and insurance penetration stalled. The degree of achievement of the
objective to increase financial market efficiency is rated modest



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase the use of financial services among micro, small, and medium enterprises and individuals.

Rationale
Theory of Change. In addition to increasing market efficiency, regulatory and supervisory
reforms, infrastructure modernization, and financial liberalization would also improve inclusion – i.e., increase
the use of financial services among micro, small, and medium enterprises and individuals -–according to the
theory of change for this objective. Improved access to finance would be measured by increased lending by
banks to MSMEs.

In summary, strengthening regulation and supervision of banks and nonbank financial institutions would boost
access to finance by MSMEs (i.e., countries with less efficient regulatory structures had lower levels of SME
financing). In particular, effective financial consumer protection would bolster consumer confidence in the
financial system and foster financial inclusion. It would also increase transparency in the market,
spur competition among financial firms, and generate innovation beneficial to consumers. Meanwhile, the
modernization of the financial market infrastructure would reduce transactions costs, lower information
asymmetries, and enhance distribution mechanisms. And market liberalization would stimulate competition
among financial firms, enlarging access to finance by consumers.

Although this theory of change is logical in its broadest sense, there is a question whether the types of
regulatory, infrastructure, and liberalization reforms supported by this operation would have been relevant and
sufficient by themselves to encourage lending to MSMEs by banks which had historically focused almost
exclusively on large firms. This project lacked any of the interventions regularly used by the Bank to foster
lending to MSMEs – SME lines of credit, partial credit guarantee schemes, and early stage innovation
finance, or even leasing, and women enterprise development. Among the regulatory and supervisory
reforms, the establishment of a financial consumer protection framework would have been most relevant to
facilitating SME finance, but its exact impact on MSME lending would be uncertain without more direct
measures. The market infrastructure development activities focused on securities clearing, settlement, and
custody and did not cover credit reporting systems, or collateral registries, or insolvency regimes, which
would have been relevant to SME finance. And, market liberalization pertained to government securities
trading, pension investments, and insurance underwriting and reinsurance.


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sri Lanka Financial Sector Modernization (P159303)



Moreover, there were some deficiencies with the results framework for this objective. There was no output
indicator to measure access to finance by individuals. The lack of baseline data on lending to MSMEs owned
or managed by women precluded specifying a target for this output indicator. And, there was no outcome
indicator for this objective.

Outputs. The project achieved one of the four intermediate results defined for the objective to increase the
use of financial services among micro, small, and medium enterprises and individuals.

of which, Disbursement Linked Results

      The results are the same as in Objective 1.

of which, Other Intermediate Results

      Data on outstanding MSME loans from commercial banks, which had not been published by any local
       commercial bank in the baseline, was provided by 21 of 24 local commercial banks by closing,
       partially achieving the target for the publication of the data. The value of total loans granted by
       commercial and development banks rose by 179 percent from an estimated LKR 685 million in the
       baseline to LKR 1,227.3 billion by closing, exceeding the target increase of 30 percent.
      Data on outstanding MSME loans from commercial banks to female borrowers, which had not been
       published by any local commercial bank in the baseline, was published by 21 of 24 local commercial
       banks by closing, partially achieving the target for the publication of the data. The share of the value
       of loans granted by commercial and development banks to female borrowers was 4 percent of the
       value of total loans granted by the commercial and development banks to all borrowers by closing
       (LKR 49.5 billion of LKR 1,227.3 billion). However, there was neither a baseline value nor a target set
       for this indicator.
      Data on outstanding microenterprise loans from licensed microfinance institutions, which had not been
       published in the baseline, was not available or published either at closing, failing to achieve the target
       for the publication of the data. No microfinance institution had yet been licensed at closing.

Outcomes. There were no outcomes defined, either in the Project Appraisal Document or in the ICR, for the
objective to increase the use of financial services among micro, small, and medium enterprises and
individuals - all expected results were defined only at the output level.

Summary. In the context of an incomplete results framework – where the causation from regulatory reform,
infrastructure modernization, and market liberalization to financial inclusion for MSMEs is complicated by the
type of regulatory, infrastructure, and liberalization measures supported by this project – the impact of
this project on MSME financing is unclear. The degree of achievement of the objective to increase the use of
financial services among micro, small, and medium enterprises and individuals is rated negligible.




Rating
Negligible



                                                                                                  Page 11 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Sri Lanka Financial Sector Modernization (P159303)




OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The degree of achievement of the objective to increase financial market efficiency is rated weak modest. The
                            degree of achievement of the objective to increase the use of financial services among micro, small, and
                            medium enterprises and individuals is rated negligible. The overall efficacy is rated negligible.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                               Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency. At appraisal, the PAD estimated the project contribution to aggregate income in 2020 to
   be US$171.2 million, the Net Present Value (NPV), US$59 million, and the economic rate of return (ERR), 12
   percent. The underlying analytical framework posited that the improvement of the regulatory and supervisory
   framework for the financial system, the modernization of the financial market infrastructure, and the liberalization
   of financial markets would raise financial market efficiency and financial inclusion through both direct effects –
    reduced transaction costs, lower information asymmetries, and enhanced distribution mechanisms – and
   indirect effects – increased competition among financial firms and useful financial innovation. Specifically, the
   analysis assumed that improved financial system regulation and supervision, a modernized financial market
   infrastructure, and liberalized financial markets would raise aggregate income by: (a) 16 percent, through
   efficiency gains – based on IFC and World Bank (2011), Barth et al. (2013), and Demirgüç-Kunt, Laeven, and
   Levine (2004); (b) 9 percent, through greater firm access to finance – based on Beck, Demirguç-Kunt, and
   Maksimovic (2004), Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Martinez Peria (2006), and Sahay et al. (2015); and (c) 9
   percent, through greater household access to finance.

   At closing, the ICR re-estimated the one-year NPV to be negative US$9.2 million (there was no equivalent ERR
   for the negative NPV), using the same methodology adopted at appraisal. The analysis lowered the project
   cost, recognizing that only 12 percent of the project funds were disbursed, and downgraded the assumed
   benefits – improved financial system regulation and supervision, a modernized financial market infrastructure,
   and liberalized financial markets would raise aggregate income by only: (a) 3.4 percent, through efficiency gains
   (versus the original 16 percent, at appraisal); (b) 1.1 percent, through greater firm access to finance (versus 9
   percent); and (c) 1.1 percent, through greater household access to finance (versus 9 percent). The ICR added
   that the ERR could be 6 percent, assuming two years of benefits, and 12.6 percent assuming five years of
   benefits.

   Operational Efficiency. A succession of security, political, and economic shocks – the constitutional and
   political crisis of 2018, the Easter Day bombings of 2019, the COVID-19 pandemic of 2020-23, and the
   sovereign debt default of 2022 – derailed the implementation of the project activities and the achievement of the
   project objectives (see Section 4). The COVID-19 pandemic was particularly disruptive: (a) travel restrictions
   prevented consultants from delivering services contracted for under the second project component; (b)
   delays with service delivery resulted in low disbursements; and (c) Bank supervision missions conducted
   virtually were not as efficient as face-to-face meetings, according to the ICR. The successive crises
   exacerbated the already weak institutional capacity of the implementing agencies. An early plan to cancel

                                                                                                                          Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Sri Lanka Financial Sector Modernization (P159303)



US$58.8 million of the IDA credit was shelved in an attempt to create a new project component – which would
have been relevant to addressing the credit crunch caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and economic crisis –
 but even that design work could not be completed. Only 12 percent of the project funds were disbursed, and
the project took half a year longer to close than initially planned.

Overall Efficiency. As there was not an equivalent measure of the one-year ERR at closing, and with only 12
percent of the project funds disbursed and the closing delayed by half a year, the overall efficiency of the
project is rated negligible.


Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      100.00
 Appraisal                                                  12.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives is rated substantial. The overall efficacy is rated negligible. The efficiency is rated
negligible. The outcome of the project is rated highly unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Sustainability Risk. The risks to the sustainability of the legal, regulatory, and institutional development
outcomes achieved by the Central Bank, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Insurance
Regulatory Commission are likely moderate. However, the risks to the sustainability of the innovations to the
financial market infrastructure will likely be substantial if the associated IT systems cannot be
procured, installed, and operationalized in the near term.

      Parliament enacted the Central Bank Act of Sri Lanka in September 2023, amending the Monetary
       Law Act of 1949, and strengthening the country's monetary and financial system by granting the

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Sri Lanka Financial Sector Modernization (P159303)



       central bank greater independence. Under the new law: the Treasury Secretary ceases to be a
       member of the Monetary Board; the central bank's mandate is clarified, with price stability as the core
       objective and financial system stability as a secondary objective; the central bank can no
       longer purchase government securities from the primary market (effectively preventing the monetary
       financing of the budget); and the central bank cannot grant credit to the government (apart from state-
       owned financial institutions) to ensure the stability of the overall financial system.
      Parliament enacted the Banking (Special Provisions) Act in September 2023 (Act No. 17 of 2023)
       further strengthening the financial system by vesting the Central Bank with the authority to resolve a
       licensed bank, revive such a bank as a going concern, and provide a deposit insurance scheme and
       winding up process for licensed banks.
      The Securities and Exchange Commission will continue with the implementation of the Central
       Country Party System for securities, for which the policy framework was drafted under this
       project. Meanwhile, the Employees Provident Fund plans to proceed with upgrades to its information
       system in line with the Comprehensive Design Document prepared under this project. In both cases,
       the main risks stem from the lack of financing (the agency's own funds or donor funds) for the
       procurement of large and complex IT systems.

Risk Mitigation. The sustainability risks are likely to be partly mitigated by new operations to continue with
the modernization of the financial sector in Sri Lanka.

      The Bank approved a US$150 million loan for the Financial Sector Safety Net Strengthening Project
       in November 2023 to strengthen the financial and institutional capacity of the financial sector safety
       net, focused on the deposit insurance scheme. The project will finance the reserves of the Sri Lanka
       Deposit Insurance Scheme of the Central Bank conditional on the achievement of a set of
       performance-based conditions, including an improved institutional arrangement for deposit insurance
       and bank resolution and a stronger funding structure for the Sri Lanka Deposit Insurance Scheme.
      The IMF approved a new four-year US$3 billion arrangement under the Extended Fund Facility in
       March 2023 to help Sri Lanka restore debt sustainability, raise revenue, rebuild reserves buffers,
       reduce inflation, and safeguard financial stability. To safeguard financial stability, Sri Lanka will act to
       maintain a sound and adequately capitalized banking system, implement a bank recapitalization plan,
       and strengthen the financial supervision and crisis management framework.
      ADB approved the first US$200 million of a US$400 million two-operation policy-based programmatic
       loan for the Sri Lanka Financial Sector Stability and Reform Program in December 2023. The first
       subprogram supports reforms to strengthen the stability and governance of the banking sector,
       strengthen the asset quality of banks, and deepen sustainable and inclusive finance.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The policy reforms and the project activities supported by this project were informed by analytic work
  produced by the Bank and other development partners pertaining to the modernization of the financial
  sector in Sri Lanka. In addition, other works supported these reforms, singularly or in conjunction with



                                                                                                       Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sri Lanka Financial Sector Modernization (P159303)



  related measures and other reform initiatives. The Bank coordinated the reform program supported by
  this operation with other development partners, including the IMF and the ADB.

  The project design suffered several major shortcomings at entry. While Sri Lanka's financial sector policy
  reform agenda was well informed by extensive and in-depth analytical work from multiple development
  partners dating back at least a decade before this operation, the choice of which reforms to prioritize and
  support with the first project component could have benefitted from more extensive consultations with
  stakeholders, according to the ICR. The purpose would have been to ensure that all levels of the
  stakeholder organization well understood the reforms. This operation did not achieve the targets for
  reforms at the Employees Provident Fund and the National Insurance Trust Fund. For the objective
  to increase the use of financial services among micro, small, and medium enterprises and individuals, the
  link between reforms and financial inclusion for MSMEs would have been more evident and stronger if
  the project supported regulatory, infrastructure, and liberalization measures that pertained to SME
  finance directly. A large portion of the funding for the second project component (about US$26 million of
  the US$59 million estimated at appraisal) remained unallocated at project approval, as at
  appraisal. Eventually, during implementation, there was little demand for project funds to finance
  expenditures – goods, non-consulting services, consulting services, incremental operating costs, and
  training and workshops – for activities that were within the scope of the project. The project duration (five
  years and nine months) was short for the complex set of activities planned for the project. There were
  shortcomings with the results framework and M&E design at appraisal (see Section 9.A).

  The project design also either misjudged the severity of operational risks or failed to provide adequate
  mitigation measures. Technical design risk was rated as moderate, but the project was complex,
  involving policy reforms in five financial sectors (banking, the equity market, the bond market, insurance,
  and pensions), institutional building among three regulators, policy and operational reform at
  four financial institutions, the upgrading of four financial market infrastructures, the enactment of three
  pieces of legislation, and the upgrading of supervision to the standards of three international agencies
  (the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, IOSCO, and IAIS). Institutional capacity risk was rated
  substantial but lacked appropriate risk mitigation measures: (a) the proposal to form dedicated project
  implementation teams in each of the agencies, supported by consultants, was not heeded, and (b)
  support for procurement, financial management, and M&E was delivered ad-hoc rather than as an
  organized technical assistance component of the project.

  Overall, the Quality at Entry is rated as Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank supervised the implementation of the project regularly, fielding bi-annual supervision missions,
 and filing 11 Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) or two reports a year (the average for
 investment project financing operations). The supervision missions were conducted virtually during the
 COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, on-demand meetings were organized in response to requests to clarify
 technical and procurement issues. As with the supervision missions, these meetings were conducted


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sri Lanka Financial Sector Modernization (P159303)



 virtually during the pandemic. The supervision missions included on-demand training for procurement and
 financial management.

 However, the ISRs could have been more candid and rated the Development Objective to be moderately
 unsatisfactory earlier than January 2021 (at the 8th ISR), when it was evident that the project had run into
 serious implementation problems (by the time of the mid-term review in September 2019). Supervision was
 affected by changes in the Bank's organization. There were three Task Team Leaders during appraisal
 and implementation, and the transition was not always smooth, according to the ICR.

 The Bank was not sufficiently proactive in restructuring the project. The Bank could have revised the policy
 reform agenda under the first project component and could have also reallocated the funds under the
 second project component at the time of the first restructuring in February 2020, according to the ICR,
 since the project had already run into serious implementation problems by the mid-term review in
 September 2019. The Bank could have considered a simpler instrument, such as a financial
 intermediary line of credit for MSMEs, rather than the proposed Trade Financing Guarantee Scheme, to
 repurpose the project funds at the time of the second restructuring in December 2022, also according to
 the ICR. A credit line would have helped support financial firms and business enterprises during the
 economic crisis triggered by the sovereign debt default in April 2022.

 Overall, the Quality of Supervision is rated as Unsatisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PAD originally defined five disbursement linked indicators, 14 other intermediate results indicators, and
 four outcome indicators to measure the achievement of the project objectives. The M&E plan called for the
 Central Project Coordinating Unit at the Ministry of Finance to monitor and evaluate the progress of the
 project and to prepare the Project Reports every semester for submission to the Bank (no later than a
 month after the end of the semester). Meanwhile, an independent third party would verify the achievement
 of the disbursement-linked results and submit the verification reports to the Bank.

 There were deficiencies with the M&E design.

       For the objective to increase financial market efficiency, higher corporate debt and higher stock
        market capitalization, as targeted, could not be expected to be driven by the regulatory,
        infrastructure, and liberalization measures under this project alone (see Section 4 - Objective 1).
       For the objective to increase the use of financial services among micro, small, and medium
        enterprises and individuals, there were no ready sources for MSME lending data at appraisal (the

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sri Lanka Financial Sector Modernization (P159303)



        Central Bank would not start collecting SME lending data until 2021 and gender-disaggregated
        SME lending data until 2023) (see Section 4 - Objective 2). Moreover, the collection and reporting
        of microfinance lending data became doubly difficult after the Central Bank was stripped of its
        supervision of microfinance institutions (see Section 2.E).
       There was no outcome indicator for the second objective to increase the use of financial services
        among micro, small, and medium enterprises and individuals (see Section 4 - Objective 2).



b. M&E Implementation
  Implementation of the M&E plan stalled.

        The Central Project Coordinating Unit at the Ministry of Finance either did not submit the required
         Project Reports to the Bank or sent them after some delay, in large part because it could not
         collect the requisite information from the implementing agencies. Instead, the Bank discussed the
         project's progress directly with the implementing agencies and recorded the M&E data in Bank
         Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) and Aide Memoires.
        Data collection on MSME lending started late, with no data collection system on microfinance in
         place (see Section 9.A).
        The first restructuring in February 2020 made only slight adjustments to the results framework and
         M&E indicators (see Section 2.E), when more significant changes were needed.
        After the first restructuring, the Ministry of Finance and the implementing agencies discussed
         further revisions to the results framework. The agencies agreed to: (a) drop non-attributable
         indicators; (b) revise the targets to reflect the reduced scope and scale of the project; and (c)
         revise the targets to consider the impact of adverse macroeconomic and financial market
         conditions on the achievement of the project objectives. However, the Ministry of Finance never
         filed a request to restructure the project along these lines, according to the ICR.



c. M&E Utilization
  The available M&E data, although reported in the ISRs, was not actively used in project decision-
  making, evidenced by the fact that the project was not proactively restructured (see Section 8.B).

  Given the severe shortcomings in M&E design, implementation and utilization, the M&E quality is rated
  as Negligible.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Negligible

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards. The project was classified as an Environmental Assessment Category C
   project at appraisal ("no environmental review is required") and did not trigger any Bank environmental

                                                                                                  Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sri Lanka Financial Sector Modernization (P159303)



   safeguards policy. There were no changes to the category or to the triggers during implementation through
   closing. The ICR only mentioned the possibility of electronic waste (e-waste) being generated with the IT
   hardware acquisition and upgrading under the second project component. To meet these concerns, the
   Project Operations Manual prescribed a set of e-waste management guidelines following country national
   regulations, which met Bank requirements.

   Social Safeguards. The project did not trigger any Bank social safeguards policy either, at appraisal or
   during implementation through closing.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. Financial management was rated moderately satisfactory to satisfactory during
   implementation, and satisfactory in the last ISR of January 2023. Cases of a moderately satisfactory rating
   were marked by: (a) occasional errors in the Interim Unaudited Financial Reports (early during project
   implementation); and (b) overdue audit reports from the Securities and Exchange Commission and
   the Insurance Regulatory Commission (in 2021). Persistent delays in project implementation resulted in
   few financial management activities during many periods. Otherwise, Interim Unaudited Financial Reports
   were submitted regularly and were generally of acceptable quality.

   Procurement. Procurement was rated moderately unsatisfactory, except toward closing, when the rating
   was upgraded to moderately satisfactory in the last ISR of January 2023. The capacity of the
   implementing agencies for procurement was generally weak, and while training was provided to the
   agency staff during supervision missions, intensive hands-on support remained necessary at all stages of
   the procurement process. Moreover, the record-keeping for procurement activities was not properly
   managed. Multiple procurement delays were due to (a) difficulties in preparing the Terms of Reference for
   procurement, especially the technical specifications for large IT systems procurement; (b) delays in setting
   up Tender Boards and Technical Evaluation Committees in the implementing agencies; (c) snags in
   finalizing the selection of bidders; (d) the slow contract approval process in the implementing agencies and
   at the Ministry of Finance; and (e) disruptions in the supply of, and abrupt price adjustments to, IT goods
   during the COVID-19 pandemic. Consequently, many large IT infrastructure procurement activities were
   not completed or were dropped altogether. The rating upgrade toward closing was prompted by: the
   cancellation of unwanted procurement packages; the updating of procurement information and documents
   in the Bank's Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement System; and the finding that the
   procurement that was completed followed Bank procurement guidelines.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings


                                                                                                  Page 18 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sri Lanka Financial Sector Modernization (P159303)



                                                                                      Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                       IEG
                                                                                      Disagreements/Comment
                                Highly
Outcome                                                   Highly Unsatisfactory
                                Unsatisfactory
Bank Performance                Unsatisfactory            Unsatisfactory
                                                                                      There were severe shortcomings
Quality of M&E                  Modest                    Negligible                  in M&E design, implementation
                                                                                      and utilization.
Quality of ICR                  ---                       Substantial


12. Lessons

Three lessons are drawn from the ICR, with some adaptation.

Selecting the appropriate financing instrument is critical to the success of a financial sector
development program. Many of the mid-level policy and even some technical-level reforms
recommended by the Financial Sector Assessment Program and advanced by this project could
have been better supported by a development policy operation, even a programmatic one. In this
operation, the alignment of regulation by the Securities and Exchange Commission to the IOSCO
Principles of Securities Regulation required the enactment of the Securities and Exchange
Act. Similarly, improvements in the regulatory framework for the insurance industry and the
supervisory practices of the Insurance Regulatory Commission were premised on the passage of the
proposed Insurance Industry Act. However, none of this legislation was required as performance-
based conditions or disbursement-linked results for this project. They could have been designed as
prior actions for a programmatic development policy operation, in which alignment with international
standards (through issuances of the implementing rules) and upgrades of the related financial
market infrastructures (through acquisition and operationalization of the related IT systems) could
have constituted second and third generation actions.

Extensive consultations with key stakeholders are necessary to ensure firm commitment to
and ownership of structural reforms by the Government and foster implementation readiness
among implementing agencies. This project did not achieve the reforms to diversify the
investment strategy of the Employees Provident Fund and to restructure the underwriting and
reinsurance businesses of the National Insurance Trust Fund. The Bank should have more firmly
secured the Government's commitment to these reforms at appraisal, including those of all
implementing agencies and coordinating bodies and at both the leadership and middle-management
levels. It is vital, according to the ICR, that a Government realizes that implementing agencies, and
not the Bank, are fully and ultimately responsible for project implementation.

A dedicated and systematic technical assistance component may be needed in projects
where implementing agencies have no experience with Bank processes and where
implementation capacity is weak. In this project, only the Central Bank had previous experience
implementing a Bank operation – the Sri Lanka Central Bank Strengthening Project – which was
implemented two decades ago – in 2001-2005. Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission
nor the Insurance Regulatory Commission were knowledgeable about Bank procurement, and yet
the project involved the major acquisition of IT goods and services for the upgrading of decades-old

                                                                                                        Page 19 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Sri Lanka Financial Sector Modernization (P159303)



financial market infrastructures. The Central Project Coordination Unit at the Ministry of Finance
was weak in project coordination, let alone monitoring and evaluation. A substantive technical
assistance component involving the systematic training of Government project staff in all relevant
facets of Bank operations and the fielding of external experts in all stages of project execution would
have served the operation better than ad hoc responses to emergency requests to untangle
procurement, financial management, and M&E process bottlenecks as they arose.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is consistent with OPCS guidelines. The efficacy assessment was outcome-oriented and based on
the degree of achievement of the results targets. The ICR is candid with its assessments of deficiencies with
project design, the M&E plan, Bank supervision, and M&E implementation. The ICR draws important lessons
that would be valuable to operations where technical and institutional capacity is weak and where project
design and operational risk mitigation measures could have been stronger.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 20 of 20
