     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Jeevika II (P159576)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023850

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P159576                                    Jeevika II

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                      Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-58670                                  31-Oct-2022                                         290,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Jun-2016                                30-Apr-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           290,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            290,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        290,000,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Shashidhara Laxman          Samjhana Thapa               Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Kolavalli




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective of the project is to diversify and enhance household level incomes and improve access to and
   use of nutrition and sanitation services among targeted households (Legal agreement, p. 6).

   For the purpose of analysis for this review, the PDO will be parsed into:

   Objective 1: to diversify and enhance household level incomes among targeted households.


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Jeevika II (P159576)



   Objective 2: to improve access to and use of nutrition and sanitation services among targeted households.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Community Institutional Development (Appraised: US$115 million; Actual
   US$151.2million)

   (a) Formation, development and strengthening of community based organizations (“CBOs”) such as Self-
   help Groups (SHGs), federation of SHGs Village Organizations (VOs) and Cluster-level Federations (CLFs)
   comprising mainly of women from poor rural HHs. These institutions would be supported to play the role of
   financial intermediaries and help in accessing services from the local and state-level government agencies.
   Trainings would be provided in developing micro investment plans (“MIPs”), and adoption of quality
   monitoring protocols, and building the capacity of CBOs to deliver productivity enhancement activities in the
   agricultural and livestock sectors; and (b) formation, development and strengthening of Producer
   Organizations (“POs”) in specific commodity clusters.

   Component 2: Community Investment Funds (“CIF”) (Appraised: US$200 million; Actual US$179
   million)

   Designing and establishing the CIF to provide financial and technical resources to CBOs on a demand
   driven basis including, (a) (i) SHG grants to Self Help Groups (“SHGs”) to catalyze investments; (ii) Grants
   to VOs and CLFs based on appraised MIPs; and (iii) technical assistance to support activities related to
   insurance and pensions; (b) Grants to CBOs and POs to implement Business plans and Value Chain
   Initiatives; and (c) provision of skills training to youth and development of entrepreneurial skills.

   Component 3: Access to Nutrition and Sanitation Services (Appraised: US$45 million; Actual
   US$32.1 million)

   (a) Developing and implementing behavior change communication strategies to increase the knowledge
   and uptake of nutrition and sanitation services and practices for improved maternal and child health and
   nutrition outcomes; and (b) capacity and institution building of CBOs for convergence efforts relating to
   nutrition and sanitation services, including supporting Village Organizations (“VOs”) and Cluster Level
   Federations (“CLFs”) towards specific activities related to health, food security, nutrition and sanitation.

   Component 4: Innovations, Partnerships and Technical Assistance (Appraised: US$15 million;
   Actual US$6.6 million)




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Jeevika II (P159576)



  (a) Provision of technical assistance and Grants to CBOs to identify, develop and pilot innovative
  intervention models on financial inclusion, livelihoods, skills training, entrepreneurship development, health
  and sanitation and nutrition; and (b) provision of technical assistance and development of partnerships
  between CBOs and technical support organizations.

  Component 5: Project Management (Appraised: US$40 million; Actual US$46.1 million)

  (i) Establishment and support to State Project Management Unit (“SPMU”) and District Project Coordination
  Units (“DPCUs”) through the provision of technical assistance and the financing of Operating Costs, to
  assist in the implementation, coordination monitoring, and evaluation of the project; and (ii) establishment of
  monitoring and evaluation systems.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost

  Appraised: US$415,000,000; Actual US$415,000,000

  Financing

  The Investment project was funded through an IDA grant of US$290,000,000.

  Borrower Contribution

  Appraised: US$125,000,000; Actual US$125,000

  Dates

  The project was approved on June 28, 2016 and it became effective on August 10, 2016. The Mid-term
  Review (MTR) was conducted on November 04, 2019. Original closing was October 31, 2022, which was
  extended to April 30, 2023.

  Restructuring

  The project underwent two level-two restructurings:

  January 2022: to use the exchange rate savings to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 on project activities,
  which also included some revisions in the Results Framework (RF).

  September 2022: to extend the closing date by six months which would allow the project to achieve results
  of some of the IR indicators (e.g., Digital enterprise performance tracking system, Total value of digital
  transactions) (ICR, para 15)

  The ICR summarizes changes in the results framework during the first restructuring (paras 14 and 16):

       i. The target for the PDO1 (% of SHG households that have at least one additional source of income)
          was reduced from 20% to 10% because the MTR showed that diversification was already high


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Jeevika II (P159576)



           among the households and opportunities for further diversification were limited because of the
           COVID-19 pandemic.
       ii. One IR indicator (Number of targeted non-farm enterprises/non-farm producer organizations
           reporting 20% increase in revenue after 2 years) was dropped because the MTR noted that a robust
           system to track revenues was not in place. It was replaced by two IR indicators (Number of women-
           owned /woman-led enterprise (individual or collective) supported through the project and Digital
           enterprise performance tacking system rolled out to enterprises supported by the project).
      iii. Three new IR indicators were added, because following the MTR, the project team decided to
           capture emerging priorities of the project, to provide financial digital services and leverage resources
           through convergence with government programs (Total value of digital financial transactions
           facilitated through project interventions, financial resources leveraged by project through
           convergence with government programs, and 70% of 2-year-old Cluster Level Federations that have
           achieved quality parameters (“A” grade) as per agreed standards/rating systems).

   The project objectives and the scope of the project did not change. The project remained equally ambitious
   despite reducing targets for the PDO1 and dropping a few hard-to-measure intermediate indicators, which
   were replaced with three new additional intermediate indicators. This review, therefore, concludes that there
   is no justification to do a split rating of outcomes.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context

Despite growing at a compounded growth rate of 5 percent in the last decade (2011–2012 to 2020–2021),
the per capita Net State Domestic Product of Bihar state stood at Indian Rupees (INR) 28,127 (constant
prices), less than one-third of the national average of INR 85,110 (ICR, para 18). The Planning Commission
(“NITI Aayog”) of India estimated that one-third of Bihar’s population (35.8 million) lived below the poverty
line. NITI Aayog’s National Multidimensional Poverty Index Report (2023) indicated that 33.8 percent of the
total population was multidimensionally poor in the state, the highest in the country (ICR, para 18).
Approximately 50 percent of children aged five and under were reported to be stunted, and the figure was
even higher for the most vulnerable rural poor, such as SCs, at 57 percent. In addition, 73 percent of
households had no access to proper sanitation facilities. Agriculture and allied sectors employed 79 percent
of Bihar’s rural workforce, but most of Bihar’s marginal farmers had poor access to extension and marker
services, good-quality inputs, price information, and credit. Low access to financial services was a key
constraint for the rural poor (PAD, para 4). Due to poor access to formal financial services, many of the
poor depended on high-cost credit from informal lenders.

Relevance to country/state strategy

The Government of India (GOI), in its twelfth Five-Year Plan, recognized that building strong community
organizations, such as Women’s Self-Help Groups (SHG) and their federations, is an important strategy to
reduce poverty (PAD, para 2). The Government of Bihar’s (GoB) priorities included women’s socioeconomic
empowerment, improved access to health, nutrition, and sanitation services, skill development, and job
placement for youth. The Poshan Abhiyan implemented by the Ministry of Women and Child Development

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 19
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Jeevika II (P159576)



(MoWCD) aims to improve the nutritional status of women of reproductive age groups, including adolescent
girls, pregnant and lactating mothers, and children below six years. The project remained highly aligned
with this national program, wherein the women SHGs are one of the most important target groups.

Relevance to Bank strategy

The World Bank’s support for Bihar Transformative Development project (BTDP), approved in 2016, was in
line with the India Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) (2013–17) and three CPS areas of engagement:
integration (physical connectivity and strengthening of market mechanisms), rural-urban transformation
(benefitting from agglomeration in parallel with raising productivity), and inclusion (promoting human
development for economic integration) (ICR, para 4). The project also aligned with the World Bank’s twin
goals of reducing poverty and increasing shared prosperity. The project remained strongly relevant to the
World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework (CPF) at the project end (FY18-Y22). The three areas
are: i) Promoting more resource-efficient, inclusive, and diversified growth in the rural sector. Specifically,
there is strong alignment on “support for rural livelihoods to increase income diversification, seek closer
linkages to the formal financial sector, integrate women’s self-help groups (SHGs) and Micro Finance
Institutions (MFI) into rural value chains, and promote rural enterprise development.” ii) Diversifying income-
generating opportunities, increasing financial inclusion and resilience, and enabling more quality jobs for
women; and iii) Improving human capital on early childhood development, access to sanitation, and quality
and access to and delivery of relevant services.

Prior Bank experience

The project benefitted from the experience of prior World Bank projects. Beginning in 2007, the World Bank
supported the Bihar Rural Livelihoods project (BRLP) and the National Rural Livelihoods Project (NRLP) to
achieve similar objectives in six districts and 179 blocks of Bihar. The BTDP was to expand coverage to the
remaining 32 districts and 300 blocks in the state of Bihar.

     Level of ambition.

In the context of high poverty levels in the state, poor nutritional outcomes, and limited access to sanitation,
and GoB’s priority of empowering women socioeconomically, the PDO to increase incomes, including
diversification of income sources, and to improve nutritional diversity and sanitation practices was pitched at
an appropriate level. The achievement of the objective would directly contribute to GoB’s priority of
socioeconomic empowerment of women.

In summary, the project’s objectives were relevant and well-aligned with the Government and World Bank
strategies. The state of Bihar’s priority was to socioeconomically empower women with increased access to
health, nutrition, and sanitation services in the context of high multidimensional poverty levels among the
most vulnerable population. The Bank’s strategy was relevant in addressing these priorities through project
activities that aimed to increase and diversify sources of income and improve access to nutrition and
sanitation services. The overall relevance of objectives is rated as High.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High



                                                                                                     Page 5 of 19
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Jeevika II (P159576)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To diversify and enhance household level incomes among targeted households.

               Rationale
               Theory of change

               According to the retrospectively developed theory of change presented in Figure 1 of the ICR (p.6 and para
               25), project activities would focus on (i) organizing poor women into self-managed institutions, such as Self-
               help groups (SHGs) and developing women's federation such as Village Organizations (VO) and community
               level federations (CLF) which can become vehicles to gain access to financial and other services, and (ii)
               providing the SHG members with resources to make catalytic investments that can leverage formal
               institutional credit, while supporting innovations and partnerships to give them access to technical support.
               The outputs of these activities would be the number of women mobilized into SHGs, organizations built,
               community investment funds disbursed, and women-owned enterprises supported. These outputs would lead
               to intermediate outcomes, such as savings mobilized by members and credit accessed from formal financial
               institutions, to achieve the objective of increased income and diversification of their income sources. The key
               assumptions were that i) local financial institutions would respond by extending credit, and ii) that the
               households could channel credit into income-generating activities.

               Outputs

               Community institution development

                     557,717 small and marginal producers organized into producer organizations (PGs/PCs), exceeding
                        the target of 500,000
                     87 percent of SHGs federated into village organizations, exceeding the target of 80 percent
                     72 percent of 2-year-old cluster level federations achieved the quality parameter A grade, exceeding
                        the target of 70 percent.
                       881,577 SHG members opened bank accounts facilitated by the project, exceeding the target of
                        500,000
                       531,825 SHGs supported by the project, exceeding the target of 450,000
                       3,304,937 SHG members covered under insurance services, exceeding the target of 1,700,000
                       61,514 youth were placed or became self-employed, exceeding the target of 50,000

               Community investment funds

                     548,986 SHG members were part of value chain interventions in the farm sector, exceeding the target
                        of 500,000
                     548,896 women farmers were reached with agricultural assets and services, exceeding the target of
                        500,000


                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Jeevika II (P159576)




      775 women-owned or women-led enterprises supported, exceeding the target of 750
      775 enterprises included in the digital enterprise performance tracking system rolled out by the
       project, exceeding the target of 750

Innovation and partnerships

      34 partnerships developed, exceeding the target of 15

Intermediate outcomes

      US$46,244,471 cumulative savings mobilized by the SHGs, exceeding the target of US$3,500,000
      US$2,303,902,439 cumulative credit mobilized by SHGs from formal financial institutions through
       project support, exceeding the target of US$800,000,000
      US$567,850,000 leveraged by project through convergence with government programs, exceeding
       the target of US$250,000,000
      US$ 626,110,000 worth of digital financial transactions facilitated through project interventions,
       exceeding the target of US$475,000,000

Outcomes

      24 percent of SHG households added at least one additional source of income, exceeding the target
       of 10 percent
      49 percent of SHG households increased their incomes by at least 30 percent, exceeding the target of
       20 percent
      6,177,482 direct beneficiaries, exceeding the target of 5,000,000
      100 percent female beneficiaries, exceeding the target of 90 percent
      78 percent of women from SC/ST households mobilized into SHGs in the projects blocks, exceeding
       the target of 70 percent

The project successfully mobilized women, who made up 100 percent of the beneficiaries, into SHGs, and
more than 80 percent of the SHGs were federated into VOs and further into CLFs. The project was inclusive
in reaching households of vulnerable groups; more than 93 percent of them belonged to (SC, ST,
Economically Backward Caste (EBC), and Other Backward Caste (OBC) (ICR, para 27).

The project facilitated financial inclusion by helping more than the targeted number of SHG members open
individual bank accounts through a government program, Jan-Dhan Yojana. The project also helped them
make digitized financial transactions.

The SHG members built up savings far in excess of the target. Nearly all of them received community funds.
They, in turn, mobilized more than US$2 billion in credit, with close to 90 percent accessing credit more than
once (ICR, para 33). The project leveraged more than half a billion USD – double the target – through
convergence with government programs.

Two key indicators measured the achievement of the PDO: the extent to which the organized households
diversified their sources of income and increased their incomes.



                                                                                                  Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Jeevika II (P159576)



In assessing the achievement of the PDOs, the ICR offers evidence from a survey of 4,524 households in 6
districts that compared participating and non-participating households in the sampled 180 villages. They were
surveyed at the beginning of the project (baseline), midway through the project (midline) and at the end of the
project (endline). The ICR notes that the same households – replacing where necessary -- were interviewed
but the endline report (page 11) notes that only 2,341 were surveyed for the midline survey. According to the
project team (from an exchange on April 2, 2024) the reasons for surveying half the sample was logistics,
time, and cost of repeating a full sample. Neither the ICR nor the endline report suggest whether the
differences observed between the two groups were statistically significant. The ICR also notes that non-SHG
households in the same village cannot be considered strict controls because they had access to government
managed programs that offered similar benefits (para 24).

Based on information from the panel survey, a larger than targeted share of SHG households (49% vs. 30%)
increased their income by 30 percent between the baseline and the endline. However, 34 percent of the SHG
households had their incomes reduced during the same period, suggesting heterogenous outcomes. The ICR
notes that similar trends but smaller changes were observed among the non-SHG households but it does not
present the numbers (para 32). A comparison of changes in average incomes of the two groups between the
baseline and the endline showed that SHG households had increased their income by 52 percent over the
period, compared by 37 percent by non-SHG households, a difference of 15 percentage points. The more
marginalized among the SHG households (SC, ST and EBC) had increased their income to a greater extent.

Relating to changes in number of income sources, the endline survey showed that 24 percent had increased
their source, but similar number had decreased their sources (Endline report, p. 24). Both groups had
increased their sources of income, but a greater share of the SHG households had, with a difference in
difference of 7 percent (ICR, para 35). The ICR offers some evidence of diversification within income
sources. The SHG households that were engaged in agriculture (7 percent) were able to increase the number
crops cultivated to a greater extent than non-SHG households (para 36)

The theory of change postulated that organizing women from vulnerable households and giving them the
catalytic funds to access formal credit would help them diversify their income sources and increase their
incomes. The project reached the targeted households, offered the necessary support, and there is evidence
of financial inclusion. The intermediate outcomes, such as increased access to credit and evidence of access
to credit enabling poor households to migrate seasonally for work, suggest that project activities could have
contributed to the project outcomes. As a result, the households that participated in the project activities
increased their incomes and diversified income sources meeting the targets. Similar improvements were
observed among non-participants but the participants increased their income more than non-participants.
With evidence of outcomes meeting the targets among project participants but without demonstrating that
they were adequately higher than among non-participants, the achievement of this objective is rated
Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve access to and use of nutrition and sanitation services among targeted households.

                                                                                                 Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Jeevika II (P159576)




Rationale
Theory of change

The theory of change postulated that project activities, such as sensitizing the women organized into groups
and federated in VOs and CLFs on nutrition and sanitation issues, would encourage them to take advantage
of the services provided through other Government programs on nutrition and sanitation. The activity would
generate outputs such as the number of women reached by Behavioral Change Communication (BCC).
These outputs would lead to increased access and use of these programs, reflected in outcomes, such as
improvements in their minimum dietary diversity (MDD) and reduced open defecation. The key assumptions
were that exposure to BCC and linking them to service providers would change their behavior relating to
nutrition and sanitation.

Outputs

      3,765,110 SHG members reached by project nutrition and sanitation BCC services, exceeding the
       target of 1,200,000
      1,323,539 targeted SHG members had access to support from Swatch Bharat Mission (SBM)
       program, exceeding the target of 400,000

Outcomes

      30 percent increase in children aged 6-23 months with Minimum Dietary Diversity (MDD) among the
       targeted SHG members, exceeding the target of 20 percent
      54 percent increase in targeted SHG household women reporting minimum dietary diversity,
       exceeding the target of 20 percent
      889,000 households moved away from open defecation among the targeted SHG members,
       exceeding the target of 500,000

The outcomes are measured in terms of improvement in dietary diversity and decrease in open defecation
among the targeted population.

About 3.7 million women underwent at least one module of behavioral change communication, and the
project was successful in linking them with government programs.

The percentage of children with MDD went up from 23 percent to 53 percent from midline to endline survey,
an increase by 30 percentage points. According to the project team (from an exchange with IEG on March 4,
2024) baseline data was unusable because it incorrectly captured food groups which was corrected at the
MTR. Children with MDD also increased among non-participants by 20 percentage points, giving a net
increase among SHG households of 10 percent. However, ICR (para 41) cites a study that examined the
impact of projects implemented jointly with the Government, which showed that the incremental change in
MDD was 21 percent for children (6 to 23 months) and 30 percent among women.

Between the baseline and endline, nearly twice the targeted number of individuals used toilets among the
SHG members. The change in percent of households using toilets was 54 percent greater than among non-
SHG households. The evidence suggest that both access to and the use of sanitation facilities increased,
thus contributing to reduced open defecation.


                                                                                                Page 9 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Jeevika II (P159576)



                            The theory of change postulated that women organized to access services when exposed to behavioral
                            change communication are likely to access and make use of nutritional and sanitation services. Both MDD
                            and the use of toilets increased among SHG households incrementally more than among non-SHG
                            households. There is evidence of increased access to and use of toilets, which was used as a proxy to
                            measure decreased open defecation (as per the project team’s exchange with IEG). In summary, considering
                            that the project met and surpassed its targets for outputs and outcomes, which can be attributed to project
                            activities, the achievement of this objective is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The theory of change postulated that a) organizing women from the most vulnerable households into SHGs
                            and their federations, which can access and deliver services, b) giving them catalytic investment support to
                            leverage credit from formal financial institutions, and c) exposing them to behavioral change communication
                            on nutritional issues would: i) help them diversify income sources and increase their incomes; and ii)
                            encourage them to access available services to improve their diet diversity and move away from open
                            defecation. There is evidence that both incomes and the number of income sources have increased,
                            exceeding the targets therefore the achievement of the first objective is rated substantial. The minimum
                            dietary diversity among children and women increased, and with upsurge in use of toilets leading to
                            decreased defecation among the the participants, the achievement of the second objective is rated
                            substantial. The review concludes that the overall efficacy with which the project’s objectives were achieved
                            was Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The PAD notes that the poor SHG-households benefit from: diversification of income sources, asset
   accumulation, access to finance and services, women’s empowerment, and improvements in other socio-
   economic indicators (para 43 and 44). The Project’s indirect household-level benefits include: improvements in
   living conditions, improved nutrition, sanitation, and health, and higher economic productivity.

   Because the Project would be based on SHGs’ demand-driven micro investment plans and POs’ business
   plans, the economic analysis at appraisal did not attempt to evaluate all project components for their quantifiable
   economic and financial returns. Based on data from the previously supported project BRLP and similar projects
   in India, analyses were undertaken to determine net benefits of a few potential economic activities. Attention

                                                                                                                             Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Jeevika II (P159576)



was given to the community Investment Fund (CIF), which comprised US$ 200 million or 48 percent of total
project cost, around 50 percent of which was set aside for livelihood activities. Evaluation of the CIF was based
on a financial viability analysis of some of the most commonly selected productive livelihood activities under the
BRLP: backyard poultry, dairy, petty shop, and vegetable cultivation. Each of these potential activities offered a
financial return within the range of 61 to 77 percent.

At the end of the project, the project estimates returns from the increased income of project beneficiaries. The
calculations of the EIRR and net present value (NPV) of the overall project were carried out for 20 years and
based on the impact evaluation for estimating achievement of PDO 2: average increase in annual incomes of
beneficiary households. After considering the project costs and incremental incomes, the EIRR has been
calculated assuming that 70 percent of the SHG households who have reported income increases continue to
realize increased annual incomes throughout the analysis period, amounting to 70 percent of what had been
measured by the impact evaluation. The EIRR of the base case is 20.3 percent with an NPV of INR 12,158
million (US$148.3 million) (at a 12 percent discount rate). Sensitivity analysis showed that reducing both the
percent of annual incremental income and the percent that continues to benefit from incremental income from
a base case of 70 to 60 percent (scenario 1) reduced the EIRR to 11.8 percent. Increasing both to 80 percent
raised EIRR to 32.1 percent.

Several factors influenced implementation efficiency.

The project benefited from continuity and leadership of the implementation organization, which had implemented
the previous project with similar objectives supported by the World Bank. The project was also designed
incorporating the lessons from the previous project. The continuity positioned the project to develop links with
financial institutions and several departments and agencies for the convergence it planned to achieve with
government programs.

Convergence with other projects helped the project more efficiently implement its activities and also receive
additional resources. Various government departments worked with the community institutions established by
the project as delivery platforms. Convergence with the departments of agriculture and animal husbandry, for
example, helped in disseminating technologies. The Department of Health set up help desks in districts closer to
the project beneficiaries.

Despite the challenges posed by COVID, the project continued with its implementation without big delays or
budget overruns.

Given the high returns from key activities of the project, as well as only a six-month implementation delay, the
project efficiency is rated as substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Jeevika II (P159576)



                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                              20.30
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The PDO of increasing income sources and incomes and improving access to health and sanitation programs
for the most vulnerable households was substantially relevant, given the state's priority and the Bank’s strategy
to support the country. The women organized within SHGs increased their incomes and diversified their income
sources, meeting the targets. The achievement of the first objective of increasing incomes was rated
substantial. The achievement of the second objective of increasing their nutritional and sanitation outcomes was
substantial as dietary diversity improved and open defecation decreased among participants significantly more
than among non-participants. The overall efficacy in achieving the objective was substantial. The project
efficiency too was substantial because of adequately high returns to investments, implementation without
significant delays, and leveraging of resources through convergence with other Government programs. With
minor shortcomings in achieving one of the objectives, the outcome is rated as Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial: SHG members have increased their incomes, but sustaining those increases will depend on their
continued access to finance and technical support (ICR, para 83). The CLFs have been critical in delivering
the needed services. Whether they can continue to offer the services poses a risk to development outcome
because the risk of poor repayment by SHGs can threaten the finances of federated organizations.

Government commitment: The village and cluster-level organizations have been supported by the long-
established implementing organization, which has support at the highest levels in the state and several state
organizations that depend on it to deliver their services. Whether it continues to benefit from state support
and function as an agent for bringing about convergence will be critical to its ability to nurture village and
cluster organizations.

Viability of producer enterprises: The enterprises of producer organizations supported by the project have
grown, but they are not stable yet. The range of activities they undertook was mostly limited to agriculture.
Not all of them were viable by the end of the project. Nearly 50 percent of them were not breaking even.
They are yet to be proven, although, over time, they might become viable. Whether producer enterprises can
offer sustained benefits to members remains to be seen.




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Jeevika II (P159576)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The objectives of the project addressed the priorities of the GoB, in particular, the socioeconomic
  empowerment of women. The project was designed to organize women from vulnerable households to
  help them save and build financial capital to gain access to credit from formal financial institutions and
  benefit from several government implemented program that aimed to improve nutritional status of women
  and children and give them access to sanitation.

  The approach employed by the project of empowering rural women by developing three-tiered, women-
  owned community institutions had proven to be effective in previously implemented projects, including the
  World Bank supported BRLP. The implementation of BRLP and NRLP and similar projects had
  suggested that social and economic mobility of rural poor particularly women is enabled through thrift and
  savings which helps them to become clients in formal financial institutions. The experience also showed
  that membership in SHGs and higher-level federations allowed women and their households to access
  productivity-enhancing technologies.

  The project included activities that could be expected to achieve the PDO: organizing women to promote
  thrift and savings, giving them the startup capital to leverage credit from formal sources, exposing them to
  behavioral change communication relating to nutrition to sanitation complemented with training, technical
  support, and support for innovations in service delivery. The project was also designed to leverage
  resources through convergence with existing programs and projects.

  The RF adequately captured the dynamics of the theory of change, with intermediate indicators capturing
  financial inclusion better (More on it in the M&E section.) The achievement of the key PDO indicators was
  to be determined with information from a panel survey that would be conducted at the beginning, middle
  and end of the project. The survey design was, however, left unspecified, and the survey turned out to be
  inadequate to fully attribute outcomes to project activities because of the saturation of projects delivering
  similar benefits in the project area, which was highlighted by the ICR as well (para 57).

  The project was to be Implemented by Bihar Rural Livelihood Promotion Society (BRLPS) an
  organization created solely to implement such projects, which had implemented the previous Bank
  supported project. It had professionals with expertise in all activities the project would support.

  The overall risk was assessed as “moderate” because the technical design was similar to the previous
  project, the implementing organization was familiar with fiduciary, safeguards, and procurement
  requirements, and the GoB was committed to the project’s approach. All project dimensions were rated
  “low” except for “moderate” for institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability, fiduciary, and
  social safeguards. The PAD suggested appropriate mitigation measures.

  Given the well-designed project aligned with GoB's priorities, but with minor shortcomings in RF related
  to the design of the panel survey, the quality at entry is rated as satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Jeevika II (P159576)



  Satisfactory



b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR notes that the World Bank team supported the state and project with regular supervision missions,
 15 in all over the five and a half years by a well-rounded team of experts, and close engagement with
 senior officials in the state government resulted in project ownership (para 81).

 Supervision strategy was focused on achieving the objectives, regularly assessing progress on results
 indicators. Expertise in the areas relevant to the project was brought in as needed to ensure that the
 project received the needed technical assistance. Adequate efforts were made to ensure that the project
 met the fiduciary requirements and social and environmental safeguards.

 Appropriate changes were made in the RF to address the emerging priorities of the project, such as a
 focus on quality of CBOs at the midterm stage.

 Overall quality of supervision is rated as Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project objectives were clearly specified, and suitable indicators were identified to measure the
 expected outcomes.

 The RF captured the dynamics in the theory of change, identifying project outputs, intermediate outcomes
 and final outcomes. The indicators were measurable, except for one that was modified after the midterm
 review. There were 18 intermediate results indicators. The bulk of them (11) were outputs of project
 activities, such as the number of people organized, organizations federated, and support extended to
 members of SHGs. The remaining seven were intermediate outcomes, many of which were behavioral
 responses of individuals and institutions. For example, savings generated by the SHGs or the credit
 extended to them by formal financial institutions. These intermediate outcomes are related largely to the
 achievement of financial inclusion.

 The RF did not adequately address understanding how financial inclusion or access to credit from formal
 financial institutions would enable beneficiaries to improve their incomes and diversify income




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Jeevika II (P159576)



 sources. Similarly, in achieving nutritional and sanitation outcomes, only one intermediate indicator
 captured the nature of access that would have contributed to the outcomes.

 The project planned for a panel survey of the same sample of households to be conducted at the
 beginning, middle, and end of the project to determine whether the PDO indicators have been achieved.
 Assessing four of the five PDO indicators depended solely on information from the panel survey. The ICR
 notes that attribution is difficult given the multiplicity of programs that were available to both SHG members
 and Non SHG members (para 24, 57). The difficulties in designing a study that can isolate the project's
 contribution could have been foreseen and suitably addressed.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project implemented the three elements of its M&E system: process monitoring, management
  information system that captured the data for constructing indicators, and the impact evaluation. The
  process monitoring ensured that project guidelines and Standard Operating procedures (SOPs) were
  maintained. The project developed several applications and invested in building digital tracking systems,
  which the ICR reports worked well (para 72).

  The panel surveys were conducted but the midline survey was limited to a subset of the panel. The
  endline report was comprehensive but it did not adequately attribute project outcomes to project
  activities. The assessment of whether PDOs had been achieved and their links to project activities
  required further analysis of data.



c. M&E Utilization
  The project used the M&E primarily for tracking project activities and correcting courses where
  necessary (ICR, para 73). Activity was monitored to ensure social inclusion, adequate performance of
  village level cadre and progress in delivering training including BCC. The system was also used to track
  fund utilization at the CLF level, SHG-bank transactions, and business activities of enterprises. The
  project used information from the system to rank the performance of districts and blocks to identify those
  that required attention.

  Summary: The project identified appropriate indicators to measure the PDO and developed an M&E that
  could measure the outcomes and their links to project activities. The project made the required
  modification midway through the project to ensure that the indicators could be measured and reflected
  new priorities. There were shortcomings in implementing the panel survey that could link project
  activities to outcomes. The M&E, which was also digitalized to a considerable extent has been
  institutionalized in an organization that will continue to implement such projects. Because of
  shortcomings in implementing the panel survey, M&E quality is rated substantial, with moderate
  shortcomings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Jeevika II (P159576)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environment

   The environmental screening category of the project was ‘B’, and the policy triggered was Environmental
   Assessment (OP/BP 4.01).

   The project developed an Environmental Management Framework (EMF), with a strategy of greening
   project activities. The project successfully complied with all the environmental safeguard requirements, and
   the performance rating remained ‘Satisfactory’. The approach followed by the project for safeguards
   integration was through issuing circulars on excluded activities, integration into project advisories and
   guidelines, conducting need-based training, and so on.

   In addition to complying with the requirements, the project integrated several environment-friendly practices.
   These include a range of sustainable farming practices: System of Rice Intensification (SRI), System of
   Crop Intensification, Direct Seeded Rice (DSR), Zero Tillage Wheat, Zero Budget Natural Farming, crop
   residue management, promotion of organic manures, biopesticides, organic methods, climate-smart
   agricultural practices, organic kitchen gardens, and so on. (ICR, para 75). Under non-farm interventions,
   activities such as food safety certification, organic foods, solar energy solutions, and bio-degradable
   alternatives to plastics were promoted.

   The project’s efforts were occasionally limited by the absence of dedicated staff to facilitate the safeguards
   integration, which delayed some training, internal monitoring, and progress reporting. These deficiencies
   were addressed by involving/deputing teams that functioned under the guidance of the World Bank team.

   Social

   The project triggered the safeguard of operational policy on indigenous peoples (OP 4.10) because of the
   presence of the ST population and other excluded communities (SC, EBC, OBC, and landless agricultural
   and seasonal laborers). The project prepared a Social Management Framework (SMF) for the project,
   including strategies for social inclusion, citizen engagement, and a tribal development Framework
   (TDF). The project adopted a multiple approach to prioritize the most vulnerable and deprived population in
   accordance with the SMF. More than 90 percent of the beneficiaries belonged to SC/ STs households,
   underlining the pro-poor targeting methods adopted under the project. Concerted efforts were made to
   identify and include persons with disabilities (PWDs), and a total of 20,304 PWDs were identified and
   mobilized into 3384 PWD SHGs.

   The key strategies adopted by the project to mainstream gender were sensitizing communities against
   gender-based discrimination through social campaigns, identification and training of gender focal points with
   the help of gender Community Resource People(CRPs), institutionalizing the gender intervention through
   panchayat-level/ block-level gender forums, and establishing four model Gender Resource Centers (GRCs);
   and undertaking Prevention of Sexual Harassment (POSH) training in all districts and blocks. The web
   portal established by Bihar Rural Livelihoods Promotion Society (JEEVIKA) facilitated the tracking and
   monitoring of grievances in a user-friendly manner. The project’s actions were, however, impeded by the
   absence of a specialized coordinator, inadequate capacity building and knowledge support for the



                                                                                                    Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Jeevika II (P159576)



   identification and inclusion of the most vulnerable, and documentation on social inclusion and gender
   activities.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM)

   During project implementation, Jeevika was provided adequate financial resources without any delays in
   fund release, The FM checks and balances at the project level worked well, and the project was managed
   by adequate staffing at the head office (ICR, para 77). There were minor delays in the submission of the
   interim unaudited financial reports. The Audit Reports, however, were submitted to the World Bank within
   the agreed timelines. The external auditors reported no significant observations.

    Jeevika strengthened finances at the Community Based organization (CBO) level. The project trained the
   SHGs and its members in maintaining books of records. Field visits revealed that they were mostly
   updated (ICR, para 28) The project, in the last few years, worked on digitizing the CBO data. At project
   closure, 88 percent of the data of CLFs and 27 percent of the data of VOs had been completed. The
   project also facilitated the audit of CBOs by chartered accountants, with approximately 24,000 CBOs
   audited until FY19–20. Moving forward, Jeevika, plans to conduct reviews of the CBO records through
   development block accountants and also scale up the community audit approach piloted earlier. Many
   block accountant positions remained vacant during most of the project life although they were expected to
   strengthen FM controls at the project level. Financial Management was rated as Moderately Satisfactory at
   project closing.

   Procurement was rated as Satisfactory at project closing (final ISR). The ICR does not offer any
   information on procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial


                                                                                                 Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Jeevika II (P159576)



Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR identified several lessons. Three of them are restated with some editing as follows:

Community based organizations can potentially complement traditional delivery institutions
in the last mile delivery of services when faced by emergencies such as the COVID
pandemic. The cluster-level federations organized by the project were able to deliver services to
rural communities to give them access to food, finance, and reliable health advice during COVID.
Community trained cadre complimented the outreach efforts of the departments of agriculture and
health. Several village organizations operated Public Distribution System (PDS) ration shops.

Federating self-help groups offer an opportunity to build scaled-up organizations capable of
accessing and delivering services to poor households, but they require attention to their
financial viability and capabilities beyond their core financial intermediary role. Timely
recovery of loans and rapid rotation of funds among the SHGs is required to have enough earnings
to meet the costs of their staff and cadre. Further transfer of responsibilities from the State Mission
to the community institutions will challenge their capabilities.

Partnering with organizations rather than contracting out implementation has the potential to
ensure the post-project sustainability of the interventions. The project partnered with several
organizations that routed their funds through the implementing organization and the community
institutions to implement their programs better. The service-fee-based partnership model offers a
way for the organizations to sustain themselves post-project.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The report comprehensively covers the implementation of the project, the outputs, and the outcomes. The
report is results oriented, making use of information from the results framework and an evaluation study,
drawing on other relevant studies where needed. The information is provided, appropriately referenced, in
considerable detail, including in several annexes. The approach taken to analysis is sound as it tries to pull
information from various sources to demonstrate that outcomes were achieved. It is candid in noting that
spillovers from many government projects make attributing project outputs to outcomes difficult.

However, there were a few shortcomings. It does not offer the results consistently. For example, averages are
presented to show the differences, in some cases, in others, difference in differences. Some of the indicator
numbers presented in Annex 1A differ from those in Annex 1B. Also, the ICR did not provide any information on
the procurement aspects.


                                                                                                     Page 18 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Jeevika II (P159576)



Overall, the document was comprehensive and outcome-oriented, with detailed information, but it had minor
shortcomings. Thus, the quality of the ICR is rated substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                               Page 19 of 19
