     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-KIIDP 2 (P133590)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023879

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P133590                                    UG-KIIDP 2

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Uganda                                     Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53840                                  31-Dec-2019                                        157,917,095.55

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Mar-2014                                31-May-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          175,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           175,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                       157,917,095.55                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero       Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p.5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 25) the
   project development objective (PDO) of this Second Kampala Institutional and Infrastructure Development
   Project was "enhanced infrastructure and institutional capacity of the Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA)
   to improve urban mobility in Kampala."

   This review will assess project performance against the PDO parsed into the following two objectives:


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-KIIDP 2 (P133590)



         to enhance infrastructure to improve urban mobility in Kampala
         to enhance institutional capacity of the KCCA to improve urban mobility in Kampala



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. City Wide Road Infrastructure and associated investments (at appraisal US$173.75 million,
   consisting of US$165 million from IDA, and US$8.75 million from KCCA; US$165 million actual, from IDA
   and US$12.87 from KCCA for a total of US$177.87). This component was to finance studies, designs, civil
   works, and supervision of the construction and rehabilitation of roads and ancillary infrastructure (e.g.,
   streetlights, walkways, street furniture, landscaping, etc.) and two primary drainage channels in Kampala
   Capital City. This component was also to finance technical advisory services to: (i) conduct a survey on the
   conditions of the road and drainage networks to create separate databases for roads and drainage; (ii)
   update the Kampala Capital City drainage master plan; and (iii) prepare designs for the future upgrading of
   roads, junctions, and drainage systems. Counterpart funds were to finance the Resettlement Action Plan
   (RAP). This component was to be conducted in two phases with target beneficiaries participating in
   prioritizing subprojects to improve mobility (including non-motorized transport) within the central business
   district using economic criteria, technical viability, the connectivity of the roads, and reduction of traffic
   congestion.

   2. Institutional and Systems Development Support (at appraisal US$10 million, all IDA, US$10.0 million
   actual, all IDA). This component was to support the capacity strengthening of three core directorates - (i)
   Engineering and Technical Services, (ii) Physical Planning, and (iii) Revenue - in investment planning and
   prioritization, design, supervision, coordination, implementation, and operation and maintenance (O&M) of
   existing and new infrastructure assets. Improvements in revenue collection capacity were to support the
   O&M needs of the infrastructure sub-projects to be financed under the first component above.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
    Project Cost: The total project cost was US$175.00 million. The credit disbursed US$157.92 million. The
   balance was cancelled.

   Financing: The International Development Association (IDA) financed this project.

   Borrower Contribution: The government committed US$8.75 million and disbursed US$12.87 million. The
   increased requirements of the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP, see Section 10 below) resulted in
   disbursement exceeding the government’s original commitment.

   Dates: The project was approved on March 20, 2014 and became effective on May 8, 2015. The Mid Term
   Review (MTR) was conducted on December 15, 2017. The project was to originally close on December 31,


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-KIIDP 2 (P133590)



   2019. The following four level 2 restructurings extended the project end date by 41 months to close on May
   31, 2023.

         On November 21, 2019 to extend the project closing date by eighteen months from December 31,
          2019 to June 30, 2021 because of delays in the acquisition of rights of way, compliance with
          safeguards requirements, mobilization of contractors, and adherence to workplans. The target for
          two new primary drainage channels was reduced to one primary and one secondary channel
          following the implementation strategy of the updated drainage Master Plan (ICR, paragraphs 16 and
          27). Only the first contract was to be funded and the length of the Lubigi primary drainage channel
          was further reduced from 2.58 km to 1.60 km due to rights of way challenges. In addition, the target
          number of junctions was reduced from 31 to 29 because these two were completed with Japanese
          donor financing instead. These were relatively minor changes to the outputs and the outcomes in the
          context and hence, no split rating is warranted (see Split Rating justification below).
         On April 6, 2021 to extend the project closing date by another five months to November 30, 2021
          because of delays from the COVID-19 lockdowns.
         On November 25, 2021 to extend the project closing date by another twelve months to November
          30, 2022 because of continued delays from the COVID-19 lockdowns.
         On November 29, 2022 to extend the project closing date by another six months to May 31,
          2023 because of the Inspection Panel and dispute resolution process.

   Split Rating: No split rating of the outcome will apply. No changes were made to the PDO or to the overall
   theory of change of the project. Targets for two sub-components under the infrastructure investments were
   reduced but not in a significant way to affect the overall achievement of the outcomes under the first
   objective. These included:

         The rehabilitation of the Lubigi primary drain (2,526 m) and Nakamiro secondary drain (3,280 m)
          replaced the planned construction of two new primary drainage channels (Nalukolongo and
          Kasanga/Ggaba) in accordance with the updated 2016 Kampala Drainage Master Plan. The length
          of the Lubigi drainage channel was later reduced from 2.58 km to 1.60 km because of delays
          from the Inspection Panel case (ICR, paragraph 46).
         Bank financing of two junctions on roads was dropped. JICA was to finance these junctions instead.
          This reduced the target of junctions from 31 to 29.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The problem: High population growth, rapid urbanization, and economic challenges were pressing urban
infrastructure needs in Kampala, the capital city of Uganda. The annual urban population grew at a rate of
5.1 percent, leading to an increase in urban population from 6 million in 2013 and is expected to rise to 20
million by 2035. This represented a third of the country's population. Kampala, the country's largest city,
had a population of 1.53 million and 3.15 million in the greater metropolitan area and had a
high concentration of poor people. Traffic congestion and high incidence of road accidents marked its poor
urban mobility. A large portion of its population were vulnerable to poverty from increasing climate shocks,
such as floods, caused by climate change. Kampala served as the country's economic hub, hosting an

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-KIIDP 2 (P133590)



estimated 50 percent of the national economic activity, 40 percent of wage and salary jobs, and 74 percent
of manufacturing activity. The first phase of the Kampala Institutional and Infrastructure Development
project implemented the Kampala Capital City (KCC) Strategic Framework for Reform to improve the
institutional efficiency of Kampala City Council (KCC) to deliver infrastructure services to its residents. The
Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) was created in 2010 to replace the KCC. KCCA required
institutional strengthening to develop its technical implementation efficiency and fiscal capacity to mobilize
own-source revenues.

Country Plans: The Government of Uganda prepared a National Development Plan (NDP) 2010 to
2014 where infrastructure was identified as the main binding constraint to growth. The plan included
“boosting physical infrastructure” as one of its four pillars. Uganda Vision 2040 discussed improving traffic
flow in Greater Kampala. The KCCA Strategic Plan for 2014 – 2018 sought to transform the city by
strengthening key institutional, infrastructural, and social structures and responding to needs brought by
increasing urbanization. The project objectives were aligned with these priorities. A key result of the
country’s National Development Plan Phase II (NDPII) - to implement the Greater Kampala Metropolitan
Area drainage master plan, and a key outcome indicator - an “increase in paved urban roads in
proportion to national roads” - highlights the relevance of the objectives. The third NDP (NDPIII, 2021-2025)
was to strengthen competitiveness by prioritizing agriculture, mineral development, and tourism, leveraging
urbanization as a catalyst for growth, and calls for investments in energy, transport, irrigation, and digital
infrastructure. This project was among KCCA priority projects and was aligned with the country's plans for
Kampala.

World Bank Country Partnership: The PDO remained relevant to the World Bank’s Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) for Uganda for FY2016-2021. In this CPF, this project PDO was to contribute to
the strategic objective of enhancing public infrastructure. The Performance and Learning Review (PLR) of
the current CPF extended its validity by one year to FY22, in line with the World Bank's COVID-19
Crisis Response (2020). A new CPF for Uganda is under preparation. In its update of the CPF, the World
Bank noted that the results of the early 2021 general elections in the country posed new risks to the
delivery of the World Bank’s remaining CPF program (PLR, paragraph 10). In this update, this PDO was to
contribute to achieving Strategic Focus Area C - Boosting inclusive growth in urban areas and Objectives 5
- Improved Business Environment. and 6 - Improved access to urban services. The PDO, as formulated,
aligned with the World Bank's partnership objectives.

World Bank Experience in the Country and in the Sector: The World Bank has supported the urban and
local government sectors in Uganda. The World Bank piloted the first Local Government Development
Program (LGDP I) in selected districts. This was scaled nationally to cover the entire local government
system of Uganda with contributions from other development partners as a performance base grant (PBG)
program called the Local Government Management and Service Delivery program (LGMSD). A US$150
million Program for Results (P4R) Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development (USMID - P117876 and
P163515) followed to build on the outcomes of the LGMSD and enhance the institutional capacity of 14
municipalities to address urban service delivery gaps. The World Bank financed Phase I of the Kampala
Institutional and Infrastructure Development Project (KIIDP 1). Phase 1 closed on December 31, 2013. The
efficacy of the project to achieve its PDO to improve the institutional efficiency of Kampala City Council
(KCC) was achieved by implementing the Kampala Capital City (KCC) Strategic Framework for Reform.
This project was the second phase and focused on strengthening the infrastructure and institutional
capacity of the Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) to improve urban mobility in Kampala. The World
Bank is financing a P4R Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers Program (P160250) to improve the
effectiveness of financing and the delivery of local government services in specific sectors such as

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      UG-KIIDP 2 (P133590)



               education, health, water and the environment, and micro irrigation. Beneficiaries were to include host
               communities and refugees. The World Bank's experience in the country and the sector further justified its
               support for this project.

               The PDOs – to improve roads and drainage and to strengthen the project management and resource
               mobilization capacity of the institutions delivering these services – were adequately formulated. These
               addressed the mobility infrastructure gaps in Kampala. The urban poor needed pedestrian-friendly roads to
               reduce accidents and fatalities. They mostly resided in low lying areas prone to flooding.

               The PDOs at closing were relevant to the country’s and the city’s priorities. The PDOs were also aligned
               with objectives 5 and 6 of the World Bank’s updated partnership strategy for the country. Overall, the
               relevance of objectives is rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To enhance infrastructure to improve urban mobility in Kampala

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: No Theory of Change (TOC) was prepared at appraisal. One was created for the ICR
                             using the indicators in the results framework in the PAD. In this TOC, completed infrastructure sub-projects
                             were to serve as evidence to improve urban mobility in the five districts of the city of Kampala. Beneficiaries
                             were to participate in prioritizing the sub-projects from a long list that KCCA prepared with division councilors,
                             and members of the Local Councils. The sub-projects were to be prioritized according to economic criteria,
                             technical viability, connectivity of the roads, ability to distribute traffic within the city to reduce congestion and
                             improve mobility of both motorized and non-motorized transport in the central business district.

                             Inputs: were to consist of financing the design and construction or rehabilitation of roads and ancillary
                             structures such as streetlights, walkways, street furniture, landscaping, etc. Financing was also to cover two
                             new primary drainage channels (Nalukolongo and Kasanga/Ggaba) as part of the updated Kampala Drainage
                             Master Plan of 2016. Additional inputs were to finance technical advisory services to survey the conditions of
                             the road and drainage networks, create databases for roads and drainage; update the Kampala Capital City
                             drainage master plan; and prepare designs for future upgrading of roads, junctions, and drainage
                             systems. KCCA was to finance any resulting resettlement under the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP).
                             Selected sub-projects were to be implemented in two phases. First, the construction of new drainage and
                             flood management infrastructure to address flooding, and second, the rehabilitation and expansion of
                             existing drainage and flood management infrastructure such as the Lubigi drainage channel to address
                             burgeoning urbanization. Three contracts prioritized the investments based on the updated master plan: (i)

                                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-KIIDP 2 (P133590)



Lubigi primary drain (2,526 m) and Nakamiro secondary drain (3,280 m); (ii) Nalukolongo primary drain (4,650
m); and (iii) Kasanga primary drain (1,723 m) and Gaba primary drain (5,380 m). Funding proved insufficient
to finance all three contracts and only one primary and one secondary instead of two primary channels were
to be financed. Restructuring reduced the length of the Lubigi drainage channel from 2.58 km to 1.60 km after
challenges to the acquisition of rights of way along the sites of the channel were submitted to the Inspection
Panel for adjudication. These reduced targets for the subcomponents did not significantly affect the outputs
and outcomes of this objective.

Outputs were to consist of new or reconstructed roads, and drainage channels. Outputs were also to
include ancillary structures to the roads such as streetlights, walkways, street furniture, landscaping, etc. At
restructuring, two junctions on upgraded roads were dropped because the roads where the junctions were to
be upgraded were financed by the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), and it made sense that
they also upgraded the junctions; these were thus dropped from the project. Outputs were also to include
surveys of the road conditions and drainage networks, databases for roads and drainage, an updated
Kampala Capital City Drainage Master Plan, and designs for future upgrades of roads and drainage systems.
Outputs were also to include the upgraded drainage channel. The causal link between the inputs and outputs
was reasonable, including the action to reduce the length of the completed Lubigi drainage channel.

Outcomes were the number of people served by the outputs noted above (i.e., beneficiaries of the roads and
rehabilitated drainage channels). The TOC presented a clear causal link between inputs, outputs, and
outcomes. However, the measures of the outcomes were insufficient to reflect how the project addressed the
development problem - i.e., how enhanced infrastructure would improve urban mobility.

Critical Assumptions: The TOC offered four critical assumptions that would help enhance achieving the
project outcomes. Two of those applied to this objective. One, that KCCA had the capacity to implement the
infrastructure investments. Two, that KCCA had the funds and capacity to operate and maintain the enhanced
infrastructure.

OUTPUTS:

      Designs for 217 km of road with pro-poor footpaths, bridges, and walkways were completed for future
         implementation. No target was mentioned.
        Constructed 216.82 km of roads with pro-poor footpaths, bridges and walkways, exceeding the target
         of 160 km.
        Paved 88 km of roads, exceeding the target of 85 km. Along these roads were installed 2,456
         streetlights were installed and 29 junctions were provided with signals (the baseline was 0 and the
         original target of 31 was reduced to 29 at restructuring because 2 junctions on roads were taken over
         by the Japan International Cooperation Agency. The revised target was achieved. Note that 614 (526
         from Batch 1 and 88 from Batch 2) of the street lights were not functional due to the theft of solar
         batteries. Batch 2 design corrected the placement of the batteries to discourage theft.
        388.3 km of roads were in good and fair condition as a share of total classified roads. The baseline
         was 300 km and the target of 386 km was exceeded.
        Implemented US$23.51 million in O&M plans. This represented an adequate O&M budget, exceeding
         the target of US$1.66 million in O&M budget.
        Rehabilitated 1 existing primary and constructed 1 secondary drainage channel, not achieving the
         target of constructing 4 primary drainage channels. The 2 primary drainage channels completed in the
         first phase of the project was the baseline. The updated Drainage Master Plan revised the priorities

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-KIIDP 2 (P133590)



       to construct new drainage channels and rehabilitate existing ones rather than constructing 4 new
       primary channels to address the burgeoning needs of urbanization. Restructuring did not revise the
       target.

OUTCOMES:

      The project had 5,520,731 direct project beneficiaries, exceeding the target of 498,522; 52 percent
       were female beneficiaries, exceeding the target of 51 percent.
      1,890,772 urban residents had access to all-season roads within a 500-meter range. The baseline
       was 641,000 residents and the target of 1,048,000 urban residents was exceeded.
      A beneficiary survey conducted at closing reported that 82.8 percent of respondents were satisfied
       with the roads and drainage completed under the project. It was unclear how this degree
       of satisfaction reflected enhanced infrastructure capacity to improve urban mobility.

The ICR mentioned the following outcomes that were not part of the results framework, were not monitored,
or did not have any targets:

      The project improved the quality of the infrastructure, and is likely to have made the city more
       attractive to private investors (although this is not supported by data).
      It is likely that the upgrading of the major road and drainage infrastructure in Kampala may lead
       to economic growth and that it will benefit the poor. The project improved the safety and comfort of
       pedestrians. The city reported during the 2014 appraisal that 70 percent of work trips were foot traffic
       and that nearly 300 pedestrians were killed in a single year prior to project implementation. There is
       anecdotal evidence from the surveys that people report having noticed fewer accidents than before
       (although incidents of road accidents were not measured).
      The project benefited other stakeholders.
            o Makerere University received in-kind compensation through the construction of a new gate and
              campus perimeter fence, and the upgrading of 6.1 km of campus roads.
            o The African Development Bank reviewed the design of 70 km of non-project roads, and
              prepared to finance its construction, updating the safeguards instruments from this project, and
              realizing cost savings.
            o The project added to resilience to floods (including floods caused by climate change-related
              extreme weather events), likely to increase land and property values, and increase business
              opportunities along roads and in dedicated lots where roadside markets were relocated.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.
Target values of two of three outcome indicators were exceeded but were not fully reflective of the
development problem addressed by the project. Improved infrastructure to improve urban mobility was
evident in the urban residents had access to all-season roads within a 500-meter range, as well as the
satisfaction of beneficiaries with the roads and drainage completed under the project



Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                   Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-KIIDP 2 (P133590)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To enhance institutional capacity of the KCCA to improve urban mobility in Kampala

Rationale
Theory of Change: No TOC was required at appraisal, but one was created for the ICR using the results
framework in the PAD. Institutional capacity of KCCA involved investment planning, prioritization of
investments, design, supervision, coordination, implementation, and operation and maintenance (O&M) of
existing and new infrastructure assets. KCCA institutional capacity was to be improved in revenue collection
because these resources were to be used for future investments and finance the O&M needs of completed
assets. Evidence of improved institutional capacity of KCCA was to be its capacity to implement sub-projects
on time, within budget, and increase its ability to mobilize its own source revenue (OSR).

Inputs: were to include financing of training, technical assistance, and procurement of software and hardware
to deliver system improvements in three directorates, the Directorates of Engineering and Technical Services;
of Physical Planning; and of Revenue. Inputs for the Directorate of Engineering and Technical Services were
to include training and technical assistance in long term project leadership preparing a Project Management
Manual, capacity to analyze the environment and social management framework, city asset management
policy, strategy, and registry, and support for the KCCA Traffic and Transport Planning unit and the
preparation of operations and maintenance (O&M) plans for completed assets. Inputs for the Directorate of
Physical Planning were to include training and technical assistance in updating the cadaster maps, street
mapping, naming and plot addresses, upgrading and obtaining a full license for the Arc GIS software to
server enterprise standard. Inputs for the Revenue Directorate were to include training and technical
assistance to streamline revenue management systems (revenue data base, assessment, billing, collection,
enforcement, dispute resolutions, and taxpayer education) and increase capacity to raise revenues from own
sources.

Outputs: were to include the upgrading of systems and processes to improve urban mobility for its residents.
In addition to the software and hardware updates, outputs were to include a Multi Modal Transport Master
Plan; assignment and installation of road names and property numbers, increase in use of SMS technology to
conduct business (pay bills, provide client feedback). Outputs were also to include the increase in
OSR mobilized by KCCA, the budget for O&M plans, and number of clients using the SMS mobile phone
platform to pay bills and provide client feedback. These outputs were reasonably linked to the inputs noted
above.

Outcomes: were to include improved KCCA capacity to implement sub-projects on time and within
budget, Client feedback was to inform KCCA on how to improve service delivery. However, there were no
indicators at outcome level associated with the use of technology other than the number of users (which is
an output). The expected outcome was sufficiently linked to the inputs and outputs of the project and
addressed KCCA's capacity to implement infrastructure investments on time and within budget. There were
no indicators associated with how OSR met O&M obligations for completed assets.

Critical Assumptions: The TOC included two critical assumptions that if realized, would enhance the
achievement of the expected outcomes. One, that institutional capacity building would increase revenue
collection; and two, that the rate of sub-project completion was evidence of improved institutional capacity.

OUTPUTS:


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-KIIDP 2 (P133590)



In the Directorate of Engineering and Technical Services: the following outputs were achieved (not all had
targets):

      62 staff were trained and obtained Project Management Professional certification and 50 others on
       other aspects of project management
      3 staff were recruited
      procured software to develop an asset register
      developed Multi-Modal Transport Master Plan and mapped the following:
            o 2,523 suitable locations for motorcyclists (boda-boda) stages to guide streamlining its mobility
              in Kampala;
            o accident crash locations to improve road safety;
            o roads and junctions to optimize improvements and upgrading.

in the Directorate of Physical Planning

      Procured software such as "iROADS," an asset management software to manage road inventory; a
       City Address Model (CAM) software to assist in road naming, addressing, and city navigation, an
       updated the city's Geographic Information System (GIS) software to improve traffic safety data
       collected. This resulted in the following (no targets were reported):
            o assigned 373,826 house numbers, exceeding the target of 314,000
            o named and approved 7,246 roads, almost achieving the target of 7,481
      For the following outputs, no targets were determined beforehand but reported as meeting needs:
            o Recruited 15 staff/consultants
            o installed 12,555 house number plate
            o installed 3,437 road signs

In the Directorate of Revenue (no targets were reported):

      1,651,292 residents used the SMS mobile phone platform to pay bills and provide client feedback,
       exceeding the target of 386,522 residents. This was equivalent to 29.8 million SMS messages.
      Total annual revenues collected increased from US$4.6 million (or UGX17 billion) in FY2016 to
       US$5.2 million (or UGX93.2 billion) in FY2021
      More than 330,000 properties were valued, using the computer-aided mass valuation (CAMV) system,

OUTCOMES:

      KCCA completed 78 percent of sub-projects on time and within budget, and while this is a substantial
       achievement, it did not achieve the target of 100 percent.
      With FY2012 serving as the base year at US$22.28 million, OSRs improved slightly to US$28.36 at
       closing but did not achieve its target of at least a 15 percent increase annually in OSR equivalent to
       US$51.54 million. Property tax collection increased from US$4.6 million in FY2012 to US$14.1 million
       in FY2022. However, other revenues such as street parking fees declined because a 2017 executive
       order prevented KCCA from collecting these. Exchange rate losses - from UGX 2,586 to UGX 3,704 to
       the US$ also contributed to this unmet target.
      92.5 percent of respondents were aware of the improvements made through the city address model;
       85.4 percent agreed that mobility and the addressing system in Kampala was better in 2023 than in


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 19
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               UG-KIIDP 2 (P133590)



                                   2017; 78 percent were satisfied with the process of naming the streets of Kampala. Respondents
                                   agreed that street and property addressing around Kampala had improved their mobility around the
                                   city. No target reported.

                            Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective of enhancing the institutional capacity of the KCCA
                            to improve urban mobility in Kampala is rated Modest because targets of outcome indicators were not
                            achieved, and limited outcome indicators to measure institutional capacity and its impact on urban mobility.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy of the project to achieve its two objectives is rated Substantial with moderate
                            shortcomings because of modest achievements in achieving the outcome of second objective. Benefits to the
                            residents of Kampala and most of its output targets were achieved or exceeded. However, key relevant
                            outcomes related to urban mobility (such as, impact of the roadworks on traffic congestion, travel times,
                            reduced accidents or reduced fatal injuries) were not reported, not monitored, or were provided targets.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency: At appraisal, the project conducted a cost benefit analysis using “with” or “without the
   project” scenarios. A discount rate of 12 percent was used. Cost benefit analysis applied to 95 percent of the
   total project cost representing the infrastructure investments to be financed - roads, junctions, and drainage
   channels. The analysis used the HDM-4 Analytical Framework and Tool, based on the concept of a 15-40-
   year pavement life cycle to predict road deterioration, road works effects, road user effects, and socio-economic
   and environmental effects; and used data indicating traffic flows, climate zones, and road types. Calibration
   improved the accuracy of predicted pavement performance and vehicle resource consumption. The Uganda
   National Road Authority (UNRA) provided the calibration data.

   Benefits for the roads and traffic management subcomponent were savings to road users from reduced vehicle
   operating costs, passenger time costs, and accident costs. The overall NPV for the roads was US$356.0 million
   an EIRR of 49.7 percent. Sensitivity analysis applied a 20 percent increase in total construction and
   maintenance costs and a 20 percent decrease in the base year traffic level resulted in an overall NPV of
   US$287.96 million and an EIRR was 36.8 percent. Analysis of the four junctions yielded EIRR of 18
   percent. The quantifiable benefits for the drainage sub-component included savings from preventing road

                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG-KIIDP 2 (P133590)



damage, property, and structures, preventing disruption to commercial and industrial activities, added income
from rentals and savings in agricultural produce. The result of economic analysis for the drainage systems
showed EIRR of 18 percent. Sensitivity analysis with a 20 percent increase in construction cost and
maintenance costs resulted in an EIRR of 15 percent.

Financial Efficiency: At appraisal, the project financial maintenance requirements for all infrastructure
development sub-components: roads improvement, junction improvement and drainage systems improvement
were determined based on the infrastructure life cycle analysis and the standard and level of service expected to
be provided. The fiscal sustainability analysis of the project compared the annual financial O&M requirement of
the investments compared to KCCA annual revenue stream from its own source revenue (OSR). KCCA would
need to spend on average about 5.5 percent of its annual OSR over a 10-year period.

At closing, following the same methodology used at appraisal, all road junctions had positive NPVs, ranging
from US$0.07 million to US$2.8, and EIRR in the range of 18-34 percent. The NPVs at the appraisal stage are
generally higher than those at completion (except the road junctions) due to increased costs and a change in the
scope of the road infrastructure works. The construction and maintenance of drainage channels had positive
NPVs higher than US$3 million, with EIRR greater than 18 percent.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: KCCA was a new institution at the time of preparation. KCCA had
come into existence in 2011 and took time to be fully staffed. Although this project was the second phase, the
implementing agency of the first phase was the Kampala City Council, the preceding organization to
KCCA. Restructuring was to address delays resulting from implementation challenges such as the acquisition of
rights of way, compliance with safeguards requirements, mobilization of contractors, and severe procurement
delays, relocation of utilities, resettlement issues, and adherence to workplans, COVID-19 response, and
dispute resolution processes. These operational inefficiencies extended the project completion date four times
and added nearly 3 ½ years to the operation.

Overall, project efficiency is rated Modest. The project achieved economic efficiency from its sub-project
investments but it was below the ex-ante EIRR for most road sections. Also, there were significant administrative
and operational shortcomings.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG-KIIDP 2 (P133590)




6. Outcome

The relevance of the objective is rated Substantial. The overall efficacy of the project to meet both objectives is
rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings. While the achievement of the first objective was rated as
Substantial, the achievement of the second objective was rated as Modest. Moreover, the ICR also
acknowledges that there were not relevant outcome indicators to measure the "urban mobility" aspect of the
PDO. Efficiency is rated Modest due to shortcomings in both EIRR of most road sections compared to appraisal,
as well as administrative shortcomings. The overall outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose risks to development outcomes:

      Compliance with environmental and social safeguards in reference to the 2023 “Uganda’s
         Anti-Homosexuality Act." After the project closed, the World Bank released a statement on August
         8, 2023 that no new public financing will be presented to the Board for Uganda until after completing
         a review of the efficacy of measures added to protect sexual and gender minorities from
         discrimination and exclusion in World Bank-financed projects. The World Bank continues to work with
         the government and local communities to identify risks and develop mitigation measures to
         strengthen inclusion and non-discrimination of vulnerable and disadvantaged individuals and groups
         in World Bank-financed projects.
        Economic risks: Increasing flash points around the world, the volatility of trade, and the prospect of
         reduced donor financing for public projects in the country would affect the county's economic growth.
        Technical risks: The project procured both hardware and innovative software that would require
         periodic updates. Commitment to keeping the systems updated would rely on the financial capacity of
         KCCA. For example, monitors in the traffic control center were not functioning because of expired
         software licenses. Traffic signals were not connected to the traffic control center. Only 1 of the 17
         traffic cameras installed under the project were functioning in August 2023. Vandalism and theft of
         solar batteries for streetlights rendered a quarter of the installed streetlights non-functional. Corrective
         design placed the batteries at a height to discourage the theft.
        Financial risk: The target for increasing OSR for KCCA to support its O&M needs for completed
         infrastructure assets were affected by a 2017 executive order that disallowed KCCA from collecting
         fees that was to help meet their targets. The KCCA O&M budgets have been reduced in the last five
         years from US$ 7.5 million (or UGX 28 billion) to US$ 2.7 million (or UGX 10 billion) in FY 2023.
         Implementation of O&M plans were delayed.
        Environmental risk: Residents continue to dump solid waste in the drainage channels. Water
         stagnates posing health risks. Siltation increases flood risks. KCCA committed to corrective measures
         under a Project Post Closure Action Plan in August 2023 to address these risks.
        Governance risk: KCCA experienced a high turnover of staff. Retaining talent or maintaining a
         reasonable schedule of transferring skills from experience with project implementation is likely to be a

                                                                                                         Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-KIIDP 2 (P133590)



      challenge. KCCA dismissed short-term or temporary contracts staff during implementation. This
      represented a loss in institutional knowledge.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The World Bank prepared this project as a follow on to the completed first phase, with KCCA replacing
  the KCC as implementing entity and the focus of the project. The Bank team designed the project
  to enhance the administrative and financial management capacity of the newly formed KCCA to address
  urban mobility of its residents. The Bank team adopted the technical and financial aspects of the lessons
  from the first phase. These included: (i) Technical aspects – Without records or maps of the sites of the
  Kampala underground utility lines (water and telephone), the team considered a five-year implementation
  period sufficient to locate, map, and determine relocation sites. Appropriate coordination was expected to
  lead to a timely implementation. (ii) Environmental aspects – The team consulted KCCA
  and stakeholders to design an appropriate Resettlement Policy Framework. The Resettlement Action
  Plan (RAP) allocated sufficient funds to implement the timely distribution of the compensation packages
  of site-specific RAPs. (iii) Implementation aspects – To avoid civil works implementation delays,
  procurement steps were batched – from design, preparation of bidding documents, to construction works,
  and supervision. The first batch of shovel-ready sub-project investments met safeguards requirements
  and readied bid documents to be procured before the project became effective. (iv) Fiduciary aspects –
  Civil works contracts were to be large enough to attract competent firms, allowed joint ventures (JV), or
  sub-contracting of elements. Due diligence involved assessing the technical and financial capacity of the
  successful bidder to avoid awarding contracts to low bidders that may have inadequate staff, equipment,
  or financial resources that could end in delays if renegotiated or re-bid.

  Risk assessment identified mitigating measures to avoid collusion between the supervising consultant
  and the contractor. While the PDO focused on urban mobility, the outcome indicators did not adequately
  measure it (see Section 9, M&E design below).

  Overall, the quality of Bank performance at entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory. Policy and institutional
  aspects were sufficient to support KCCA capacity to implement investment sub-projects and address
  O&M resource needs of the designed interventions. However, shortcomings were evident in assessing
  implementation risk associated with nascent capacity to meet the resettlement and social safeguards
  needs of the project, as well as lack of indicators in the results framework to adequately measure the
  PDO.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-KIIDP 2 (P133590)



 The Bank team conducted 17 supervision missions over the project period. The Bank team
 included experts to help design corrective measures to implementation challenges such as those
 associated with safeguards compliance. The Bank team intended to supplement the initial political
 economy and governance assessment by adopting mitigation measures. The team noted the poor
 coordination among the central government, the locally elected leaders of KCCA, and its staff, and the
 mistrust between the locally elected KCCA leaders and its technical staff. The Bank team did not conduct
 this political economy and governance assessment because of changes in KCCA leadership and technical
 teams in 2016 and 2021. Delays marked implementation. The land tenure system in the country allowed
 that some private land parcels extend to the centerline of rights of way. To acquire land for roadworks, the
 team developed guidelines that specified cases when landowners could be compensated (e.g., for larger
 land areas including affected structures), or when landowners could opt for voluntary donations (i.e.,
 without compensation) for smaller land areas within the road reserve right of way.

 A local NGO, representing residents around the Lubigi drainage channel, complained to the Inspection
 Panel (IP) in June 2021 that the World Bank and KCCA failed to include their community in the project’s
 resettlement and compensation program, and alleged coercion, deception, and corruption in the
 resettlement process. The IP initiated a dispute resolution process in December 2021. The IP resolved the
 dispute by May 2023.

 The Bank team used restructuring to address implementation challenges. The team extended the closing
 date, reduced the length of the rehabilitated drainage channels, and dropped the financing of two junctions
 on roads that JICA was already financing. These restructurings, however, did not address the adequacy of
 the indicators of the results framework (see Section 9 M&E design below).

 Overall, the Bank’s performance at supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory. There were moderate
 shortcomings in the proactive identification of opportunities and resolution of implementation challenges.

 The overall Bank performance at entry and at supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design did not include a theory of change at appraisal but used the results framework to
 document key activities reflected in eight intermediate results indicators or outputs that were to lead to five
 PDO-level outcomes indicators. The causal link between inputs, outputs, and outcomes was sound.
 However, the indicators did not capture all potential outcomes resulting from the project. The implicit
 objective was to improve urban mobility, and while one component was designed to improve the urban
 infrastructure, the other component was designed to improve the capacity of KCCA in aid of


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-KIIDP 2 (P133590)



 improving urban mobility in the city. The activities included drainage improvements but without targets to
 reduce the impact from floods due to climate change. Activities would also improve road safety but no
 relevant indicators to measure road safety was included in the results framework. Design included a
 beneficiary assessment to be conducted twice before the project closing date (PAD, paragraph 48). The
 intermediate results indicators adequately captured the activities' expected outputs and their contribution
 toward achieving the PDO-level outcomes. However, the ICR reported that some outcome and
 intermediate indicators could have been introduced at restructuring to better measure the PDO outcomes
 and an outcome indicator - the increase in number of primary drainage channels constructed - was more
 an intermediate rather than an outcome indicator. The number of sub-projects KCCA completed on time
 was a reasonable proxy for institutional capacity but did not fully capture the range of capacity building
 activities completed under the project (ICR, paragraph 54).



b. M&E Implementation
  KCCA implemented the M&E as designed. Indicators in the results framework were measured, and
  reported in the implementation status reports (ISRs), the midterm, and end term reports (ICR, paragraph
  55). However, more adequate and relevant indicators could have been introduced at restructuring to
  better measure the project outcomes. Restructuring introduced a reduction of the scope of sub-projects
  (drainage, junctions), but the targets were not updated in the results framework. There is a risk that M&E
  functions and processes introduced under the project may not be sustained after project closing. KCCA
  as implementing agency did not hire an M&E specialist or ensure effective M&E implementation.
  Indicators were insufficiently monitored, or reported with inconsistent data (e.g., the number of direct
  project beneficiaries fluctuated over time or did not appear in some of the ISRs (ICR, paragraph 56).
  Implementation did not address the weaknesses in M&E design.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data was used in completing the implementation status reports (ISRs), the midterm, and end term
  reports (ICR, paragraph 55). M&E findings were communicated to the various stakeholders. Survey
  results at closing noted a high level of awareness for the project among the respondents. Restructurings
  were informed by the M&E activities that showed the shifts during implementation that led to repeated
  extensions of closing dates and slight revisions in scopes of sub-projects. M&E data was used to
  support the evidence of achieving the identified outcomes, including evidence of application of inputs or
  achievement of outputs. M&E data or findings were expected to influence the design of subsequent
  projects (see Section 12 Lessons below).

  M&E is rated Modest. There were shortcomings in the M&E system’s design including the inadequacy of
  indicators to measure the PDO, as well as implementation weaknesses. The M&E implementation rating
  was downgraded to Moderately Satisfactory in December 2020 due to “client failure to take early
  mitigation measures to address implementation delays” (ICR, paragraph 58).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-KIIDP 2 (P133590)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards: The project was assigned Environmental Assessment Category "B." The
   project triggered the following Environmental Safeguard Policies: OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment;
   OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats; and OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources (PCRs). Site specific
   environmental risk management plans and tools such Environmental and Social Impact Assessments
   (ESIAs), Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs), Environmental Audits, were prepared, and
   cleared. Uganda disclosed both the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and
   Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) on the KCCA website on December 27, 2013.The World Bank
   disclosed both on the InfoShop website on January 7, 2014. Mitigation measures were adopted to address
   the following environmental impacts: (i) siltation of water resources, (ii) increased runoff, (iii) sewerage
   disposal in case of sewerage line damage, (iv) impact of dust, (v) non-restoration of excavated areas, and
   (vi) impacts related to the transport and storage of fuel. These mitigation measures were: (i) planting trees
   elsewhere to compensate for any loss of vegetation, (ii) sprinkling water to suppress dust, (iii) disposal of
   waste material in approved locations, (iv) paving of sites where fuel would be stored and (v) installation of
   oil interceptors and fire extinguishers. Contractors implemented sub-project Social and Environment
   Management Action Plan and Waste Management Plans to minimize negative environmental, health, and
   safety (EHS) risks and impacts at sub-project sites. Environment, Health, and Safety (EHS) non-compliance
   were reported for the Lubigi and Nakamiro drainage improvement works in 2021. This resulted in a
   moderately unsatisfactory rating of environmental safeguards compliance in 2021. The contractor
   implemented the recommended corrective measures.

   Social safeguards: The project triggered OP 4.12 on involuntary resettlement. Challenges were anticipated
   because most KCCA staff members were new and had limited understanding of involuntary
   resettlement. Lessons learned from the first phase of the project's audit of its Resettlement Action Plan
   were adopted. These included addressing the weaknesses in land valuation, documentation, handling of
   grievances, enforcing cut-off dates, securing rights of way, and timely payment of compensation (ICR,
   paragraph 61). The key social impacts included: (i) impact on planned and unplanned developments along
   the existing road reserve, (ii) impact on commercial developments (e.g., Kasubi market) and resettlement
   options for communities, (iii) linear land taking along the roads resulting in possible relocations of people,
   (iv) disruptions of livelihoods, (v) noise nuisance and traffic disruption, (vi) workers’ and public health and
   safety especially with regard to HIV/AIDS and sanitation, and (vii) the impact on vulnerable and socially
   disadvantaged people like the elderly, women and children. The following mitigation measures were
   implemented: (i) provision and enforced use of personal protective equipment in addition to conducting
   regular staff drills, (ii) identification and conservation of any cultural materials and artifacts that are of value
   to national heritage and in designated areas; and (iii) KCCA conduct stakeholder consultations
   during preparation and implementation. Contractors prepared a Resettlement Action Plan and Traffic
   Management Plan for all relevant sub-projects. The delayed hiring of a social safeguards
   specialist delayed payments to project-affected persons (PAPs, ICR, paragraph 66). Corrective measures
   were implemented. Compliance improved but untimely or non-payment of compensation to
   PAPs, subsequent lapses in reporting, and uneven stakeholder engagement affected compliance.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

                                                                                                        Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-KIIDP 2 (P133590)



   Financial Management: KCCA had inadequate staffing and capacity to supervise project implementation
   and lacked own source revenue (OSR) to pay for costs associated with the Resettlement Action Plan
   (RAP). Corrective measures were identified, some included in the institutional capacity building component
   of the project. Financial management was rated Satisfactory during most of the project (ICR, paragraph
   68). Control measures were in place. External audits were conducted. Issues raised were addressed.
   However, ineligible expenditures, low absorption of funds, and risks to the funds associated with the court-
   issued garnish orders downgraded the rating and ended at Moderately Satisfactory until project closing.
   Fiduciary challenges remained to be resolved at closing. The Task Team confirmed in their February 16,
   2024 email to IEG that they continue to follow up on these issues. These included refunds to the World
   Bank of US$2 million to due to mis-procurement, and about US$150,975 (or UGX 558 billion)
   for expenditure on interest paid to service providers. The World Bank team and KCCA agreed to a Post
   Closure Action Plan to resolve these issues (ICR, paragraph 70).

   Procurement: At appraisal, the technical assistance packages acknowledged the lack of procurement
   capacity to be addressed at implementation. Compliance rating for procurement fluctuated between MS
   and MU throughout implementation but reached a satisfactory rating at closing. Lengthy procurement
   delays, concerns about variance between actual cost and engineering estimates for ongoing contracts, and
   procurement unit staff continuing to be unfamiliar with World Bank procurement policies influenced these
   ratings. For example, around US$ 2 million of mis-procured traffic lights and US$0.15 million (or UGX 558
   billion) for expenditure on interest paid were to be refunded to the World Bank and formed part of the Post
   Closure Action Plan noted above. Procurement processes for contractors and sub-contractors were
   delayed. Contractor mobilization for the drainage works and adherence to workplans justified the first
   extension of the project closing date. Procurement required contractors to prepare relevant sub-
   project Resettlement Action, Traffic Management, Social and Environment Management Action, and Waste
   Management Plans. Bidding was initiated only after acquiring substantial continuous right of way.
   Resettlement issues delayed site acquisition. Designs were revised even during implementation as rights
   of way became available. Payments to contractors were delayed. KCCA could not use the IDA credit to
   meet these obligations because it was ineligible under IDA, but KCCA used their own resources to
   pay interest accrued on delayed payments.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                Overall efficacy of the project to
                                                                                achieve both objectives is rated
Outcome                         Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory    Substantial with moderate
                                                                                shortcomings. Efficiency is rated
                                                                                Modest.


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    UG-KIIDP 2 (P133590)



                                  Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
                                                                                   Shortcomings in M&E design
Quality of M&E                    Substantial           Modest
                                                                                   and implementation
Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The operation offered the following lessons:

      Segmenting the implementation of a road project may overcome challenges to rights
         of way by allowing the resettlement and compensation processes for
         unchallenged segments to proceed and limit implementation delays. In this
         project, practices were adopted to move implementation forward even as resettlement
         processes were challenged. Roadworks were divided into sections, and contractors started
         construction on sections where the right of way was fully acquired while resettlement issues
         on others were addressed. The project addressed resettlement related complaints by
         sharing clear resettlement and compensation guidance with all stakeholders, PAPs, and local
         leaders.
        Applying an integrated approach to planning infrastructure improvements in a
         neighborhood may benefit implementation. This project took a linear sequence approach
         to infrastructure planning and upgrading. This led to occasional flooding and damaged
         sections as completions proceeded down the line. This generated complaints. Time
         consuming contract variations were used to resolve these. An integrated area-wide
         infrastructure improvement plan may better address various infrastructure needs of affected
         neighborhoods without causing unnecessary disruptions or overflows in neighboring areas.
         An effective communication strategy may facilitate implementation. In this project,
         significant challenges resulted from a lack of accurate information on the location of utilities,
         delays in relocation of utilities and high relocation costs. Those affected by proposed
         improvements may benefit from periodic updates on what to expect, timelines
         involved, locations, and implications on their daily existence. Improved coordination and
         effective information sharing would improve on planning of these services, reduce conflict or
         misunderstandings, and may result in savings of time and money.
        If appropriate outcome indicators are not identified reflecting a holistic view of urban
         mobility (e.g., indicators to measure travel times, road safety, pedestrian use, etc.) the
         project may lack the evidence to measure significant outcomes. In this project, the M&E
         indicators were not sufficient to reflect various aspects of urban mobility. A more
         comprehensive approach would have included the convenience, safety, and comfort of urban
         mobility, from the points of view of pedestrians and riders of both private and
         public transport vehicles.
        Including mitigating measures in designing infrastructure investment may overcome
         low O&M capacity. In this project, mitigating measures did not address the sustainability
         risks to infrastructure investment (roads, streetlights, traffic cameras, drainage channels,
         etc.) Detailed O&M plans and budgets may be used to guide development partners and
         other stakeholders on realistic obligations. Financial and other resources may be classified
         into short and medium terms. Obligations to maintain the infrastructure assets could be part

                                                                                                      Page 18 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       UG-KIIDP 2 (P133590)



         of the design package, including setting up clear processes and conducting information
         campaigns such as when acquiring rights of way are needed. Keeping records and
         establishing clear rights of way for infrastructure may help define uncontestable reserves and
         protect future needs.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR followed the guidelines and provided a clear overview of the project. The theory of change formulated
from the results framework developed at appraisal framed the narrative to justify the ratings to the reader. The
quality of analysis based on available evidence was aligned with the theory of change. The report triangulated
data to focus on results, providing annexes and pictures as evidence of achievements reached. It was candid,
acknowledging the ambiguously framed project development objective and lack of adequate outcome
indicators. The report provided an accurate accounting of the numerous implementation challenges faced, and
the resulting delays. The lessons presented in the report were well thought through and informed by the
project.

Overall, the ICR quality is rated Substantial



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 19
