     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Biodiv Consv & Ecosys Serv (P133803)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023965

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P133803                                    IN: Biodiv Consv & Ecosys Serv

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                      Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A3990                                  30-Jul-2022                                         22,469,733.43

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Jul-2017                               30-Jul-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            24,640,000.00                                  24,640,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             24,640,000.00                                  24,640,000.00

 Actual                                         22,469,733.43                                  22,469,733.43




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl             Stephen Hutton               Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p.6) and the Financing Agreement of August 16, 2017
   (p.6) the objective of the project was “to improve forest quality, land management and Non-Timber Forest
   Produce (NTFP) benefits for forest dependent communities in selected landscapes in Madhya Pradesh and
   Chhattisgarh.”

   According to the World Bank team (February 26, 2024) the project defined “improved forest quality” as
   ”forests with improved ecosystem services, measured as increased carbon sequestration, which is the

                                                                                                 Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Biodiv Consv & Ecosys Serv (P133803)



   primary ecosystem service focus of the project”. Carbon sequestration was measured using the conventional
   methods of the five carbon pools as well as through innovative technology, the Eddy Covariance based
   carbon flux towers, which were financed through project grants.

   For the analysis in this ICRR, the PDO will be parsed as follows:

          i. to improve forest quality in selected landscapes in Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh;
         ii. to improve land management in selected landscapes in Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh;
        iii. to improve NTFP benefits for forest dependent communities in selected landscapes in Madhya
           Pradesh and Chhattisgarh.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included four components:

   Component 1: Strengthen Capacity of Government Institutions in Forestry and Land Management
   Programs in Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh (appraisal estimate US$4.0 million, actual US$2.15
   million): This component was to finance technical assistance to: i) build institutional capacity and capability
   for planning and efficient delivery of forest ecosystem quality improvement and management programs; and
   ii) develop, test, and pilot systems for measuring and monitoring forest carbon stocks. This component was
   also to finance training activities to build human resource capacities for improved forest management.
   These training activities were to include: i) spatial planning using new tools and technologies for designing
   sub-projects for mainstreaming biodiversity in production forests; ii) training for measuring and monitoring
   carbon stocks in forests and related lands as well as monitoring habitat quality; iii)
   training for strengthening of local self‐governance institutions; and iv) generation of baselines for making
   realistic assessments of the dependencies on and livelihoods from Non-Timber Forest Produce (NTFP) and
   for developing local management plans.

   Component 2: Investments for Improving Forest Quality in Selected Landscapes (appraisal estimate
   US$14.50 million, actual US$14.04 million): This component was to finance improving the quality and
   productivity of existing forests to ensure sustained flows of ecosystem services and carbon sequestration,
   and the sustainable harvesting and value addition of NTFP to provide economic benefits to forest
   dependent communities through: i) enhancing and restoring carbon stocks in forestlands through
   supporting interventions for improving, upgrading, and modernizing selected forest nurseries for raising high
   quality native species and planting material; ii) developing community based models for sustainable
   utilization of NTFP.

   Component 3: Scaling-up Sustainable Land and Ecosystem Management in Selected Landscapes
   (appraisal estimate US$3.74 million, actual US$4.69 million): This component was to finance the
   prevention of land degradation and desertification and to increase above-ground forest carbon stock
   through a variety of activities to implement and scale-up tried-and-tested Sustainable Land and Ecosystem

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Biodiv Consv & Ecosys Serv (P133803)



   Management (SLEM) best practices, to increase national capacity for monitoring and land degradation, and
   to track associated indicators and generate knowledge exchange on SLEM approaches.

   Component 4: Project Management (appraisal estimate US$2.40 million, actual US$1.59 million): This
   component was to finance the establishment of a Project Management Unit (PMU) to coordinate and
   monitor project implementation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost: The project was estimated to cost US$24.64 million. Actual cost was US$22.47 million.

   Financing: The project was financed by the Global Environment Facility (TF-A3990) in the amount of
   US$24.64 million of which US$22.47 million was disbursed. The ICR did not state the reason why actual
   disbursement was lower than planned.

   Borrower contribution: It was not planned for the Borrower to make any contribution.

   Dates: The project was approved on July 6, 2017, and became effective on February 7, 2018. On February
   3, 2022, the project was restructured to extend the project’s closing date by 12 months from July 30, 2022,
   to July 30, 2023, to allow for delays that had occurred as a result of the COVID-19 restrictions.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. According to the PAD (para. 3), forests were an important safety net for the
poor population in rural India. Despite the low availability of forest at 0.05 hectares per capita, about 23
percent of the population, mostly rural poor, were directly or indirectly dependent on forests. With little land
and limited livelihood options, forests were the primary source for firewood, fodder, and non‐timber forest
products and served as a safety net in the lean agricultural season. In addition, forests were also a
repository of significant biodiversity. The absence of a unified land use policy resulted in unplanned and
unsustainable land use, which in many places increased the rate of land degradation. Despite a series of
programs and schemes aimed at reversing land degradation (including watershed programs), soil erosion
continued to severely impact land productivity. While it was plausible that declining forest quality and forest
degradation were serious issues for the country, neither the PAD nor the ICR explicitly stated the rationale
for improving forest quality.

According to the PAD (para 9) India had a variety of policy instruments for managing its forest and land
resources. However, there continued to be barriers to improving forestry quality and land management
including i) lack of skills and capacity of government agencies for ecosystem-based management of land
and forest resources; ii) lack of strategic direction and knowledge for implementing sustainable land and
ecosystem management approaches; iii) lack of modern technology and tools for understanding and
measuring forest quality and ecosystem services; iv) lack of awareness and knowledge of design for
sustainable resource utilization and benefit‐sharing models for natural resources; and v) insufficient and


                                                                                                      Page 3 of 17
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       IN: Biodiv Consv & Ecosys Serv (P133803)



ineffective coordination at the landscape level among various line agencies to achieve harmonized
approaches and improved return on investments.

The project documentation was not particularly clear as to why the states of Madhya Pradesh and
Chhattisgarh were chosen as the focus of the project. It did articulate that forests in these areas were
vulnerable to climate change, with nearly 73 percent of forested areas in Chhattisgarh expected to undergo
vegetation change due to climate change.

Alignment with the government strategy. To address the issues stated above, the government launched
the Green India Mission (GIM), which aims to protect, restore, and enhance India’s diminishing forest cover
and respond to climate change through a combination of adaptation and mitigation measures.

Furthermore, the objective of the project supported India’s Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs)
targets of sequestering 2.3 to 3 billion tons of carbon through forestry. Also, the objective was in line with
the government’s National Action Plan on Climate Change that was launched in 2008 and aims to mitigate
and adapt to the adverse impact of climate change.

Alignment with the World Bank strategy. The objective of the project was in line with all three pillars of
the World Bank’s most recent Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (FY18-22): i) promoting resource-
efficient growth by increasing and diversifying income-generating opportunities while improving efficiency in
the use of water and land resources in agriculture; ii) enhancing competitiveness and enabling job creation
through value addition of NTFPs and market linkages creating economic opportunities for forest-dependent
communities; and iii) investing in human capital by providing training to government staff and communities
to improve land management. The project's objective is also aligned with the World Bank’s Climate Change
Action Plan (2021-2025), which aims to advance green, resilient, and inclusive development by enhancing
support for WBG clients to integrate climate into their development strategies.

The World Bank has extensive experience in working with the Government of India to improve forest
management, such as through the Andhra Pradesh Forestry Project (P010449), financing amount US$76
million), which aimed to i) introduce local participation in protecting and managing of public forests; ii)
support forest regeneration and rehabilitation as well as biodiversity conservation; and iii) improve public
forest management and development.

The objective of the project was pitched at an appropriate level to address a critical development
problem. Piloting sustainable land and ecosystem approaches in the two states allowed to demonstrate the
potential for the nationwide scaling up of GIM. However, it is not entirely clear why these two provinces
were selected. Also, the project documentation did not sufficiently articulate the rationale for the need to
improve forest quality. Overall, the relevance of objectives is rated as High.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 17
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  IN: Biodiv Consv & Ecosys Serv (P133803)


EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Improve forest quality in selected landscapes in Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh

               Rationale
               Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change stated that project inputs/activities such as
               enhancing and restoring carbon stocks in forestlands and developing community based models for
               sustainable utilization of NTFP were to result in outputs including carbon stocks in forestlands being
               enhanced and restored as well as community based models for sustainable utilization of NTFP being
               developed. These outputs were to result in the outcome of forest quality for forest dependent communities
               being improved.

               The theory of change was sound and logical.

               Outputs:

                     25,748 hectares of forestlands and corridors (usually narrow areas connecting two habitats facilitating
                      wildlife movement between them) were under biodiversity monitoring by the State Forest Department
                      using a protocol that was developed by the project, achieving the target of 25,000 hectares.
                     In both states, carbon assessment baselines were developed, carbon stock measurements were
                      conducted, and equipment to measure carbon sequestration was installed and commissioned,
                      achieving the targets of the two states using carbon measurement and monitoring systems.

                     In Madhya Pradesh:
                          o 3,624 hectares of forest area were restored by planting over 1.1 million tree saplings of
                             indigenous species.
                           o The project contributed to 11 forest nurseries being upgraded, resulting in an increase in area
                              under natural regeneration from 852 hectares to 1,644 hectares in Madhya Pradesh.
                     In Chhattisgarh:
                           o 3,763 hectares of degraded forest and moderately dense forest were restored by planting over
                              1 million plants.
                     STARMAP, a Geographic Information System (GIS) based monitoring platform, was developed, which
                      allows for assessing the abundance of native species and making decisions for restoring degraded
                      patches.
                     68 capacity-building programs with 3,107 participants were organized.

               Outcomes:

                     In areas supported by the project, the average annual carbon sequestered per hectare increased from
                      2.53 tons per year in 2015 to 2.78 tons per year in 2023, achieving the target of 2.78 tons per year.
                     The project recorded an increase in average carbon density from 59.88 tons per hectare in 2019 to
                      66.59 tons per hectare in 2023 in Madhya Pradesh and from 74.11 tons per hectare in 2019 to 79.58
                      tons per hectare in 2023 in Chhattisgarh.




                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Biodiv Consv & Ecosys Serv (P133803)



The project was able to increase forest quality as measured by carbon sequestration. Overall, achievement
under this objective was Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve land management in selected landscapes in Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change stated that project inputs/activities such as building
capacity for forest and landscape planning, carbon monitoring and measuring, as well as conducting NTFP
assessments were to result in several outputs such as forest and landscape planning methods being
established, carbon monitoring methodology being developed and NTFP assessments being conducted.
These outputs were to result in the outcome of land management being improved.

The theory of change was sound and logical.

Outputs:

      66,655 hectares of new area outside protected areas were “managed as bio-diversity friendly”,
         exceeding the target of 30,000 hectares. It was unclear how this indicator was measured, and it
         appears that it was merely the area where SLEM activities were carried out. According to the World
         Bank team (March 26, 2024) areas managed as bio-diversity friendly were areas that adopted best
         practices that led to improved soil quality, and construction of water storage structures that helped to
         improve vegetation cover and avian, amphibian and reptilian diversity.
        50,538 hectares of landscape area were restored through the treatment of 10,000 hectares, achieving
         the target of 50,000 hectares. The project tried to demonstrate that by physically treating a smaller
         area within a landscape, the benefits of such treatments percolate wider in the landscape. For
         example, in Madhya Pradesh, as a result of the upstream restoration of forest area that increased the
         availability of irrigation water in the catchment during the dry summer months, cropping area in some
         villages increased.
        Five government agencies used the online land degradation and desertification indicator portal for
         reporting India’s international commitments under the Bonn challenge, achieving the target of five
         agencies.
        12 Sustainable Land and Ecosystem Management (SLEM) best practices were published on ICFRE
         knowledge platform exceeding the target of 10 SLEM best practices.
        The project conducted capacity building programs on scaling up SLEM practices including 18,133
         participants.
        A web-based national system for monitoring land degradation and desertification was developed.
        A roadmap for institutional and policy mainstreaming of SLEM in India was developed.
        A SLEM knowledge sharing and reporting system was developed.
        A national database for SLEM was created.

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Biodiv Consv & Ecosys Serv (P133803)




      A total of 4,245 households in Madhya Pradesh and 8,810 households in Chhattisgarh received
         improved cookstoves in the project landscapes to reduce the use of firewood avoiding greenhouse
         gas emissions and improve indoor air quality.
        A total of 8,846 households in Madhya Pradesh and 18,575 households in Chhattisgarh received an
         improved variety of vegetable seeds to allow them to boost their productivity and build resilience
         despite being located in climate stressed regions.
        A traditional tree-based farming system (WADI) to promote agroforestry, horticulture, and forestry was
         introduced to 4,276 households in Madhya Pradesh and 11,795 households in Chhattisgarh.
        1,672 units of gravity-based drip irrigation systems were introduced in Madhya Pradesh and 2,394
         units in Chhattisgarh and 1,198 portable sprinkler irrigation systems were installed in Madhya Pradesh
         to improve water use efficiency.
        A total of 7,000 units with accessories and mother seeds were established for scaling up of Azolla
         cultivation for integrated farm development.
        Over 5,022 households benefitted from training and tools for promoting vermicomposting. The tools
         included vermicompost beds, shade net, earthworms for vermicomposting. Also, for biopesticides the
         project provided both training and tools, which included tank, mixers, and limited raw materials.
        A total of 2,612 households were supported in Lac Cultivation through training to beneficiaries/
         farmers/ cultivators on methodologies for sustainably upscaling Lac Cultivation.

Outcomes:

      25,316 hectares of land area were under sustainable landscape management practices, achieving the
         target of 25,000 hectares. According to the Bank team, these were areas where practices such as
         vermicomposting and biopesticides were adopted, as confirmed by a monitoring mechanism.
        17,854 land users adopted sustainable land management practices as a result of the project,
         exceeding the target of 5,000 land users.
        During the project end-survey, about 99 percent in Madhya Pradesh, and 100 percent in Chhattisgarh
         reported a reduction in firewood use by about 40 percent from the daily per household baseline of 20
         kg in Madhya Pradesh, and 17.5 kg in Chhattisgarh.
        As a result of being provide with improved variety of vegetable seeds, during the end-line survey,
         about 96 percent of households reported improvement in production/yield as well as crop
         diversification.
        As a result of the introduction of the WADI system, 54 percent of households reported improved
         incomes and nutrition intake during the end-line survey.

The project was able to make significant improvements in land management for forest dependent
communities by land users adopting sustainable land management practices and achieving the target of land
area being under sustainable landscape management practices. Achievement of this objective was
Substantial.



Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Biodiv Consv & Ecosys Serv (P133803)




OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve NTFP benefits for forest dependent communities in selected landscapes in Madhya Pradesh and
Chhattisgarh

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change stated that project inputs/activities such as developing
community based models for NTFPs, rehabilitate forests, and improve soil, and water conservation
techniques, as well as develop sustainable harvest protocols and conduct training on such protocols were to
result in several outputs. These outputs were to include people (mostly women) living in forested areas being
trained in techniques for improved production, harvesting, and entrepreneurship. These outputs were to result
in the outcome of improved value addition for NTFPs for forest dependent communities.

The theory of change was sound and logical.

Outputs:

      21 government institutions were provided with capacity building support to improve the management
       of forest resources, exceeding the target of eight government institutions.
      18,834 people in forest and adjacent community benefitted from monetary/non-monetary benefits from
       forests, exceeding the target of 5,000 people. Of those people, 9,655 were female, exceeding the
       target of 2,500 being female. Also, out of the total number of people, 14,954 people were from forest-
       ethnic minority/indigenous groups, exceeding the target of 2,500 people. According to the World Bank
       team (March 26, 2024) those beneficiaries who received direct monetary gains (income increases
       attributed to the project) were considered as having received monetary benefits. Those beneficiaries
       whose gains could not be measured or attributed to the project but who benefited were counted as
       having non-monetary benefits. The non-monetary benefits included collection of fodder, increased
       availability of water in wells and for agriculture, land productivity enhancement through SLEM best
       practice adoption, efficiency in NTFPs collection and processing, skill development and alternate
       livelihood trainings etc. Estimation included comparing baseline incomes from the pre-project period
       (i.e., year 2016) against incomes measured at end line survey in 2023.

Outputs that were stated above such as tree planting and restoration were expected to contribute to NTFPs in
the medium term.

      25 sustainable harvesting protocols for NTFPs were developed for Madhya Pradesh and12
       sustainable harvesting protocols were developed for Chhattisgarh.
      745 beneficiaries in Madhya Pradesh and 4,161 beneficiaries in Chhattisgarh were trained on
       sustainable harvesting protocols.
      The growing stock of valuable NTFP (medical plants) was improved by 60 hectares.

Outcomes:

      630 targeted beneficiary groups were engaged in participatory planning under the project, exceeding
       the target of 500 groups.
      A third-party impact evaluation conducted for the project used a difference in difference method to
       assess increases in average annual household income. Comparing the pre-project (2016) to post-

                                                                                                 Page 8 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                IN: Biodiv Consv & Ecosys Serv (P133803)



                                   project (2022): in Madhya Pradesh, incomes increased by 12 percent more for households in project
                                   areas as compared to a control group, and similarly by 7 percent in Chhattisgarh.
                                  According to the World Bank team (March 26, 2024) evidence collected as part of the impact
                                   evaluation showed that beneficiaries experienced an increase in crop productivity through use of
                                   vermicompost, diversified livelihood through introduction of value addition, such as, NTFP based
                                   bakery and handicrafts.

                            The number of targeted beneficiary groups engaged in participatory planning under the project was not an
                            adequate indicator to assess the objective of improved NTFP benefits for forest dependent
                            communities. However, the project’s impact evaluation demonstrated an increase in income for project
                            beneficiaries. Therefore, achievement of this objective was Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project’s achievements under all objectives were Substantial resulting in an overall efficacy rating of
                            Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency:

   Both, the PAD and the ICR included a cost-benefit analysis, covering benefits accruing from increased carbon
   sequestration.

   The cost-benefit analysis included in the PAD (p. 14-16) estimated the economic value of additional carbon
   sequestered through project interventions because carbon sequestration was the primary ecosystem service
   targeted. The analysis assumed that the project would result in a 10 percent incremental gain in carbon
   sequestration over the baseline rates in the 50,000 hectares of forestlands where project investments were to
   result in forest quality improvement. This was estimated to lead to an estimated 5.4 million tons of additional
   carbon sequestered over a 10-year period, or 10.8 million tons over 20 years. Converting this value from tons of
   carbon into tons of CO2 equivalent using a conversion factor of 3.666, the project was expected to sequester an
   additional 40 million tons of CO2 equivalent over 20 years. Different scenarios were tested to adequately
   understand the uncertainty relating to the current and future value of carbon sequestration. Based on a

                                                                                                                               Page 9 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IN: Biodiv Consv & Ecosys Serv (P133803)



conservative assumption of $1.5 USD / metric tons of carbon sequestered, three different scenarios were tested:
an increase of 3 percent, 5 percent and 10 percent of carbon credits within 10 years from the beginning of the
project, resulting in benefit-cost ratios between 2.13 and 2.31 and an Internal Rate of Return (IRR) ranging from
28 and 32 percent. The analysis indicated that the project was a worthwhile investment.

The ICR (para 28) modified the PAD’s cost-benefit analysis by using updated project disbursements, an
economic value from carbon sequestration using a shadow price of carbon, and monetary benefits (such as
income increases attributed to the project) due to sustainable land and ecosystem management.

The analysis examined three scenarios, using different carbon sequestration values ranging from US$3.37 to
$20 per ton. Given that the project restored a total of 7,387 hectares and that it was assumed the project
sequestered 11 tons of CO2 per hectare per year, the analysis estimated an IRR of 33 percent, 36 percent, and
41 percent for the three different scenarios. However, it is unclear why such large differences in the assumed
value of carbon sequestration led to relatively small differences in the project rate of return. The ex-post returns
are also not meaningfully comparable to the ex-ante returns because the methodologies use dramatically
different estimated carbon sequestration values. The ex-post returns match the ex-ante returns only because of
a dramatically higher estimated value of carbon sequestration.

As noted above, a project impact evaluation showed increased household income for project-affected
households compared to control groups.

Overall, these analyses may indicate that the project was a worthwhile investment, but the transparency of the
methodologies used could have been improved.

Operational efficiency:

From project approval until the Mid Term Review (MTR) in November 2020, the project experienced significant
implementation delays due to a delay in the government meeting the effectiveness conditions, a lag in
completely setting up the state-level implementation units, and finalizing annual plans. Furthermore, the project
experienced delays related to weak fiduciary capacity and slow flow of funds. By the time of the MTR, the
project had only disbursed 17 percent of its financing, leaving 83 percent to be disbursed during the following 29
months remaining for implementation. Therefore, the World Bank team restructured the project to extend the
implementation period by 12 months to allow more time to complete project activities.

Overall, efficiency is rated Substantial.

In table below: point values here are the midpoint of estimated ranges.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)

                                                                                                      Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Biodiv Consv & Ecosys Serv (P133803)



                                                                                    100.00
Appraisal                                                 30.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    100.00
ICR Estimate                                              37.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the objective was rated High. Efficacy and Efficiency were rated Substantial. Therefore, the
overall outcome rating is Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment: According to the World Bank team (February 26, 2024) the government remains
committed to the objective of the project as demonstrated through the extension of the GIM and merging it
with the National Afforestation Plan to achieve operational efficiency. Also, in the second NDC update of
August 2022, the government retained the target of sequestering additional 2.5-3.0 billion tons of carbon.

Financing: While the project was able to diversify and increase incomes, the sustainability of these
achievements will depend on financing and technical capacity. According to the World Bank team (February
26, 2024) there will be a follow-on project (financing amount US$400 million) to scale up the pilots initiated
under this project.

Technical capacity: According to the ICR (para. 62) the project was able to strengthen institutional support
capacity at different levels, which positively impacted local community organizations. However, State Forest
Departments need to continue to provide handholding support to some of the community groups and
beneficiaries who benefited through livelihood enhancement activities for some more time to ensure the
sustainability of project activities.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The design of the project was simple and innovative. Also, according to the PAD (para. 29) the project
  design was based on previous World Bank projects in this area in India. Lessons learned integrated into
  this project’s design included the importance of selecting biological corridor areas for ensuring



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Biodiv Consv & Ecosys Serv (P133803)



  connectivity, building local stakeholder ownership, promoting participatory conservation management
  approaches, as well as creating systems for monitoring of carbon sequestration.

  According to the PAD (para. 40) the World Bank team identified relevant risks as Substantial including: i)
  inadequate sector strategies and policies due to the novelty of the program; ii) low capacity of the State
  Forest Departments to take up new approaches for improving forest quality could mean the technical
  design may not be implemented; iii) inadequate institutional capacity due to low allocations and delays in
  fund releases; iv) state departments limited experience in implementing World Bank projects could result
  in fiduciary bottlenecks; and v) forest‐dependent poor households might have little incentive to take part
  in project activities. The World Bank team identified mitigation measures, some of which were inadequate
  due to weak capacity and inadequate project management structures. As a result, the project
  experienced a low disbursement of funds until the MTR in November 2020. Also, the project experienced
  implementation delays due to fiduciary issues. Furthermore, according to the ICR (para. 39), despite the
  project’s long preparation phase, the readiness of the implementing agencies was low, resulting in low
  disbursement. The project’s Results Framework did not sufficiently measure benefits for forest-dependent
  communities (see section 9a for more details).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (para. 43) the World Bank team conducted 15 bi-annual supervision missions
 throughout implementation. The project benefitted from strong local World Bank country office support to
 provide timely assistance in key areas such as procurement, financial management, and safeguards.

 During the MTR in November 2020, the World Bank team identified key implementation bottlenecks such
 as inadequate project management structures and technical assistance from the PMU as well as low
 absorption of funds. The World Bank team developed an action plan to address these issues. Also, the
 World Bank team conducted fiduciary and safeguard workshops to strengthen the capacity of the PMU. As
 a result of these measures, disbursement picked up and project performance improved.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization




                                                                                                 Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Biodiv Consv & Ecosys Serv (P133803)



a. M&E Design
 The M&E was innovative to use advanced technology for monitoring carbon sequestration and
 demonstrating the feasibility of this for monitoring forest quality.

 The objective of the project lacked clarity allowing for different possible ways to parse the PDO – it was
 unclear whether or not the project expected forest quality and land management benefits to be self-
 standing or explicitly linked to forest-dependent communities (which would have been more challenging to
 prove). A clearer way to articulate the PDO would have been, for example, to improve i) forest quality, ii)
 land management, and iii) Non-Timber Forest Produce (NTFP) benefits for forest-dependent communities
 in selected landscapes in Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh. The project’s theory of change and how key
 activities were to result in the intended outcome was sound. Indicators captured key outputs, though the
 Results Framework did not cover many other outputs. However, the project could have benefited from
 multiple PDO indicators that covered the three different aspects of the PDO (forest quality, land
 management, and benefits for forest-dependent communities) rather than trying to bundle these under a
 single measure, which would do so imperfectly. The Results Framework did not sufficiently capture benefits
 for forest-dependent communities and hectares of forest area that were restored. However, these benefits
 were captured by other evaluative methods.

 According to the PAD (para. 38) the Project Management Unit (PMU) was responsible for the project’s
 M&E activities. The project was to use field surveys to determine the quality of forests and land
 management improvements and to determine the socio‐economic aspects of NTFP utilization and the
 extent to which benefits to forest dependent communities increased. Also, the PMU commissioned an
 impact evaluation to identify livelihoods and environmental impacts in project areas, which was completed.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (para. 19) the project collected data and conducted Geographic Information System
  (GIS) based plotting on a regular basis and conducted regular field monitoring missions to monitor the
  implementation progress of project activities.

  The project’s Results Framework was not modified during implementation. According to the World Bank
  team (February 26, 2024) M&E data were found to be reliable and of good quality. Also, the project did
  not encounter any significant M&E related issues. The state forest departments had been using remote
  sensing and were familiar with data capture, documentation and reporting, The World Bank team
  provided limited capacity support through a technical workshop on designing M&E processes in the initial
  stages of project implementation.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (para. 52) the project’s M&E data were continuously used to inform project
  management and inform decision making such as budgetary allocations. Also, M&E data were used for
  reporting on the progress against annual targets for project activities. According to the Bank team
  (March 26, 2024) the project conducted beneficiary surveys, which provided key data. However, it is not
  clear to what extent this data was used to inform project implementation since the ICR did not
  adequately articulate the study findings or incorporate them into project indicators.


                                                                                                 Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Biodiv Consv & Ecosys Serv (P133803)



  Overall, the M&E quality is rated as substantial with moderate shortcomings especially at design.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats), OP/BP 4.36 (Forests), and OP/BP 4.10
   (Indigenous People). The project developed several safeguard instruments such as an Environmental and
   Social Management Framework (ESMF), an environmental assessment, and a tribal development
   framework.

   According to the ICR (para. 55) the project’s safeguards rating was Satisfactory until November 2019 when
   it was downgraded to Moderately Satisfactory due to: i) beneficiary data on gender and social grouping
   being provided as aggregated data instead of format specified in ESMF; ii) delay in the appointment of the
   Social Specialist in Chhattisgarh; iii) delay in raising awareness for the Grievance Redress Mechanism
   (GRM), which had been in place since project effectiveness and delay in the operationalization of Grievance
   Redress Committees; iv) lack of participatory planning methods being available in printed format and
   resource plan was not available within community groups/Joint Forest Management Committees
   (JFMCs); and v) minor cases of motorable road access being cut off from main habitation due to the
   project’s plantations in two hamlets. The project addressed these issues adequately. However, the
   safeguard rating remained Moderately Satisfactory until project closure due to procedural and
   documentation issues. According to the World Bank team, these included: i) reporting of aggregated data
   on beneficiary details on gender and social grouping, despite disaggregated data being available; ii) delay
   in the appointment of the Social Specialist in Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh at the PIU level; iii) delay in
   the awareness of the GRM (already in place from effectiveness) and in the formation and operationalization
   of the Grievance Redress Councils; and iv) minor cases of motorable road access being cut off from main
   habitation due to the project’s plantations in two hamlets. While these issues were resolved, the procedural
   delays and improper reporting caused the rating to be retained at Moderately Satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management:

   According to the ICR (para. 57), during project preparation, the World Bank team conducted a fiduciary
   capacity assessment which rated the project’s fiduciary risk Substantial due to the PIU’s lack of experience
   with World Bank operations, limited fiduciary capacity, a decentralized flow of funds and weak reporting
   structures. Mitigation measures were not sufficient resulting in disbursement delays. By the time of the
   Mid-Term Review, the project had only disbursed 17 percent of its funds. The Bank addressed Financial
   Management issues through: i) creating provisions at PIU level for dedicated FM specialist staff; ii)
   conducting dedicated fiduciary training sessions; iii) providing support to identified fiduciary focal points

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Biodiv Consv & Ecosys Serv (P133803)



   within each PIU: iv) conducting regular follow ups on Interim Unaudited Financial Reports and Audit
   Reports; and v) flagging Financial Management related issues. After the Mid-Term Review, the state
   capacity improved significantly, which resulted in better project performance and disbursements.

   According to the World Bank team (February 26, 2024) the project complied with the World Bank’s
   financial covenants. Not all of the external auditor’s opinions were unqualified. The World Bank team
   addressed identified issues.

   When the project closed, Financial Management was rated Satisfactory.

   Procurement:

   The World Bank team stated (February 26, 2024) that the project followed the World Bank’s procurement
   guidelines. According to the ICR (para. 57), the procurement-related risks identified during the fiduciary
   assessment at appraisal were mitigated through conducting training sessions on World Bank procurement
   procedures, providing technical assistance to procurement focal points within each PIU, and establishing
   compliant handling mechanisms at all PIUs. However, according to the ICR (para. 39) mitigation measures
   were not sufficient resulting in initial implementation and disbursement challenges that lasted until the
   project’s Mid-Term Review.

   When the project closed, procurement was rated Moderately Satisfactory since the Procurement Post
   Review by the World Bank found, in some sample cases, delays in contract award or completion, payment
   execution delays, incomplete or missing information on the data sheet and missing documents on STEP.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                               Inadequate mitigation measures
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               for identified risks.
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

                                                                                                 Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IN: Biodiv Consv & Ecosys Serv (P133803)




The ICR (para. 63-68) included several lessons learned which were adapted by IEG:

        Using technology tools can be effective for planning, implementing, and monitoring
         forest management activities and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of such
         activities. In this project, the State Forest Departments used GIS and mobile apps to identify
         flora and fauna. Using the app reduced the time and effort required for monitoring, allowing
         field staff to focus more on conservation and protection activities.
        Combining investments on forest and non-forest lands can unlock greater economic
         and ecological benefits. In this project, the integration of sustainable land and ecosystem
         management outside of forests as part of forest restoration, provided a wider range of
         economic and ecological benefits such as enhancing land productivity, diversifying livelihood
         opportunities, and increasing ecosystem services.
        To make forestry financially attractive for rural communities and for attracting private
         sector financing, critical policy and institutional reforms are necessary. In this project,
         strategic investments in NTFP value chains enhanced economic returns for the rural poor by
         setting up forestry-enterprises amongst forest-dependent communities and connecting them
         with economic opportunities.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation and included an appropriate
economic analysis. Also, the lessons learned included in the ICR can be useful for future engagement in this
area. However, the ICR would have benefitted from providing more information in key areas such as M&E,
Financial Management and Procurement such as whether M&E data were found to be adequate and of good
quality, the external auditor’s opinions were unqualified, the project complied with the World Bank’s financial
covenants and procurement guidelines. Also, the ICR would have benefitted from better articulating the findings
of the beneficiary studies conducted into its assessment of achievement of project objectives, rather than only
project efficiency. Overall, the quality of the ICR is Substantial, but only marginally so.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 17
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
IN: Biodiv Consv & Ecosys Serv (P133803)




                                                                        Page 17 of 17
