     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SO-Pub Financial Management Capacity Str (P151492)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023899

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P151492                                   SO-Pub Financial Management Capacity Str

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Somalia                                   Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D3700,TF-A0388,TF-A0389,TF-           30-Jun-2022                                          43,682,842.93
 A8217,TF-A8218

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 07-Jul-2015                               30-Jun-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           30,000,000.00                                    30,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            29,999,853.05                                    28,296,414.64

 Actual                                        28,296,414.64                                    28,296,414.64




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Dimitri Tsarouhas          Vandana Chandra               Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The original Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Second Public Financial Management Capacity
   Strengthening Project was “to establish and strengthen institutional capacity for the management of public
   funds in central finance agencies and targeted sectors” (PAD, p. ix, 2015).

   The PDO was amended when the 2017 restructuring was undertaken.


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SO-Pub Financial Management Capacity Str (P151492)



   The revised PDO was “to strengthen systems of domestic revenue mobilization, expenditure control and
   accountability in the Federal Government, Puntland State of Somalia, and Somaliland.” (ICR, pg.11).

   The PDO as stated in the Financing Agreement (FA) was “to strengthen systems of domestic revenue
   mobilization, expenditure control accountability in the Federal Government, Puntland State of Somalia, and
   Somaliland”, (FA, 2018 pg.5).

   For the purposes of this review, the PDO will be parsed into three objectives as follows:

         PDO1: To strengthen systems of domestic revenue mobilization (DRM) in the Federal Government,
          Puntland State of Somalia, and Somaliland.
         PDO2: To strengthen systems of expenditure control in the Federal Government, Puntland State of
          Somalia, and Somaliland.
         PDO3: To strengthen systems of accountability in the Federal Government, Puntland State of
          Somalia, and Somaliland.

   Split Rating: a split rating was considered due to the expanded scope of the project, the changes to the
   PDO, and the changes to the related PDO targets. However, the expansion of the scope of the project, which
   incorporated re-prioritization of Public Financial Management (PFM) activities, and additional financing did not
   warrant a split rating. The restructuring included core DRM elements, consolidated the project’s design
   around the components of DRM, PFM, PFM expenditure accountability and oversight, and expanded the
   scope of activities to be financed. The scope of the project was not narrowed.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  07-Dec-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   At appraisal, the project consisted of seven components. At the restructuring in 2017, these were reduced
   to four components that better reflected the programmatic changes from re-prioritization and consolidation
   of PFM activities, expanded scope, and the additional financing as follows:

   Component 1: Strengthening Tax Policy and Inland Revenue Administration Systems: (Appraisal:
   US$2.75 million; Restructured: US$15.0 million; Actual: US$10.68 million). Component 1 was originally
   designed as mobilization, planning and budget preparation.




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  SO-Pub Financial Management Capacity Str (P151492)



The primary objective of this component was to strengthen tax policy and selected inland revenue systems
and capacity. The sub-components were as follows:

    a. Improving organizational capacity for tax policy: the main activities included establishment of the tax
       policy unit including the legislative and regulatory frameworks for access to taxpayer and other data,
       development of a revenue policy, evidence-based research, revenue forecasting, and tax gap
       analysis capacity.
    b. Improving systems for inland revenue administration: the main activities included operationalization
       of the large taxpayer office, business process mapping and redesigning, development and
       implementation of integrated automation system user requirement specifications and an information
       and communication technology strategy. The procurement of ICT equipment and infrastructure for
       an integrated tax administration system that would interface with the Somalia Financial Management
       Information System (SFMIS) was also included. Capacity building under this sub-component
       included the development of a human resource management (HRM) strategy for the inland revenue
       department, a training needs assessment and development of a skill development strategy, a
       communication strategy, and training and professional development of staff that would lead to PFM
       and procurement accreditation.
    c. Taxpayer education and facilitation to promote voluntary compliance: This sub-component included
       development and implementation of a taxpayer orientation/socialization program, taxpayer service
       charter, facilitation and grievance redressal help-desk, proactive disclosure of revenue performance
       reports, tax forums, training curriculum; and utilizing the Somalia Revenue Academy to equip the
       wider public with tax compliance skillsets and knowledge.
    d. Supporting the Revenue Bill consultations and bridging operationalization upon enactment: This
       sub-component included activities to support consultations with the Federal Member State (FMS) on
       the FGS-led Revenue Bill, support to implement the enacted revenue law, and analytical work on
       revenue assignment and unbundling issues.

Component 2: Strengthening Capacity for Public Financial Management (PFM) Control and
Accountability (Appraisal: US$12.8 million; Restructured: US$25.5 million; Actual: US$21.3 million).
The original Component 2 - (treasury management, budget execution, procurement, accounting, and
financial reporting), Component 3 - (integrity pillar strengthening), Component 4 - (PFM professionalization)
were combined into the restructured Component 2 “strengthening capacity for public financial management
control and accountability” (ICR, p. 42). Component 2 included three sub-components as follows:

    a. Strengthening systems of treasury management, budget execution, procurement, accounting, and
       financial reporting: This sub-component included activities to support the integrity and quality
       assurance of the SFMIS, sustainable management of the SFMIS, and system’s implementation and
       post implementation support, including a Primary Data Center (PDC), and Disaster Recovery Center
       (DRC) support. Other activities included targeted institutional capacity building programs,
       recruitment of a PFM expert to support the Office of the Auditor General (OAG), implementation of
       government cash management policies, training, and capacity development specific to the
       information systems, and skills transfer. The sub-component also supported a systems audit to
       review potential gaps and data integrity issues as well as capacity building activities directly related
       to expenditure management and control, including implementation of government cash management
       policy.
    b. Strengthening the integrity systems: This sub-component supported the publication of timely and
       quality audit reports, institutional strengthening of the Supreme Audit Institutions (SAI) of the


                                                                                                 Page 3 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  SO-Pub Financial Management Capacity Str (P151492)



       FGS and FMS, SAI strengthening activities to fast track the audit of projects and Government-wide
       Annual Financial Statements (AFS), and capacity building.
    c. Professionalization of PFM staff: This sub-component sought to expand the professionalization of
       the PFM staff program and to build PFM competencies. Key activities included a PFM Education
       and Training Program to build capacity for planning and budget preparation officials, procurement
       officers, accountants, and internal and external auditors, including face-to-face lectures
       supplemented by mentorship and on-the-job learning.

Component 3: Rapid Response Facility (Appraisal: US$1 million; Restructured: US$3.0 million;
Actual: US$2.10 million). Component 3 replaced the original Component 5 - “Bank-executed, demand-
driven, just-in-time contingency response”. The goal of the component was to assist authorities for emerging
DRM and PFM priorities, including provision of technical advisory services, conducting approved
consultations, workshops, and focus-group discussions. The Rapid Response Facility was expected to
support the three governments—FGS, PSS, and Somaliland - and finance: (i) consultants; (ii) services; and
(iii) consultations, workshop, and focus-group discussions; and (iv) training to the staff of the Project
Implementation Unit (PIU) in environmental and social safeguards management.

Component 4: PFM reform oversight, coordination, and management (Appraisal: US$2.92 million;
Restructured: US$5.92; Actual: US$9.74 million). Component 4 was the same as the originally designed
Component 6. This component provided project management and coordination support to the three
governments of FGS, PSS and Somaliland.

Restructurings:

The project underwent three restructurings as follows:

Restructuring No. 1: The first restructuring on August 25, 2016, extended the project closing date by 24
months from June 30, 2018, to June 30, 2020.

Restructuring No. 2: The second restructuring on September 25, 2018, included additional financing (AF),
and became effective on April 01, 2019. Following the 2017 mid-term review (MTR), the project was
restructured to: (a) expand the scope of activities related to DRM; (b) deepen treasury management and
budget execution reforms and align them with the 2016-2020 PFM Reform Action Plan; and (c) introduce
new activities to enhance fiscal accountability and transparency. The restructuring also included: (a) a
revision of the PDO to explicitly include DRM support; (b) consolidation of the PFM and integrity-
related activities into one component; (c) reallocation of resources in accordance with the new design; (d)
amendment of the Just in Time (JIT) support; (e) revision of the results framework and monitoring systems
to improve the attribution of project specific interventions; and (f) extension of the closing date of the original
project by two years, from June 30, 2020 to June 30, 2022, to allow for successful implementation of the
project’s original and new activities (PAD 2018, pg. 8).

Main component changes:

Component 1: expansion of DRM activities which included the redesign and retooling of a large taxpayer
office, establishment of a fit-for-purpose integrated tax administration system (ITAS), mapping of the tax
business process, and support to modernization and automation of information and communications
technology. The component also included measures in support of the Highly Indebted Poor



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SO-Pub Financial Management Capacity Str (P151492)



  Countries (HIPC) initiative tax-related benchmarks, including developing sales taxes procedures for
  domestic products and turnover taxes for large taxpayers, and submission of the revenue bill to Parliament.

  The following intermediate results indicators (IRIs) were added in Component 1:

        IRI1: Capacity of federal government to administer taxes based on modern principles: number of
         large and medium taxpayers using automated processing.
        IRI2: Capacity of federal government to implement tax policy: number of analytical reports
         disseminated.
        IRI3: Citizen engagement: number of taxpayers consulted or educated (gender disaggregated).

  Component 2: all key PFM reforms were consolidated into this component. The consolidated Component
  2 included financing for: (a) implementation of critical treasury management, control, budget execution,
  public procurement and accounting and reporting reforms; (b) transparency and accountability in the use of
  public funds through strengthening key integrity pillars; (c) the fiduciary environment; and (d) PFM staff
  professionalization.

  The following intermediate results indicators (IRIs) were added in Component 2:

        IRI4: Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy (CIPFA) diploma-certified students
         (gender disaggregated).
        IRI5: Stronger audit methods implemented.
        IRI6: Percentage of payments made directly to vendors.

  Component 3: this component was added to enable the project to respond to urgent unplanned PFM
  reform needs.

  Component 4: this component was extended to include financing of project management and coordination
  support for the three governments, FGS, Puntland (PSS), and Somaliland.

  Restructuring No. 3: The third restructuring on May 31, 2022, extended the project closing date from June
  30, 2022, to June 30, 2023. This extension was for the DRM component only, to allow the ITAS to be fully
  implemented.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The Project's original cost at appraisal was US$20 million to be funded through the Somalia
  Multi-Partner Fund (MPF). US$16 million was approved on 6 July 2015 (TF- AO388) and US$4 million was
  approved on 10 November 2015 (TF – AO389). AF of US$6 million was approved on 22 August 2018 (TF-
  A8217). On September 25, 2018, further AF of US$20 million was approved, of which US$15.5 million was
  disbursed (IDA- D3700), while another US$4 million was approved on 25 September 2018 (TF- A8218), of
  which US$2.3 million was disbursed.

  The actual project cost at closure was US$43.8 million.




                                                                                                 Page 5 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SO-Pub Financial Management Capacity Str (P151492)



   Financing: A US$30 million commitment from Somalia Multi-Partner Trust Funds and a US$20 million IDA
   grant financed the project.

   Borrower Contribution: The Federal Government of Somalia, the Puntland State Government and
   Somaliland did not contribute financially to the project.

   Dates: The Bank approved the Project on July 7, 2015, and it became effective on September 9, 2015. The
   original closing date was June 30, 2020; however, this was revised twice, and the project closing date was
   extended by 36 months to June 30, 2023. The MTR was completed on December 7, 2017.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At appraisal-in 2015, Somalia had just emerged from more than 20 years of conflict that had undermined
the rule of law and destroyed major governance institutions. Somalia’s formerly centrally planned economy
had fallen into disarray, leading to radical privatization of a significant portion of the country’s economic
activities. Although the FMS of Somaliland and Puntland did not directly have violence, they had
experienced the spillover effects of violence from the south. Somalia was classified as the world’s most
fragile state according to the Fragile States Index at the time.

Two decades of conflict had led to a general lack of trust by the public in government institutions, the
destruction of the country’s human capital and extremely limited government capacity for PFM. The
formation of a new government in 2012 rekindled hopes that effective state institutions could be built. The
ability to establish credible public finance institutions, improve macro-fiscal management, generate more
revenues, and manage resources efficiently was necessary for better service delivery and for the
establishment of an accountable public sector in Somalia.

At the time of project design-in 2014, Somalia had the lowest ratio of domestic revenue to gross domestic
product (GDP) in the world (1.7 percent). The federal budget accounted for merely 3 percent of GDP with
much of the budget going to salaries. Total government expenditures were only 3.8 percent of GDP while
wages and salaries accounted for 51 percent of GDP in 2014. Government tax institutions were weak and
lacked capacity to collect and disburse revenues because of limited staff skills and lack of digitalization. The
highest-spending institution in 2014 was the armed forces, accounting for 29 percent of total spending
(US$43 million), with almost half allocated to salaries and allowances. Accumulation of expenditure
arrears was acute in the armed forces, accounting for 16 percent of the budget in 2014. Pursuing PFM
reforms would help the government generate revenue and enable better use of limited public funds
collected.

Somalia’s political and economic instability had significant consequences as equipment, and records of
most government agencies were destroyed or damaged during the civil war. Government agencies were
understaffed due to a mass exodus of qualified personnel during the civil conflict. There was also a
shortage of technical and policy expertise. Almost all FGS institutions recruited advisors to support senior
management in highly technical functions. As the government lacked meaningful public expenditure
systems and functioning internal controls, it was important to address this core weakness by establishing
accounting systems and related internal controls. At the time of project design, the federal government of

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SO-Pub Financial Management Capacity Str (P151492)



Somalia, and the state governments of Puntland, and Somaliland suffered from deep perceptions of
corruption. Audit offices existed only on paper. Public finances were not scrutinized by parliament and there
was a lack of parliamentary oversight of government public finances.

The PDO was highly relevant and well-aligned with World Bank’s FY2014-2016 Interim Strategy Note (ISN)
which focused on two areas: (i) strengthening core economic institutions and (ii) expanding economic
opportunity. This project was the second in a series of projects (SOP) aimed at boosting Somalia’s public
sector capacity development and strengthening core government functions. The Somalia Capacity Injection
Project (CIP, P149971) aimed at strengthening the staffing and institutional capacity of selected line
ministries and central agencies to perform core government functions, while the Second Phase of the
Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project (RCRF, P154875)) financed recurrent costs of core government
functions and support to expert services. The project’s focus on capacity building to enhance revenue
mobilization and strengthen the institutional and regulatory PFM framework aligned fully with the ISN’s call
to boost institutions such as the Ministry of Finance (MoF), the Central Bank of Somalia, and the Ministry of
Planning and International Cooperation. During restructuring in 2018, it was ensured that the expanded
scope of the project was consistent with the ISN (2014-2016), Systemic Country Diagnostic (SCD) and the
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY2019 – 2022 as well as the government’s National Development
Plan (NDP) 2017 – 2019.

The PDO was also highly relevant and well aligned with the World Bank’s CPF for FY2019-23 which
positioned Somalia for eligibility to enter the HIPC process by including in program documentation the goal
of strengthening Somalia’s institutions to deliver services and restore economic resilience and
opportunities. To be able to benefit from HIPC debt relief, Somalia needed to establish the necessary
governance systems and achieve some core IDA and IMF HIPC triggers and benchmarks. Somalia needed
to implement PFM reforms that would later be supported by the companion RCRF project and CIP
activities. The project supported the Somali Government’s to meet the International Monetary Fund’s (IMF)
Staff Monitored Program (SMP) in its preparation for the HIPC debt relief program. The PDO was relevant
for the CPF’s other priorities such as strengthening governance institutions and making them more
accountable and effective to restore citizens’ confidence in government, and ensuring targeted distribution
of services facilitated by improvements in PFM and institutional effectiveness, The PDO reflected the fragile
conditions on the ground, weak capacity in government, and was appropriately pitched at Somalia’s
development status by establishing systems and building foundational capacity.

The project was consistent with the government’s strategy, the NDP 2012–2016, covering the
Peacebuilding and Stability Goals (PSGs) of the New Deal for Engagement in FCVs. It was in line with the
2014 Somalia Flagship Program set out by the federal government in partnership with the World Bank and
the United Nations and focused on building resilient and efficient institutions through three components:
developing capacity for core government functions, strengthening the frameworks and procedures for civil
service management, and strengthening capacity at the center of government to effectively coordinate
policy and lead reform. The PDO also aligned with one of the five priorities of the 2017 NDP of Somalia
which centered on effective and efficient institutions. The NDP proposed to engage both on the
reorganization/streamlining of public sector structures and the re-building of operational effectiveness and
capacities through reform of PFM, revenue generation, and HRM. Throughout the period from 2014 to
2022, the PFM capacity strengthening project remained the core instrument directly supporting all PFM
systems necessary for the establishment of effective state institutions and the delivery of better public
services.




                                                                                                   Page 7 of 24
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      SO-Pub Financial Management Capacity Str (P151492)



               The project contributed to the Somalia Multi-Partner Fund's objective of fostering socio-economic recovery
               and stabilization by financing technical assistance and the establishment of accountable and transparent
               mechanisms of public funds’ management. It was also aligned with the Somalia Compact’s emphasis on
               the need to build core public sector capacity as a precondition for rebuilding trust in Somalia’s institutions.
               The Compact’s fifth Peacebuilding and Stability Goal (PSG) was dedicated to Revenue and Services, and
               its third priority was to “strengthen PFM to enable the different levels of governments to better manage
               financial resources in a transparent and accountable manner in support of national priorities” (PAD, p. 3).
               To complement the Compact, the Federal MoF and Planning prepared an Economic Recovery Plan (ERP),
               which emphasized the role of the annual budget in linking resources to Federal government priorities.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             PDO1: Strengthen systems of domestic revenue mobilization in the Federal Government, Puntland State of
                             Somalia, and Somaliland.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: The overall theory of change (TOC) was that stronger systems and structures of revenue
                             mobilization and tax collection would boost the legitimacy of state institutions, in turn enhancing state capacity
                             to deliver basic services. In the longer term, these would enhance revenues and facilitate service delivery.

                             Key Outputs

                                          Annual Budget Revenue Forecasts for 2020, 2021, 2022 Budgets;
                                          Revenue Mobilization strategy for Somaliland;
                                          Development of tax audit strategy;
                                          Customs Declaration system and introduction of Tax Identification Number (TINs) through issuance of
                                           guide for all taxpayers;
                                          Tax platform to engage with citizens;
                                          FGS/FMS Medium Term Revenue Strategy;
                                          Tax enforcement study in three largest ports
                                          FGS/FMS-DRM Organizational Structures and Staffing Review;
                                          Orders and regulations to cover some of legal gaps relating to tax collection.

                             Intermediate indicators and outcomes



                                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SO-Pub Financial Management Capacity Str (P151492)



IRI 1: FGS Revenue administration capacity for tax administration

IRI-1 focused on measuring the number of registered taxpayers through the automation of registration and
payment of revenue through Financial Management Information System (FMIS). Baseline: 25. Target 200.
Actual achieved at completion: 103. Partial achievement.

An increase in the FGS revenue administration capacity for tax administration was partially attained by
registering 103 taxpayers through the FMIS against a target of 200.The target was missed because the FMIS
registration system was paused at some point in anticipation that this process would be done in ITAS, which
did not materialize during the project and until closure.

It bears noting that IRI 1 was a weak indicator as an increase in the number of registered taxpayers is not
indicative of whether they paid any taxes. In the absence of data on revenues collected, the contribution of
IRI1 to PDO1 is unclear.

IRI 2: SL-Revenue Mobilization Strategy implemented in Somaliland.

A revenue mobilization strategy for Somaliland was developed and implemented. IRI-2 Baseline: Ad hoc
approach to revenue mobilization. Formally Revised Target: Regulations to implement Customs Act drafted
and introduced. Actual achieved at completion: Regulations to implement Customs Act drafted and
introduced. Goods self-declaration, tariff classification, customs valuation and risk profiles developed.

The implementation of the strategy allowed for the development of the Customs Act which made customs
duties obligatory for importers; led to a customer’s charter; and enabled goods self-declaration at customs,
tariff classification, customs valuation, and customs risk profile to be put in place. The introduction of a new
revenue mobilization strategy in Somaliland was intended to replace the ad hoc approach to revenue
mobilization with the Customs Act, as well as the digitalization of some tax operations, and education of
traders about the new procedures. However, as the target was only to draft regulations for the Customs Act,
and there is no information confirming the passing of the Act, the contribution of IRI2 to PDO1 is unclear.

IRI3: FGS improved Tax Policy Capacity

IRI-3 measured two staff capabilities through the production of revenue performance reports and quarterly
and annual revenue forecast reports, both of which materialized through the work of the FGS Tax Policy Unit
(TPU). Baseline: 0. Formally Revised Target: 2 reports. Actual achieved at completion: 2. Achieved.

The TPU also supported the annual budget revenue forecasting process from 2020 and conducted COVID-19
fiscal implications related analysis. With project support, the MoF established the large and medium taxpayer
office (LMTO), a tax policy unit, and a revenue academy and instituted tax audits and verification. The federal
government also introduced a system of unique TINs issued to 4,287 citizens by 2022. In 2015 the federal
government had collected US$114 million but by end of 2022 this had increased to US$225 million, and the
country’s revenues increased from 1.3 percent in 2016 to 4.3 percent in 2019. It is not clear that the
increasing trend in revenue collected was sustained in the post COVID-19 pandemic period as the ICR
provides no evidence. It is unclear how the production of revenue performance reports would contribute to
enhanced revenue collection.

IRI4: FGS Citizen engagement


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SO-Pub Financial Management Capacity Str (P151492)



IRI-4 measured the number of taxpayers who received/educated (gender disaggregated) comprehensive
information about tax filing, ways to reduce taxes due and how to ensure compliance with tax laws and
regulations. Baseline: 0. Formally Revised Target: 600. Actual achieved at completion: 1441. Exceeded
target. Although the target was exceeded, it is unclear whether this measure made any contribution to overall
revenue collection.

RI-1: Main PDO1 indicator – Number of Tax and Non-Tax Revenue Instruments with Basic Processes
Automated

The strengthening of DRM processes in the FGS, Puntland State and Somaliland was assessed through
progress made in RI-1 “revenue instruments (both tax and non-tax) with basic processes automated at the
FGS.” Baseline: 0. Revised Targets: 4. Actual achieved at completion: 2. The PDO indicator was partially
met. By project closure, 50 percent of the non-taxation instruments were in place through the implementation
of a new revenue mobilization strategy in Somaliland (IRI-2) and the education and consultation of taxpayers
in FGS on tax processes (IRI-4). The other two taxation instruments referred to a property tax and a Value
Added Tax (VAT). Interview data obtained by the IEG suggest that the former’s applicability is limited to cities
and municipalities, while a VAT tax law was passed by Parliament in November 2023 after project closure.

It is unclear how much the project contributed to strengthening domestic revenue mobilization as the
envisaged International Tax Administration System (ITAS) was not completed by project closure, and there
was no/little progress in implementing the tax instruments and processes for the property tax and VAT which
are typically effective in raising revenues. If the pandemic period of 2020-2021 is excluded, revenue data
indicates a gradually increasing total revenue stream with a steady rise in the share of locally collected
revenues. However, as improvements in Somalia’s tax capacity were also supported by several development
partners (IMF, EU, African Development Bank), the partial achievement of the PDO1 is not directly
attributable to this project.

The IRIs for PDO1 suggest that the project made modest progress toward PDO1. IRI-4 exceeded the target,
IRIs 2 and 3 were met and IRI-1 was partially met. However, their contribution to PDO1 is unclear. Most of the
targets that were met were related to taxpayer education or registration without corresponding evidence
(data) that they contributed to tax collection. PDO1 is rated Modest.




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO2: Strengthen systems of expenditure control in the Federal Government, Puntland State of Somalia, and
Somaliland.

Rationale
Theory of Change: PDO2 sought to improve Somalia’s severely limited PFM system, broken institutions,
loss of the state’s legitimacy, extremely weak government capacity to manage and across-the board erosion

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SO-Pub Financial Management Capacity Str (P151492)



of human capital. Given inadequate public expenditure systems and ineffective internal controls, the project
was expected to address this core weakness by establishing accounting systems and related internal
controls. These would create the basis for sustainable technical and implementation capacity of the state,
thereby enhancing its legitimacy in the eyes of the citizens.

Key Outputs

        Budget module;
        Use of country systems Roadmap strategy;
        Multi-dimensional chart of accounts;
        HRM manual developed;
        FMIS functional evaluation report;
        Draft Public Procurement Law and Public Procurement Authority Strategic Plan;
        PPP legal and institutional management structure.

Intermediate indicators and outcomes

IRI-5, IRI-6 and IRI-7: Improved coverage and classification of data in Quarterly (in year) and Annual
Budget Reports

In each of the three jurisdictions – FGS (IRI-5), Puntland State of Somalia (IRI-6), and Somaliland (IRI-7):

Baseline: Quarterly budget reports included only approved budget and actuals disclosed.

Formally Revised Target: Code covered main budget items.

Actual achieved at completion: The end target was achieved. Allowed comparison to approved budget
including supplementary information. The targets for each of the three jurisdictions were achieved and
contained enhanced coverage by including expenditures at commitment and payment stages at project
closure.

IRI-8, IRI-9 and IRI-10: Improved coverage and classification of data in Annual Financial Reports

For all three jurisdictions – FGS (IRI-8), Puntland State of Somalia (IRI-9), and Somaliland (IRI-10):

Baseline: Revenue and Expenditure reports by organizational and economic classification.

Formally Revised Target: Improved financial statements.

Actual achieved at completion: Implemented. The targets for each of the three jurisdictions were achieved
and contained enhanced information at project closure as intended.

The target for in-year budget reports improving coverage and data classification was achieved in each of the
three jurisdictions. As Somalia had no formal approved budget for almost 20 years during the protracted war,
PFM capacity did not exist previously. All records were processed manually, there were long delays in
preparing the government's annual financial statements and presenting them to Parliament. No financial
statements had been submitted for audit within 25 months of the end of each financial year for several


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SO-Pub Financial Management Capacity Str (P151492)



years, and there was a 3-year backlog in preparing annual financial statements. The achievement of the
targets for IRI-5 – IRI-10 was therefore a significant step towards PDO2.

IRI-11 – IRI-12: Diploma Training

      IRI-11: Somaliland - Baseline: 0 students. Revised Targets: 33 students. Actual achieved at
       completion: 2 students obtained their diploma from the Somaliland Chartered Institute of Public
       Financial Accountants (CIPFA). Somaliland CIPFA diploma target of 33 was not met.

Somaliland did not perform well because the training by CIPFA UK for their local PFM consultant CIPFA
trainer and qualified accountant, who also provided ongoing direct support to students started late. Face-to-
face and web-based lectures were however supplemented by mentorship and on-the job learning, and a
senior manager’s scheme ensured that proper workplace coaching and mentoring is provided to students.
These aspects were brought on board late.

      IRI-12: Puntland State of Somalia - Baseline: 0 students. Revised Targets: 33 students. Actual
       achieved at completion: 34 students. PSS target of 33 was exceeded.

IRI-13, IRI-14 and IRI-15: Direct Payments to Vendors

      IRI-13 – IRI-15 measured the percentage of non-salary expenditures that were transferred directly to
       beneficiaries in each of the three jurisdictions compared to their targets.
      IRI-13 - FGS - Baseline: 25%. Revised Targets: 60%. Actual achieved at completion: 93.5%.
       Exceeded.
      IRI -14 - Somaliland - Baseline: 25%. Revised Targets: 60%. Actual achieved at completion:
       100%. Exceeded.
      IRI – 15 - Puntland State of Somalia - Baseline: 25%. Revised Targets: 60%. Actual achieved at
       completion: 51%. Target was not met at PSS due to problems in the interface system connected with
       the Central Bank.

Out of a total of eleven IRIs, nine were met and two were not met.

RI-2a – 2c: Main PDO2 indicator – Percentage of Appropriated Expenditures Processed.

      RI-2a – 2c measured progress towards PDO2 by recording the percentage of transactions that were
       processed through the SFMIS system in each of the three jurisdictions.
      RI-2a: FGS Baseline: 25%. Formally Revised Target: 60%. Actual Achieved at Completion:
       93.5%. Target exceeded.
      RI-2b: PSS Baseline: 25%. Formally Revised Target: 60%. Actual Achieved at Completion: 75%.
       Target exceeded.
      RI-2c: Somaliland Baseline: 25%. Formally Revised Target: 60%. Actual Achieved at Completion:
       100%. Target exceeded.

Achievement of RI – 2a- 2c in each of the three jurisdictions helped to reduce expenditure arrears. The
operationalization of SFMIS established a PFM system with strong internal controls as evidenced by the
absence of expenditure arrears (2021 IMF report No. 21/310). The SFMIS system also facilitated reconciling
bank accounts in a timely manner, improving financial reporting and paying directly into the civil

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SO-Pub Financial Management Capacity Str (P151492)



servants’ individual accounts through the electronic system, thereby replacing the manual processing system
that existed at appraisal.

As the RI-2 targets were exceeded in each of the three jurisdictions, the overall PDO2 indicator was
achieved. Nine of the eleven IRIs for PDO2 were also achieved/exceeded. Consequently, the rating for the
efficacy of PDO2 is Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
PDO3: Strengthen systems of accountability in the Federal Government, Puntland State of Somalia, and
Somaliland.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The overall theory of change (TOC) was that since Somalia’s public finances were not
scrutinized by parliament previously, the introduction of parliamentary oversight over its public finances would
contribute to reducing the prevailing sentiment of widespread corruption, thereby contributing to institution
building, and enhancing the legitimacy of the state, institutional effectiveness, and responsiveness of the state
to citizens’ needs. IEG believes that this approach was optimistic. It is not clear if the publication of audit
reports would automatically contribute to parliamentarians and citizens knowledge/education about PFM
given that electronic access to government publications remains a challenge.

Key Outputs

        International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions (ISSAI) based Audit manual produced;
        Performance audit-based manual produced;
        Audit quality control guide produced;
        Office of the Auditor General (OAG) strategic plan;
        Draft Audit Act developed.

Intermediate indicators and outcomes

IRI-16, IRI-17 and IRI-18: Strengthened audit methods implemented.

In each of the three jurisdictions (FGS, PSS and Somaliland), IRI-16 – IRI-18 recorded the passing of audit
laws that would align the audit procedures and methodology with the standards set by the International
Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI).

      IRI-16 - FGS - Baseline: Audit procedures & methodology not aligned with INTOSAI standards.
         Revised




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SO-Pub Financial Management Capacity Str (P151492)



Targets: Passing of a new law establishing the Office of the Auditor General (OAG). Actual achieved at
completion: Law passed. Target achieved.

      IRI -17 - Puntland State of Somalia - Baseline: Audit procedures & methodology not aligned with
       INTOSAI standards. Revised Targets: New audit tools – adoption by the OAG of a Compliance Audit
       Manual (CAM) and a Financial Audit Manual (FAM) based on INTOSAI standards. Actual achieved
       at completion: Implemented – “As of 2019, the OAG is progressively adopting Compliance Audit
       Manual (CAM) & Financial Audit Manual (FAM) that were developed with technical assistance of the
       INTOSAI Development Institute (IDI). These were developed based on INTOSAI standards,” (ICR
       Annex 1, June 30, 2023). Progress was made but target was not fully achieved.
      IRI-18 - Somaliland - Baseline: Audit procedures & methodology not aligned with INTOSAI
       standards. Revised Targets: MDAs to adopt audit procedures using modern audit management
       software and improved methodologies. Actual achieved at completion: End target achieved.

RI-3a – 3c: Main PDO3 indicator – Ministries, departments, and agencies (MDA) audits (incl. pro-poor
sectors) completed and published.

      RI-3a – 3c measured progress in the accountability of public finances (PDO3) by recording the
       percentage of MDA audits completed and published in each of the three jurisdictions.
      RI-3a: FGS Baseline: 0%. Formally Revised Target: 75%. Actual Achieved at Completion: 98%.
       Target exceeded. The passing of the Law of the OAG of the FGS turned the OAG into an independent
       entity that was able to issue timely, relevant, and high-quality audit reports in line with international
       standards, including the formulation of a Strategic Plan for FY17-20.
      RI-3b: PSS Baseline: 0%. Formally Revised Target: 75%. Actual Achieve at Completion: 87%.
       Target exceeded.
      RI-3c: Somaliland Baseline: 0%. Formally Revised Target: 75%. Actual Achieve at Completion:
       55%. Target missed. Somaliland did not attain the set target because it had a problem with its
       financial system which was resolved in late 2022. At closure, Somaliland only attained 62 percent.

The 75% target for RI-3 was met in two out of the three jurisdictions. RI-3 fell short of the target of 75% in
Somaliland, where it reached 62 percent. A new law strengthening audit methods was passed at the federal
level, new audit procedures were introduced in Somaliland, and new audit tools were implemented in
Puntland. The project strengthened systems of accountability in all three jurisdictions through qualitatively
better methods used to audit government financial statements. The project also financed the development of
the audit law for FGS, audit manuals and sufficient infrastructure and ICT capacity for efficient audit
operations in all three jurisdictions.

The targets for the IRIs related with the passing of the audit laws that would enable the implementation of the
audits as per INTOSAI standards were achieved in FGS and Somaliland. While the target was missed in
PSS, there was substantial progress starting in 2019. As the main PDO indicator (RI3) was largely met in the
three jurisdictions, and the IRIs were either met or substantially achieved in all three jurisdictions, the efficacy
of PDO3 is rated Substantial. This said, it is notable that the publication of the audit reports was critical for
enhanced accountability. However, given the weak state of citizens’ awareness and means to access
electronically government publications, as well as the weak state of parliamentarians’ access to electronic
records, it is ambitious to assume that for the larger civil society and parliamentarians, RI-3a - 3c contributed
to greater accountability and minimization of corruption.


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 24
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                SO-Pub Financial Management Capacity Str (P151492)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy rating is Substantial. However, given the weak capacity and FCV status of Somalia, while
                            all three PDOs can be perceived as being appropriately output-oriented to capture the intended outcomes, in
                            the interest of sustainability, it would have been useful if the Project team was more ambitious in the case of
                            at least one PDO and targeted creating more fiscal space in the longer-term. As an example, in the case
                            of DRM, the project made progress in educating/registering taxpayers but despite an array of IRIs and RAs
                            aimed at customs duties, property tax, VAT or income tax, there is no evidence whether any of the targets
                            that were achieved contributed to enhanced revenue collection.

                            Of the three PDO indicators, RI-2 related with strengthening PFM control was met in all three jurisdictions and
                            is rated Substantial. RI-3, which is also rated Substantial, measured improved accountability in PFM and was
                            fully achieved in two of the three jurisdictions, and largely achieved in the third jurisdiction. RI-1 focused on
                            DRM reforms and met its targets in only two of the three jurisdictions. As its achievement is not directly
                            attributable to this project, RI-1 is rated Modest. It is also unclear if RI-1 made a contribution to DRM as its
                            indicators were largely focused on taxpayer registrations/education.

                            Of the 18 IRIs, 14 achieved their targets, supporting the substantive progress that the project made towards
                            PDO1 – PDO3. Even in cases where the IRI targets were not met, there was significant progress.

                            PFM capacity was increased in Somalia through activities outlined above by way of increased revenues.
                            SFMIS established strong PFM system that had strong internal controls as evidenced by absence of
                            expenditure arrears. Intergovernmental fiscal transfers were enabled on the strength of PFM systems at
                            Federal and FMS level. In March 2020, Somalia qualified for the HIPC initiative decision point, reaching the
                            necessary milestones—some of which this project financed.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Traditional measures of efficiency, such as financial rate of return and cost per unit of input or output are not
   applicable to the project given the paucity of economic data, the ongoing conflict and fragility in southern
   Somalia, and the uncertainty in determining costs and benefits. However, it is possible is to determine the extent



                                                                                                                               Page 15 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SO-Pub Financial Management Capacity Str (P151492)



to which available resources were used efficiently, and whether cost effectiveness was a guiding criterion in
Somalia’s FCV context and the project’s funding modalities.

Most of the available project funding was used at closure— US$43.6 million out of US$50.0 million, or 88
percent. The 2018 restructuring and availability of additional funding benefited all components.

In a country where two decades of war had destroyed all formal fiscal systems and government capacity, the
project activities made impressive progress in establishing domestic revenue and expenditure management as
well as audit systems. While the longer-term benefits of these are difficult to quantify, if sustained, they are likely
to make significant contributions to PFM. The project activities under PDO2 and PDO3 modernized Somalia’s
PFM system. The use of SFMIS interfaced with the Central Bank of Somalia’s system and enabled the
processing of automatic payment systems which improved internal payment controls, decreasing opportunities
for fraud and corruption, and eliminated payments arrears. The system enabled timely payment of salaries to
civil servants, teachers, the Somali police force, and the army. The federal government has been using a
custom-developed web-based FMIS since April 2015. The SFMIS is cost effective, with unlimited concurrent
users and cost-effective license fees. There were 250 registered users in 2016, approximately 30 percent of
whom connected to the system daily. The annual cloud hosting charge was US$54,000. Ongoing costs were
approximately US$9,000 per month for Internet and phone. Puntland is using the same custom-developed
platform but the Puntland FMIS costs less than the SFMIS because there were fewer licenses.

Somalia aligned its audit methodology with the ISSAIs, which supported provision of high-quality financial
information to stakeholders, investors, and the public, resulting in greater economic growth, development, and
accountability. The adoption of international standards by the OAG lent credibility to the audit process and
allowed the Auditor General to publish government-wide audit recommendations. Expenditure documents are
electronically filed to support accountability and audit processes. The training/capacity building effort established
significant workforce capabilities built from the bottom up in the social sectors. The International Public Sector
Accounting Standards, which the government adopted through the project, improved the cash basis of financial
reporting. A citizen’s guide to budget preparation was published although it is not clear that citizens have the
knowledge and electronic access to benefit from it. Nevertheless, it is good practice and, if sustained, likely to
benefit citizens in the longer-term. For Somalia which lacked a central authority and rule of law, the PFM reform
project aspired to restore trust in government institutions through its support for core PFM institutions that are
central to state building.

Several factors reduced the efficiency of resource use for the project.

Efficiency in resource utilization was negatively impacted by implementation delays. The 36-month extension of
the project raised the administrative costs for the World Bank, as project implementation was delayed for six
months after effectiveness. According to the ICR, the project’s design was too complex with seven components
and several activities included in each component. Evidently, the activities were too ambitious given the weak
capacity of the government.

Software-related problems also led to delays. Delays were incurred due to the need to attain uniform
specifications for ITAS and SFMIS as desired by the three government jurisdictions. The ITAS contract was
cancelled by the government twice over the lifetime of the project, adding to the delays. There were also delays
due to the onset of the pandemic towards the end of the initial project window.

The civil servants who ran the project lacked basic understanding of World Bank procurement guidelines. This
led to difficulties for the beneficiary MDAs to draft the terms of reference which project implementation unit


                                                                                                         Page 16 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SO-Pub Financial Management Capacity Str (P151492)



staff finally did, with World Bank technical assistance. Similar reasons led to delays in the procurement
evaluation processes. The decision makers did not have full trust in the evaluation teams.

Resource efficiency was affected negatively by unusually high procurement contracts which incurred a higher
premium compared to premia in other FCV environments, primarily because consultants were unwilling to
work in Somalia without a premium, due to heightened security risk. In addition, the consulting market in
Somalia for governance was very small and oligopolistic in nature. In the sub-region, there were few specialists
with deep governance knowledge of PFM reform in FCV contexts.

Based on the above, the project’s overall efficiency is rated as Substantial. The project benefited from
considerable additional funding following appraisal, but implementation was slow and led to long delays,
requiring a 36 months’ extension.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project achieved significant gains in a challenging context. Under PDO1, strengthening DRM, the project
facilitated the institutionalization of core DRM practices in all three jurisdictions. Revenue outcomes cannot be
attributed to this project alone, however, given that several other organizations were working concurrently on
such reforms satisfactory progress can be attributed to the overall project. Standards required as part of
international tax administration system specifications (ITAS) are now applicable in FGS, PSS and Somaliland,
although the system had not become operational by project closing. A new VAT tax law was passed by
Parliament after project closure and is expected to contribute to enhanced DRM capacity. The envisaged new
property tax was not implemented at closure. Although its legal framework has been put in place and is a step
forward, it may not be implemented even in the medium-term because of Somalia’s fragile security situation. A
more meaningful approach to a DRM-PDO’s design would be measures that are more amenable to
implementation in conditions with fragile security. Under PDO2, automatic processing of expenditures is now
operational in Somalia through the implementation of SFMIS, the establishment of the OAG as an independent
entity that operates according to the ISSAIs, as well as the passing of a new PFM law that has significantly
boosted the country’s PFM capacity and knowledge. Under PDO3, considerable progress was made following
the establishment of the new system of fiscal accountability through the completion and publication of

                                                                                                     Page 17 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SO-Pub Financial Management Capacity Str (P151492)



expanded and detailed audit reports in FGS and PSS, although problems in Somaliland’s financial system
continue to impede progress in that jurisdiction. Importantly, synergies across PDOs were developed during
implementation. Audit reports are also shared by the OAG with citizens in the hope of fostering citizens’ feeling
of ownership in the country’s fiscal management system, though this goal is optimistic given that most citizens
lack access to electronic information.

Although some reforms are pending, important results are already observed. Operationalizing and
implementing the ITAS system will be crucial for the purposes of streamlining revenue collection mechanisms,
while the full introduction of a new VAT and property tax will boost the federal government’s capacity to enhance
revenue. The establishment of new institutional structures through the LMTO, the tax policy unit, a unique TIN
and the operationalization of the revenue academy will enable further progress in attaining core project
objectives. The ICR mentions that improvements in budget management and control led to the IMF 2021 report
that identified no new domestic expenditure arrears since 2017. In December 2023, Somalia qualified for
irrevocable debt relief as the IDA and IMF approved the country’s HIPC Completion Point. Somalia has fulfilled
the required triggers that, inter alia, entail successful reforms in its PFM and DRM strategies (CPF FY24-28, p.
10).

As the relevance of the PDO is rated High, overall efficacy is rated Substantial, and efficiency is rated
Substantial, the overall outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to the project’s development outcomes is significant and spans most risk categories, primarily due to
Somalia’s status as a fragile state marked by weak institutions, limited state capacity, and ongoing conflict.
These challenges pose significant obstacles to the project’s long-term sustainability. An escalation of the
security risk could erode the government’s effectiveness, potentially draining resources required for civil
servant salaries, leading to new accumulation of arrears. A breakdown in relations between the PSS and the
FGS as is currently happening (https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2024-04-01/puntland-to-operate-
independently-from-somalia-after-law-change), will undermine the progress made in hiring and training
competent staff, thus leading to a loss of valuable technical skills. The political landscape in Somalia is
characterized by competing interests and power struggles. This further jeopardizes the sustainability of
development outcomes. One of the most important risks to development is the FGS’s modest level of fiscal
revenues and its continued dependence on donor support to finance the wage bill. This includes the
provision of technical capacity and training needed to sustain and enlarge the sphere of civil service
competence in both jurisdictions. An external shock that disrupts the flow of donor support will directly affect
FGS’s ability to maintain the PFM reforms and systems established as a part of the project. The Somali
federal government, as well as state governments such as the PSS and Somaliland, remain in an embryonic
state, and clan-based rivalries have the capacity to undermine political leadership in support of project
reforms and associated policy. Policy implementation remains a key challenge in the country context. An
example is the functionality of the SFMIS, crucial to project outcomes. Some of the SFMIS functions do not
work well, yet developers have chosen to retain the SFMIS course code instead of handing it over to the
FGS.


                                                                                                     Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SO-Pub Financial Management Capacity Str (P151492)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project design focused on setting up functional structures on PFM, external control, and accountability.
  The project team recognized, in line with the 2012 UN Monitoring Group Report, that corruption and
  legitimacy are linked in Somalia, and that building trust in Somali institutions and enhancing state
  legitimacy was at the core of establishing PFM integrity, as well as security and justice. The project’s
  rationale and design departed from the sound argument that institutional capacity-building in FCV
  contexts is a long-term exercise as also underscored in the 2011 WDR. The project’s solid analytical
  underpinnings elaborated in the 2018 SCD pointed to continued donor dependence in Somalia and the
  need to boost solid, institutionalized domestic revenue streams. With regards to donations from abroad,
  project design stressed the need to ensure a predictable flow of funds from the external development
  partners through Somali government institutions that would then direct the flow of funds to citizens in the
  form of reliable service delivery.

  The Bank cooperated with international donors by disseminating results and findings to them.
  Cooperation on PFM reform and DRM was pronounced, especially with the African Development Bank,
  the European Union, Norway and the UK Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office.

  The project’s design reflected synergies with Bank engagement in Somalia but was complex and set
  overtly ambitious targets and was not clear on crucial aspects of the project. At appraisal, the project was
  agreed upon with key government officials from the three jurisdictions and ensured domestic reform
  ownership. The PFM focus areas selected built on progress made until appraisal through existing Bank
  engagement in Somalia by the PFM capacity strengthening project (P146006). Its main results would
  underpin the recurrent cost window project (P148428), thereby ensuring a gradual strengthening of
  financial management structures. However, project appraisal included three high level objectives, three
  key performance indicators, seven components and multiple intermediate results indicators, despite the
  fragile security situation and the known absence of a statistical office and related data. Each of the
  components contained several activities and the activities were overambitious. Moreover, the adoption
  and implementation of such policies is a long and often arduous process that depends, inter alia, on
  adequate technical and administrative capacity. At appraisal, the project also did not clearly define the
  “central finance agencies and targeted sectors” mentioned in the original PDO and was vague about the
  range of stakeholders that were expected to be influenced by project activities. Further, the level of
  ambition set out by the project in the PAD, such as the establishment of a “training for trainers” (ToT) to
  create SFMIS “super users” (PAD, p. 22) or a MoF intranet for Somalia did not adequately consider the
  set of challenges that the realization of such laudable goals would entail.

  The lessons derived from PFM reforms in FCV operations in other countries, especially regarding the
  salience of an incremental approach to reform and quick implementation, were not always reflected in the
  project’s implementation and sequencing. The project rightly drew on prior analytical and practical work
  on PFM reform in FCV contexts such as the 2005 IMF Report on Rebuilding Fiscal Institutions in Post-
  conflict Countries. During implementation, however, some of those lessons were ignored. While the PAD
  stressed the need to embark on reforms in an incremental manner and make good use of “quick wins” to
  build momentum, such a sequenced approach was not followed through. implementation delays meant
  that action had to be taken simultaneously to use existing windows of reform opportunity instead of

                                                                                                   Page 19 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SO-Pub Financial Management Capacity Str (P151492)



  moving from quick wins at PFM level to service delivery improvements, as originally envisaged and as
  done in other FCV countries that had successfully undertaken PFM reforms. Further, lessons from other
  FCV operations underlined the significance of a robust legal framework early on to concentrate on
  implementation in subsequent stages. Such progress did not always prove easy. To illustrate, the new
  Audit Law was passed and approved by the President shortly before project closure in 2023 (ICR, p.21).

  Project sequencing did not take adequate account of contextual constraints. Existing data at preparation
  pointed to the fragility of Somalia, the political tensions that existed in the country and the need to make
  efficient use of resources to maximize output towards the PDO. The ICR mentions that project
  sequencing responsibilities were delegated to a government PFM Reform Coordinator on a day-to-day
  basis, despite the known challenges in the country context pertaining to technical expertise and
  implementation capacity. Procurement contracts incurred a high premium due to heightened security risk
  and the paucity of qualified governance specialists. This could have been incorporated in the project at
  appraisal, given that Somalia’s fragility status was well known.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Political support at the highest level enabled the implementation of difficult reforms. The close engagement
 with high-level government officials allowed the World Bank to have a strategic dialogue with the federal
 government, Puntland and Somaliland and continue supporting the reform process, despite frequent
 changes in government and associated priorities.

 The Bank’s ongoing dialogue with the government facilitated frequent and effective monitoring, despite
 security challenges. Security constraints increased the difficulties for implementation and supervision. It
 was difficult to organize in-country missions due to security threats, including implementation support
 missions. The onslaught of the pandemic made on-site visits for supervision and control very difficult, with
 the government and the WB being the sole monitoring agencies. The PFM Action Plan (PFMRAP) aimed at
 focusing public expenditure on government priority areas and improve the transparency of the national
 budget process. PFMRAP was created out of two studies, conducted by the Inland Revenue Department,
 setting up benchmarks to mark progress towards the realization of the set PFM goals.

 The ISRs were conducted frequently and were instrumental in improving aspects of the project. Project
 supervision benefited from frequent ISRs, 11 in total, which were detailed and analytical. They contributed
 to the dialogue with FGS authorities on reform prioritization. The 2017 Mid-term review that led to the
 additional financing paper was crucial in restructuring the project, clarifying the PDO and tightening the
 results chain framework.

 The Bank offered close support to implementing agencies throughout project implementation, but frequent
 TTL changes undermined cohesion. Bank support was extensive throughout the project life cycle,
 including during the preparation of the procurement documents, review of deliverables, discussions with
 consultants, and technical advice and support in implementation related to DRM and expenditure control
 and accountability reforms. Supervision required significant engagement from the Bank, and Bank
 continuity was limited, especially in the project’s early phase. The first TTL managed the project for a little

                                                                                                     Page 20 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SO-Pub Financial Management Capacity Str (P151492)



 longer than 1 year after project effectiveness, the second one for 6 months, and the third TTL for 18
 months. A team of co-TTLs led the project from the mid-term review to completion. The Bank also
 maintained an active hands-on dialogue supplemented with frequent face-to-face meetings and
 consultations with the client government in a frequently changing and volatile environment.

 Capacity constraints inhibited project implementation. Institutional capacity was weak due to the lack of
 defined processes and responsibilities (which the project sought to address) as well as the lack of
 familiarity with World Bank procedures. Most of the staff at MDAs, both management and civil servants,
 lacked a basic understanding of World Bank procurement regulations, including the stages of the
 procurement process. This led to multiple requests for clarifications to the Project Coordination Units, in
 addition to suppliers also faced challenges with bidding documents published in English, and not in Somali.
 complaints. Many suppliers also faced challenges with bidding documents published in English, and not in
 Somali.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project objective was initially vague but improved at midterm review. The monitoring and
 evaluation system and framework lacked realistic targets and had poorly formulated indicators, which were
 vague and difficult to measure. The overall logic of intervention was not clear. None of the DRM-related
 indicators could measure progress towards revenue collection - "number of taxpayers consulted or
 educated" was not a meaningful indicator. The design of the VAT is noted to be unsuitable for a fragile
 state. Similarly, the expenditure-related indicators also did not connect with a larger fiscal space. The
 citizens’-related accountability indicators were too ambitious given that most citizens do not have access to
 the Internet in Somalia. The project indicators were not well aligned or linked to the PDOs or necessary
 reporting tools. Some of the initial indicators were not relevant, specific, measurable, achievable, relevant,
 and time-bound. There were no proposed sampling and data collection methods documented, while M&E
 also lacked an analysis plan and reporting templates. At midterm review, the PDO was made clearer and
 changes in a series of indicators clarified the intervention logic, making some targets clearly measurable.



b. M&E Implementation
  Project restructuring allowed for the formulation of mostly measurable indicators. M&E data was
  recorded for the ISRs. Most intermediate results indicators were relevant, specific, measurable,
  achievable, and time bound. The IRI used to assess citizen engagement was unclear as to whether
  citizens were consulted or educated regarding tax processes.


                                                                                                    Page 21 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SO-Pub Financial Management Capacity Str (P151492)




c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data was used by the Bank to warn stakeholders and accelerate progress. In the project’s
  initial phases, M&E data was difficult to obtain. The PFM Reform Coordinating Unit regularly updated the
  operational tools and procedures. Challenges identified were shared with other donors, World Bank
  management, and the government so that they could be addressed. M&E was used to inform project
  implementation during the 2017 restructuring, and data was used to accelerate progress towards
  meeting PDO objectives as well as specific indicators, such as revamping the OAG’s audit framework to
  align with the Supreme Audit Institution framework standards, the alignment to ITAS specifications by
  the three jurisdictions and the outline of the CIPFA Diploma.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category C, and no environmental or social compliance issues occurred
   during implementation. No specific environmental or social safeguard instruments were required, and no
   safeguard policies were triggered.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The project complied with World Bank procedures and policies regarding budgeting, financial accounting,
   and internal controls, reporting and auditing. Quarterly interim unaudited financial reports were found to be
   timely in the later part of the project and prepared in form and substance as agreed upon with the Bank.
   Challenges raised in the project’s audit reports were resolved satisfactorily. The PFM project received
   unqualified audit reports every year from the OAG. The overall level of disbursements at the date of
   closure was noted to be moderately satisfactory due to initial limitations in the internal control that were
   addressed during the project.

   Project procurement was conducted in accordance with the WB’s procurement guidelines under IBRD
   loans and credit and in accordance with the approved Procurement Plan. Since the national procurement
   law was not fully operational, customized Bank standard procurement documents were used to approach
   the national market. Procurement delays were mostly due to the challenging operating environment
   and weak capacity of procurement staff as well as unfamiliarity with the WB’s procurement requirements.
   Additional procurement support was offered as implementation progressed, including hands-on support by
   the WB procurement and technical teams. Recommendations made during implementation support
   missions, combined with the trainings, resulted in improved processes and reduction in procurement



                                                                                                   Page 22 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SO-Pub Financial Management Capacity Str (P151492)



   processing turn-around time. The overall project procurement performance is rated Moderately
   Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory         Satisfactory
                                                                              Initial project design led to
                                                                              implementation delays and the
                                                                              non-completion of ITAS by
Bank Performance               Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                              closure, reducing the
                                                                              developmental impact of the
                                                                              project.
Quality of M&E                 Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                  Modest


12. Lessons

Design project sequencing by setting realistic targets in FCV contexts. The Somalia Second
PFM Capacity Strengthening Project suggests that “quick wins” envisaged at appraisal should be
implemented in the early stages of the project to carry forward a positive momentum and expand
beneficiaries over time. Although its risk assessment analysis departed from sounds observations
regarding the inherent risks in implementation in the country context, project design did not
anticipate the possibility of implementation delays that could undermine overall delivery.

Front-load tough reform areas to build momentum. The Somalia Second PFM Capacity
Strengthening Project demonstrates that it is useful to implement tough reforms early to enhance the
chances of implementation by closure. One of the project’s major objectives was to fully implement
ITAS at closure. Such an inherently difficult reform typically faces multiple veto players, opposed
coalitions and entrenched interests set against change. In the presence of government commitment
to reform, such a reform should have been introduced at the very early stages of Somalia’s
PFM reform drive. This may have convinced reform beneficiaries that the developmental impact
of the reform would be positive and thus enlarged the pro-change constituency. In practice,
important DRM progress was made through the project, but even after two extensions, ITAS
implementation was not achieved by closure.


                                                                                                Page 23 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SO-Pub Financial Management Capacity Str (P151492)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR offers a concise summary of the project, substantiating most of its ratings with available data and
evidence. Overall, the ICR maintains a largely consistent alignment with the project's developmental objectives,
adheres to most of the established guidelines and maintains a results-oriented focus. Lessons drawn from the
project are articulated clearly and are mostly substantiated by the evidence presented in the ICR. Some of the
available data regarding Bank performance are not well documented, and there are some important gaps in
information. IEG obtained evidence of IRI indicators from other documents, such as the 2022 restructuring
paper (Report No. RES51297) and ISRs, while the tax instruments that formed a core part of PDO-1’s outcome
indicators were obtained by IEG through additional research, since they were not stated in the ICR. The report
does not include a discussion of the project's theory of change, since none was formulated at approval, instead
outlining a retroactive ToC through a diagram. It would have been very beneficial to outline how the theory of
change looks ipso facto, aiding the reader in comprehending the basis for the given ratings. The ICR’s risk
section could have more strongly acknowledged the existential risks to the sustainability of the project
outcomes.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                  Page 24 of 24
