     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Oromia Forested Landscape Program (P156475)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023911

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P156475                                   Oromia Forested Landscape Program

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Ethiopia                                  Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A4442,TF-A4467                         31-Dec-2022                                         18,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 17-Mar-2017                               30-Jun-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          18,000,000.00                                    18,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           18,000,000.00                                    18,000,000.00

 Actual                                       18,000,000.00                                    18,000,000.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Chikako Miwa              Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of this project was “to improve the enabling environment for
   sustainable forest management and investment in Oromia” (BioCarbon Fund Plus Grant Agreement,
   schedule 1, page 6). This project covered components financed by the Recipient-Executed Trust Fund
   (RETF) grant under the Oromia Forested Landscape Program. The PDO statement in the Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD, para 17) was identical to that in the BioCarbon Fund Plus Grant Agreement.



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Oromia Forested Landscape Program (P156475)



   The objective of the overarching Oromia Forested Landscape Program was “to reduce net greenhouse gas
   (GHG) emissions and improve sustainable forest management in Oromia” (PAD, para 16). This
   overarching program objective combined the objectives of the RETF grant and Emission Reductions
   Purchase Agreement (ERPA) (PAD, para 16). The ERPA’s objective was “to reduce net GHG emissions
   from forest cover change in Oromia” (PAD, para 18). The portions covered by the RETF grant and the
   ERPA were to be reported separately based on the legal agreements (PAD, para 11).

   IEG concurs with the ICR (para 10) to assess the project based on the objective of the RETF grant.

   This ICR Review assesses the achievement of the PDO of the RETF grant, which is parsed to two objectives
   as follows (Objectives 1 and 2), as well as the overarching objective of the Oromia Forested Landscape
   Program (Objective 3):

   Objective 1. To improve the enabling environment for sustainable forest management in Oromia

   Objective 2. To improve the enabling environment for sustainable forest investment in Oromia

   Objective 3. To reduce net greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and improve sustainable forest management in
   Oromia



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   This project was financed by the RETF grant to implement Components 1 and 2 of the overarching Oromia
   Forested Landscape Program. The ongoing Emission Reduction Project (OFLP-ERPA, P151294)
   implements Component 3 for the Emission Reductions Purchase Agreement (ERPA) (ICR, page 50).

   The estimates of the following project component costs are based on the PAD (paras 33-34), while the
   actuals are based on the ICR (table 1, page 9).

   Component 1. Enabling investments (Estimate: US$11.54 million, Actual: US$12.17 million)

   The component financed investment in Participatory Forest Management (PFM) and reforestation in
   deforestation hotspots in selected sites, as well as extension services and land-use planning at state and
   local levels. PFM activities included livelihood support and development of selected nature-based
   community enterprises.

   Component 2. Enabling environment (Estimate: US$6.46 million, Actual: US$5.83 million)

   The component financed complementary activities aimed at improving the effectiveness and impact of
   institutions by enhancing enabling environment (i.e., policies, marketing, Benefit Sharing Mechanism
   (BSM)), information (i.e., strategic communication, Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification (MRV)),


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Oromia Forested Landscape Program (P156475)



  and safeguards management at state and local levels. Component 2 included costs to set up a MRV system
  and a Benefit Sharing Plan to lay the foundations for the OFLP-ERPA to operationalize the ERPA (ICR,
  page 50).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: At appraisal, the project was estimated to be US$18 million (PAD, table 3, page 16). At
  project closing, the actual cost was US$18 million (ICR, annex 3, page 49).

  Financing: At appraisal, the project was planned to be financed through a RETF grant of US$18 million
  from the BioCarbon Fund Plus (PAD, para 11). At project closing, the project was financed by a RETF grant
  of US$18 (ICR, page 6).

  Borrower Contribution: No contribution from the Borrower was reported by the ICR.

  Dates: The project was approved on March 17, 2017, and became effective on April 28, 2017. The Mid-
  Term Review (MTR) was reported on January 31, 2020. The project closed on June 30, 2023, which was 6
  months after the original closing date of December 31, 2022.

  Restructurings: The project was restructured twice.

        Restructuring 1: The project was restructured in January 2020 following the MTR. The number of
         woredas supported by the project for PFM and Afforestation/Reforestation (A/R) was increased from
         49 to 77. This change helped to offset slower implementation progress in those woredas where the
         evolving fragile and conflict-affected situations (FCS) and the security risks had constrained field
         work. Additionally, one PDO indicator and three Intermediate Results (IR) indicators were revised to
         clarify the definition and verification methodology, as described below (based on Restructuring
         Paper 2020, paras 4-5).
               o Indicator 3 (Direct project beneficiaries). At appraisal, this PDO indicator was defined to
                  measure the number of “people or groups who directly derive benefits from an intervention”
                  (PAD, page 45) The description of this indicator in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
                  was found to lack clarity leading to inconsistent reporting against this indicator. The
                  adjustments of the definition at the first restructuring clarified that reporting should include all
                  those that receive livelihoods support, direct employment or training, as well those involved
                  in PFM and A/R activities but should not include the numbers of community members that
                  have simply been ‘consulted’ as part of project implementation.
               o Indicator 5 (Forest users trained). At appraisal, this IR indicator was defined to include the
                  number of woreda and kebele experts and community members trained in the application of
                  PFM, land use planning, extension practices and safeguard training (PAD, page 46).
                  Because of this, the indicator was found to be similar to Indicator 3 (Direct project
                  beneficiaries). Therefore, the first restructuring modified its definition to include only the
                  community members trained and exclude the woreda and kebele level experts from future
                  reporting on this indicator.
               o Indicator 7 (Beneficiaries that feel project investments reflected their needs). The survey
                  methodology to measure the results of this IR indicator was modified to be sample based
                  instead of covering all the target beneficiaries indicated in the Result Framework.


                                                                                                        Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Oromia Forested Landscape Program (P156475)



               o Indicator 11 (Benefit Sharing Mechanism (BSM)). The IR indicator was modified to read
                  “BSM approved” instead of “BSM established and maintained” to better reflect the objectives
                  of the OFLP Grant. While approval of the BSM was part of the objective of the OFLP Grant,
                  maintenance of this mechanism was part of the Emissions Reduction Program which would
                  only become active once the ERPA was approved.

         Restructuring 2: The project was restructured in July 2022 to extend the project closing date by six
          months from December 31, 2022, to June 30, 2023. This extension was to ensure completion of the
          final preparation activities supporting OFLP-ERPA and the investment activities on the ground,
          considering interruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context: Ethiopia’s largest forested landscapes are in Oromia National Regional
State, which provide critical ecosystem services to the country and the region. Oromia is Ethiopia’s largest
regional state in terms of land area (around 32 million hectares (ha)), population (over 30 million people),
and forest cover (around 9 million ha in total) (PAD, para 5). However, forest loss and degradation are
increasing in Oromia. Throughout Oromia, 499,135 ha of forest was lost between 2000 and 2013 or around
38,395 ha per year, which resulted in over 65 million tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2e) emitted into
the atmosphere over this period, or around 5 million tons annually (PAD, para 6). Deforestation and forest
degradation in Oromia are driven primarily by small-scale conversions for agricultural expansion as well as
wood extraction for firewood and charcoal purposes. Subsistence agriculture is the main economic activity
throughout Oromia. Firewood is the primary source of energy for 94 percent of Ethiopia’s population and
the most important forest product consumed in Ethiopia, with the total consumption exceeding 116 million
m³ in 2013. Most firewood is produced from natural forests, including woodlands and shrub lands, and
current firewood demand is estimated to significantly exceed the sustainable yield potential of the remaining
forest areas. Indirect drivers include inadequate development and implementation of land-use plans, weak
cross sectoral policy and investment coordination, population growth and migration into forested areas, as
well as road expansion. Regarding fragile and conflict-affected situations (FCS) aspects, the Oromia region
had civil disturbances started in November 2015 which led the Government to declare a six-month State of
Emergency on October 9, 2016 (PAD, para 60). While the disturbances were outside the scope of this
project and the forest issues, protesters’ concerns around legacy issues of land use and access were a
high political risk to the project (PAD, para 60).

Relevance to Government Strategies: At appraisal, the objective aligned with the Government’s Second
Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP-2) and the Climate Resilient Green Economy (CRGE) which aimed
to “increase socioeconomic and ecological benefits of forests through improved forestry development,
conservation and utilization” (ICR, para 2). At project closing, the objective continued to align with the two
key national strategies.

Relevance to Bank Assistance Strategies: At appraisal, the project’s objectives aligned with the Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) FY13-FY16. The PDO aligned with Outcome 6.3: Sustainable natural resource
management and resilience to climate change, which was postulated to contribute to CPS Strategic
Objective 6: Comprehensive Social Protection and Risk Management. Additionally, the project aligned with

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Oromia Forested Landscape Program (P156475)



               the World Bank’s Forest Action Plan (2016) and contributed to relevant Programmatic Advisory Services
               and Analytics (PASA) activities (ICR, para 26). At closing, the project’s objectives aligned with the Country
               Partnership Framework (CPF) FY18-FY22; in particular, CPF Objective 2.7: Enhanced management of
               natural resources and climate risks (CPF, page 65). The project directly supported progress towards
               achievements of the CPF objective indicators regarding the area with sustainable land management
               practices and the reforested/afforested area. This CPF objective was postulated to support the
               Government’s focus on building a “climate-resilient green economy” to ensure environmental sustainability
               amid rapid economic growth (CPD, page 65).

               Bank’s Previous Experience in the Sector: The World Bank had been a leading supporter of Ethiopia’s
               forest sector development and reforms. The World Bank provided programmatic support to the investment
               planning, policy/strategy development, and capacity building to enhance the country's agenda for Reducing
               Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation, conservation of forests, sustainable forest
               management, and enhancement of forest carbon stocks (REDD+). Moreover, in parallel to this project, the
               World Bank supported the Resilient Landscapes and Livelihoods Project (P163383), which cemented its
               coordinating role in the productive landscape agenda. The World Bank also played a critical role in
               supporting land sector reforms, influencing the design of the reforms through knowledge sharing. Fully
               aligned with the CPF and Forest Action Plan and building on the pivotal contributions of the Bank-financed
               Sustainable Landscape Management Program, this program was the first large-scale jurisdictional REDD+
               pilot project in Ethiopia to test the different elements of the National REDD+ Strategy as part of the national
               project.

               There was a clear alignment between the project’s development objectives and the country- and World
               Bank assistance strategies. While acknowledging the difficulty of the operational environment, a
               shortcoming here was that the objective did not clearly define what aspects of the enabling environment the
               project aimed to improve. Some of the project’s indicators identified expected outcomes at a higher level
               (e.g., incentives, information, and institutions), but this was not captured in the PDO formulation. Thus,
               overall, the relevance of objectives is rated substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the enabling environment for sustainable forest management in Oromia

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC): Based on the PAD and the ICR, this ICR Review postulates the ToC of Objective
                             1 as follows. The ToC of Objective 1 postulated that the activities including developing and updating policies
                             and legislation for forest management (e.g., National Land Use Plan, National Forest Program, Agenda

                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Oromia Forested Landscape Program (P156475)



2035, Forest Policy and strategy, drat Forest Law) would result in the output of reforms in forest policy and
legislation conducted. The ToC also postulated that the activities including developing and operationalizing
the private sector engagement strategy and action plan would result in the output of enhanced marketing
mechanisms. These two outputs were postulated to contribute to the outcome that the index score of
incentives under the composite indices for tracking changes in the enabling environment for reducing
deforestation and forest degradation increased. In addition, the ToC postulated that the activities, including
developing and implementing the communication strategy and action plan, would result in the output of
enhanced strategic communication, contributing to the outcome that the index score of communication under
the composite indices increased. Moreover, the ToC postulated that the activities, including establishing the
Benefit Sharing Mechanism (BSM) and Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification (MRV) systems, strengthening
safeguards management at state and local levels would result in the outputs that the BSM approved, the
MRV systems established, and the safeguards management systems established. These three outputs were
postulated to contribute to the outcome that the index score of institutions under the composite indices
increased. In the long-term, those outcomes were postulated to contribute to operationalizing the Emission
Reduction Purchase Agreement activities under the Emission Reduction Project (OFLP-ERPA, P151294) and
reduce deforestation and forest degradation in Oromia.

Critical assumptions of the ToC included: (i) the government has adequate ownership and institutional
capacity to enforce the reformed forest policy and legislation; (ii) the government has adequate human and
financial resources to implement the strategies and action plans for private sector engagement and strategic
communication; (iii) the necessary systems are in place within an agreed funding timeframe to sign the
ERPA; and (iv) no exogenous events outside the control of the program (e.g., development of roads or other
infrastructure and major population shifts) substantially affect the deforestation trend.

The ToC was sound and plausible in general. It focused on establishing and updating the legal framework
and systems to prepare for implementing the ERPA. However, the ToC relied heavily on critical assumptions
to fill gaps in the results chain. Specifically, limited evidence was provided regarding to what extent
stakeholders have adequate human, financial, and technical capacities to utilize the established framework
and systems.

Outputs:

      Reforms in forest policy, legislation or other regulations were supported, meeting the target.
      Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification (MRV) systems were established and maintained at national
       and Oromia levels, meeting the target.
      Benefit Sharing Mechanism (BSM) was approved, meeting the target.
      Safeguards system was established and maintained, meeting the target.
      100 percent of grievances registered related to the delivery of project benefits were addressed,
       meeting the target.

Outcomes:

      Score of the composite index for tracking changes in the enabling environment for reducing
       deforestation and forest degradation increased from the baseline of 0.35 to the actual of 0.57,
       exceeding the target of 0.55. According to the PAD (page 49), the composite index’s definition,
       measurement methodology, and limitations were as follows. The composite index was a grouping of
       indicators combined in a standardized way to track changes in the enabling environment

                                                                                                 Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Oromia Forested Landscape Program (P156475)



       for sustainable forest management. A set of questionnaires covering the three constituent categories
       (A: incentives, B: information, and C: institutions) were tested and administered to a reasonable
       sample of informants from across society with an emphasis on government at woreda, zonal, state,
       and federal levels. For the baseline calculation and target definition, the survey instrument was used
       by 323 informants who discussed and provided anonymous data on the state of the enabling
       environment for forest management and land use. A composite index value close to “1” implied a
       highly favorable enabling environment for forest management and land use, whereas index value
       close to “0” indicated a highly unfavorable enabling environment. On the other hand, the main
       limitation of the composite index was its subjectivity and reliability, as the PAD (page 49) appropriately
       pointed out. No explanation was provided by the ICR regarding whether the points raised in the PAD
       (page 49) to maximize data accuracy were addressed during the measurement of the composite
       index.
             o The index score of incentives (policy, laws, regulations, markets) increased from the baseline
                of 0.37 to the actual of 0.58, exceeding the target of 0.57.
             o The index score of information (generation and dissemination of information) increased from
                the baseline of 0.35 to the actual of 0.55, meeting the target of 0.55.
             o The index score of institutions (capacity to implement and coordinate) increased from the
                baseline of 0.33 to the actual of 0.58, exceeding the target of 0.54.

On February 9, 2023, First ERPA Phase Agreement was signed between Ethiopia and the World Bank as
trustee of Tranche 3 of BioCarbon Fund (First ERPA Phase Agreement, cover page). Referring to the ToC, it
was plausible that the project’s outputs and outcomes contributed to the establishment of the legal agreement
that envisaged improving sustainable forest management. The overarching program became ready to apply
the MRV to determine Emission Reduction achievements, independent verification, and finetuning the BSP
for ERPA implementation Phase I (2022-24) (ICR, para 56). Although limited evidence was provided
regarding what extent the critical assumptions were fulfilled in line with the ToC, it is plausible to conclude that
the results achieved under Objective 1 contribute towards laying the foundation for ERPA implementation.
Thus, overall, the efficacy of the objective is rated substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the enabling environment for sustainable forest investment in Oromia

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC): Based on the PAD and the ICR, this ICR Review postulates the ToC of Objective
2 as follows. The ToC postulated that the activities such as investing in Participatory Forest Management
(PFM) including providing revolving fund for livelihood improvements and developing selected nature-based
community enterprises would result in the outputs including the increase of incentives for the protection of
natural forests through forest patrolling, fire management, and restoration. These outputs were postulated to
contribute to the outcome that the forest users adopting sustainable forest management practices and the
livelihoods of the community adjunct to forest area diversified. The ToC also postulated that the activities
including investing in reforestation and afforestation, providing training to forest and land users, improving

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Oromia Forested Landscape Program (P156475)



extension services, and improving land-use planning at state and local levels would result in the
outputs including the forest area brought under management plans and the land users adopting sustainable
land management practices. These outputs were postulated to contribute to the outcome that the reforested
area expanded. In the long-term, the outcome was postulated to contribute to reduce the deforestation and
forest degradation in Oromia.

Critical assumptions of the ToC included: (i) the target beneficiaries have willingness to conduct sustainable
forest and land management practices after project closure; (ii) the conducive security situation prevail; (iii)
the livelihoods activities generate sufficient incomes for the community to reduce their dependance on forest
resources for their livelihoods; (iv) the target communities and households have adequate financial, human,
and technical capacity to maintain the planted woodlots in a sustainable manner; and (v) no exogenous
events outside the control of the program (e.g., development of roads or other infrastructure and major
population shifts) substantially affect the deforestation trend.

The ToC was weakly plausible due to its strong focus on output-level achievements. The only outcome under
Objective 2 was the reforested area expanded. However, this result was directly affected by the project’s
reforestation and afforestation investments. Moreover, the ToC relied heavily on the critical assumptions to fill
gaps in the results chain. The critical assumptions (ii) and (iii) were not fulfilled during implementation as the
insecurity in the Oromia region disrupted the implementation of livelihoods activities on the ground.

Outputs:

      210,592 hectares (ha) of forest area were brought under management plans, exceeding the target of
       120,000 ha.
      39,313 forest users were trained, exceeding the target of 25,000.
           o 11,790 female forest users were trained, exceeding the target of 7,500.
      97,789.00 land users were adopting sustainable land management practices as a result of the project,
       exceeding the target of 18,000.
           o The ratio of female land users adopting sustainable land management practices as a result of
              the project was 35 percent, exceeding the target of 30 percent.
      78 percent of beneficiaries felt project investments reflected their needs, not meeting the target of 90
       percent.
           o 24,550 female beneficiaries felt project investments reflected their needs, exceeding the target
              of 6,750. The sex-disaggregated target was exceeded because the number of total
              beneficiaries increased due to the expansion of target areas thus the total number of female
              beneficiaries increased. When this sub-indicator uses the same unit of measurement as the
              parent indicator, 78 percent of the total female beneficiaries felt project investments reflected
              their needs, not meeting the target of 90 percent.
           o 47,658 male beneficiaries felt project investments reflected their needs, exceeding the target of
              14,000. When this sub-indicator uses the same unit of measurement as the parent indicator,
              78 percent of the total male beneficiaries felt project investments reflected their needs, not
              meeting the target of 90 percent.
           o Total female beneficiaries were 31,475, exceeding the target of 7,500.
           o Total male beneficiaries were 61,100, exceeding the target of 17,500.

Outcomes:



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Oromia Forested Landscape Program (P156475)




      Area of 9,673 hectares (ha) was reforested, exceeding the target of 9,000 ha. Although this indicator
       was designed as an outcome indicator, it measured a lower-level achievement (e.g., an intermediate
       result or an output) of the project’s investments on reforestation.
      Direct project beneficiaries were 92,576 people, largely exceeding the target of 25,000 people.
            o The ratio of female beneficiaries was 34 percent of the direct project beneficiaries, exceeding
               the target of 30 percent.

In addition to the outcomes defined in the Results Framework, the project task team reported on the following
achieved outcome which did not have any formal target. The following is based on the project task team’s
response to IEG’s questions received on February 29, 2024 (hereafter, referred as Task Team Response).

      An assessment to quantify the economic impact of the program’s incentives on 115 households who
       engaged in the livelihood's activities, in general, showed positive change on households' income, as
       described below.
           o About 93 percent of the participants agreed that the activities brought improvement on
              households' income while only 7 percent disagreed, as the assets purchased by the support
              have been wiped out by the drought.
           o The average net profit earned per individual ranges from US$18 to US$358 with a mean value
              of US$86 per person.

In sum, all targets were achieved or exceeded except for the target of the indicator regarding the ratio of
beneficiaries who felt project investment reflected their needs. 78 percent of beneficiaries felt project
investments reflected their needs, not meeting the target of 90 percent. The indicator was critical as the
livelihood activities were strategically important for the sustainability of the gains from PFM gains and the
initiatives for the Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation, conservation of forests,
sustainable forest management and enhancement of forest carbon stocks (REDD+) (ICR, para
53). Moreover, behavioral changes by communities and farmers largely depended on incentives from grant
support for livelihoods, according to the testimonies provided by a group of representative beneficiary
communities during the May 2023 ICR workshop (ICR, para 102). Some evidence was provided regarding
income and profit increases in a sample of 115 households; nevertheless, it was uncertain whether these
economic gains contributed to generating sufficient incentives to the communities to participate in the PFM
system and the ER system. The ICR (para 81) noted that the insufficient budget allocation and the limited
business skills and experience among A/R and PFM cooperatives restricted the full achievement of benefits
available from the project’s livelihoods support investments. Thus, overall, the efficacy of the objective is rated
substantial with moderate shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To reduce net greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and improve sustainable forest management in Oromia [The
overarching objective of the Oromia Forested Landscape Program]



                                                                                                     Page 9 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Oromia Forested Landscape Program (P156475)




                            Rationale
                            The likelihood that the overarching objective would be achieved in the future is medium. The project
                            established institutional systems and mechanisms to apply the MRV to determine Emission Reduction
                            achievements, independent verification, and of finetuning the BSP for ERPA implementation Phase I (2022-
                            24) (ICR, para 56). On the other hand, the achieved development outcomes might not be sustained due to
                            risks to development outcomes described in section 7. At the time of this ICR Review, it was yet to be
                            confirmed to what extent the cash flows and the Benefit Sharing Mechanism would operate adequately
                            to incentivize different levels of governments and farmers to improve sustainable forest management and
                            reduce GHG emissions in Oromia.

                            The overarching program development objective is not rated, based on the harmonized guideline between
                            OPCS and IEG.



                            Rating
                            Not Rated/Not Applicable


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The efficacy of Objective 1 was substantial, while the efficacy of Objective 2 was substantial with moderate
                            shortcomings. Overall, the efficacy of the project is rated substantial with moderate shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis: At appraisal, the economic internal rate of return (IRR) was estimated as 15 percent with
   the total Net Present Value (NPV) of US$10 million, using 20-year analysis period and 7 percent discount rate.
   At project closing, the economic IRR was 17 percent with the total NPV of US$14 million, using 20-year analysis
   period and 7 percent discount rate. The ex-post NPV was 40 percent more than the estimated NPV due to
   higher number of livelihood beneficiaries and larger PFM area compared to the estimates in the PAD.

   Aspects that affected implementation efficiency: The project’s implementation efficiency was increased due
   to (i) the implementing agency’s ownership of the integrated land use planning increased efficiency, (ii) the
   restructuring to add more Woredas with available communal land, and (iii) the adjustments of monitoring
   indicators (ICR, pages 56-57). On the other hand, the implementation efficiency was decreased due to (i)
   implementation delay in livelihoods activities because of the high staff turnover at Woreda and Zone levels and
   the late disbursement of funds provided to Oromia Forest and Wildlife Enterprise (OFWE) for livelihood
   activities; and (ii) the slow process of revising the communication action plan and communication toolkit in

                                                                                                                             Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Oromia Forested Landscape Program (P156475)



collaboration with stakeholders (ICR, page 57). Despite the challenges, the project experienced only a half-year
extension.

It is noted that a low rate of return is common in forestry programs where benefits lie further into the future.
However, the rate of return is increased substantially with the early inclusion of livelihood support. The efficiency
analysis found that without the social value of carbon (reduced GHG emissions), the economic NPV is
US$14 million with a 7 percent discount rate. The economic IRR is 17 percent. Compared to the discount rate,
this is an economically viable investment.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   15.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                17.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance is rated substantial. The objectives were aligned with the government's strategies and the World
Bank's assistance. The efficacy is rated substantial with shortcomings. While both objectives were achieved
substantially, the substantial achievement of Objective 2 had moderate shortcomings, contributing to weakening
the likelihood that the overarching program objective would be achieved in the long term. The efficiency is rated
substantial as the ex-post economic IRR was larger than the ex-ante IRR. Thus, overall, the outcome is rated
satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Risk Related to Institutional Support. There is a potential risk that the project entities’ operational and
strategic support might be inadequate to cover the territorial jurisdiction of 30 million people and 32 million
hectares, facing challenges in terms of program focus, reach of support activities, resources, and
materialization of Emission Reduction Credits (ERCs) and associated incentives (ICR, para 102). To mitigate

                                                                                                       Page 11 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Oromia Forested Landscape Program (P156475)



the risk, the ICR reported three main risk mitigation measures. First, the ICR (para 102) suggested
strengthening the Emission Reduction payment system to cover the wide jurisdiction, improve stakeholders’
understanding of the landscape approach and/or the Agriculture, Forest, and Other Land Uses (AFOLU)
approach, and enhance the enabling policy and regulatory environment by updating the land policies and
making forest use more market oriented (ICR, para 102). Second, the project disseminated lessons from the
Benefit Sharing Plan and Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification development at the federal level and in
other regions to replicate and scale up the project’s Emission Reduction (ER) payment model (ICR, para
102). Third, the successor project would continue to address data, operational, and conceptual problems to
materialize additional ERs by enabling additional carbon pools through reduced land degradation and
livestock/enteric fermentation (ICR, para 102).

Financial Risk. There is a potential risk that the Emission Reductions Purchase Agreement (ERPA) funding
risks might cause cash-flow problems during implementation (ICR, para 102). To mitigate the risk, the World
Bank provides support for improving natural capital accounting and management and strengthening private
sector engagement in generating emission reductions through programmatic advisory services and analytics
(ICR, para 102).

Social Risk. There is a potential risk that the ERC payments might not adequately incentivize forest-
dependent beneficiaries for behavioral changes due to uncertainty regarding the requirements, amounts, and
timing of future payments (ICR, para 102). To mitigate the risk, the ICR (para 102) suggested reinforcing the
importance of the Benefit Sharing Mechanism as a key factor in the long-term sustainability of project
interventions.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The strategic relevance and approach were mostly adequate, as described in section 3. The technical
  aspect was thoroughly considered, drawing upon the insights from REDD+ readiness preparatory studies
  and leveraging the World Bank's operational expertise around the world. The financial, economic,
  environmental, and fiduciary aspects were adequately considered. The risk assessment was adequately
  conducted with proposed mitigation measures, as shown in Annex 12 of the PAD (pages 188-194).

  On the other hand, the M&E arrangements were not adequate due to limited attention to the Theory of
  Change for each project and the causal chains among outputs and outcomes, as described in sections 4
  and 9. M&E shortcomings included the use of a composite index as the first PDO indicator that consisted
  of parameters that were subjective and difficult to assess and quantify during implementation, as the ICR
  (para 82) points out. Additionally, relevant indicators at the outcome level were missing in the Results
  Framework under Objective 2. Thus, overall, the quality at entry is rated moderately satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                  Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Oromia Forested Landscape Program (P156475)




b. Quality of supervision
 The supervision inputs and processes were adequate. The World Bank conducted 13 joint implementation
 support missions on a semiannual basis (ICR, para 97). The Aide Memoires, Action Plans and ISRs were
 produced with no major delays, despite the limitations imposed by COVID and the security situation in the
 project area. Throughout the project, the supervision teams had adequate mix of technical and fiduciary
 expertise, with strong support provided by locally based specialists (ICR, para 97). The supervision of
 fiduciary and safeguard aspects was adequate, as described in section 10. The Bank team included two
 consultants dedicated full time to provide coordination and technical support. The World Bank’s role in
 ensuring adequate transition arrangements was sufficient. A detailed exit strategy process was conducted
 over the last 12 months of project implementation which took into consideration specific requirements to
 ensure a smooth transition towards the implementation of the ERPA phase (ICR, para 99). In addition, the
 World Bank team effectively collaborated with the Project Implementation Unit and obtained the
 commitment and ownership both at Federal and State level governments, which were instrumental to
 advance the goal of establishing the conditions and instruments for the ERP payment phase (ICR, para
 98).

 On the other hand, the shortcomings in M&E were not addressed during implementation with no substantial
 revision to the PDO and the Results Framework to assess the outcome related to the behavioral changes
 in the communities, as described in section 4. Furthermore, the ICR did not clarify to what extent the risk
 mitigation measures were implemented as planned (i.e., as described in the PAD (page 189)), in order to
 address the implementation risks related to the emergence of fragile and conflict-affected situations.
 Overall, the quality of supervision is rated moderately satisfactory.

 The overall performance of the World Bank is rated moderately satisfactory, as both the quality at entry and
 the quality of supervision are rated moderately satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project developed an M&E manual for the whole program with detailed implementation arrangements
 and templates to be used as a basis for staff training (ICR, para 82). The M&E design and arrangements
 were well-embedded institutionally in relevant government agencies at regional, zonal, and woreda levels
 (ICR, para 83). Baselines and targets were available for all indicators. On the other hand, the Theory of
 Change (ToC) of the overarching program in the PAD (figure 1.1, page 65) did not specify causal chains
 among activities, outputs, and outcomes for each project under the program. The ToC in the ICR (figure 2,
 page 8) was partially sound, as its plausibility was reduced by the ToC’s heavy reliance on critical
 assumptions and the weak causal chains among outputs and outcomes, as described in section 4. The

                                                                                                 Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Oromia Forested Landscape Program (P156475)



 Project Development Objective (PDO) statement did not specify the expected outcomes under Objective 2.
 The PDO and Intermediate Results indicators in the Results Framework were inadequate to encompass
 relevant outcomes of the PDO statement due to the following two reasons. First, it was questionable
 to what extent the composite index for tracking changes in the enabling environment for reducing
 deforestation and forest degradation (i.e., PDO indicator 1) was objective and reliable. The main concern
 with the composite index was its subjectivity and reliability (PAD, page 49). The parameters included in this
 indicator were difficult to assess and quantify during implementation (ICR, para 82). Second, the PDO
 indicators under Objective 2 were not adequately designed to measure outcomes related to the
 community’s ownership towards the Participatory Forest Management (PFM) system and the Emission
 Reduction (ER) system, as described in section 4.



b. M&E Implementation
  The agency responsible for M&E and other relevant stakeholders ensured attention to effective M&E
  implementation. The M&E system was adequately implemented throughout the project, collecting
  georeferenced data in a decentralized manner with specific supervision and reporting requirements (ICR,
  para 83). All baseline data was collected at appraisal. All the indicators in the Results Framework were
  measured and reported. M&E functions and processes were likely to be sustained in the succeeding
  project. The project established a Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification (MRV) system for land use
  change and forest degradation at national level, which enabled the succeeding project to operationalize a
  MRV system at regional level, including a MRV Laboratory Room and equipment (ICR, para 83).
  Although the weaknesses in M&E design were not fully corrected during implementation, the inadequate
  design of the PDO indicators was partially addressed by conducting an economic impact assessment of
  livelihood’s activities.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E information was communicated to various stakeholders to disseminate results and inform shifts in
  the project design during restructurings. The M&E data was used to inform the subsequent project. By
  project closing, the project created a geospatial database of the location and area of PFM and
  afforestation sites, which supported the succeeding project to operationalize a MRV system for the
  Emission Reduction (ER) payments, as described in section 4.

  In sum, the project’s M&E system successfully developed the MRV system, which was one of important
  outputs that supported the succeeding project to operationalize the ER system. However, the M&E
  design was inadequate to comprehensively measure all outcomes of the project due to the misalignment
  between the Results Framework and the ToC. The shortcomings in the M&E design were partially
  addressed by an additional quantitative assessment conducted at project closing. Thus, overall, the
  M&E quality is rated substantial with moderate shortcomings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial



                                                                                                   Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Oromia Forested Landscape Program (P156475)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards: The project was classified as a Category ‘B’ project, as it was designed and
   implemented in a changing and fragile environment with complex social relationships. In addition, there
   were activities related to the construction or rehabilitation of physical structures related to
   afforestation/reforestation, nursery sites and livelihoods diversification, among others. The project
   triggered the following environmental safeguards policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01),
   Natural Habitat (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36), Pest Management (OP/BP4.09), Physical Cultural
   Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37). The project complied with the triggered
   safeguards policies and relevant national policy and legal frameworks. In line with the safeguards policies
   and requirements, the project developed the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
   and the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA), which were disclosed in October 2015.
   These instruments were later revised to reflect the role of the new implementing agency (Oromia
   Environment, Forest and Climate Change Authority), established on July 20, 2016, and re-disclosed in
   February 2017. A Safeguards Operational Manual was developed and used as part of the Program
   Implementation Manual (PIM) drawing specificities from the safeguard’s instruments. In addition, site-
   specific safeguards instruments (e.g., Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs)) for
   afforestation/reforestation and participatory forest management subprojects were prepared, implemented,
   and monitored. Regarding the Pest Management safeguard (OP/BP 4.09), an integrated pest management
   plan was developed and implemented throughout the project's lifetime (Task Team Response). Regarding
   Safety of Dams safeguard (OP/BP 4.36), the project did not include any activities that required dam
   construction (Task Team Response). An Environmental and Social Audit was conducted in June 2021 to
   review the safeguards performance of the project, where the audit corrective action plan was developed to
   fill the identified gaps and implemented.

   Social Safeguards: The project triggered the following social safeguards policies: Involuntary Resettlement
   (OP/BP 4.12), and Indigenous Peoples/Underserved and Vulnerable peoples (OP/BP 4.10). The project
   developed the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and the Process Framework (PF) to guide the
   implementation of mitigation measures related to resource access restriction in forest areas and or
   protected areas (parks, biosphere reserves, and others). The RPF and PF were disclosed in October 2015
   and revised and re-disclosed in February 2017. They are implemented accordingly prior to the
   commencement of the targeted intervention activities. Regarding the Indigenous People safeguard (OP/BP
   4.10), the SESA identified mitigation actions related to the underserved and Vulnerable groups that were
   properly implemented throughout the project period (Task Team Response). Regarding the Involuntary
   Resettlement safeguard (OP/BP 4.12), no subproject involved in the involuntary land acquisition process
   (Task Team Response). A Consultation and Participation Plan was also prepared and implemented through
   a consultative process. Additionally, the project conducted a gender analysis to inform the preparation and
   implementation of gender mainstreaming guidelines. Safeguards and gender awareness training and
   capacity-building activities were implemented at different levels.

   Grievances Redress Mechanism (GRM): The project established and operated a GRM to cover a total of
   6,387 kebeles, where a total of 36 cases were registered, 35 of them resolved, and one referred to court.
   Based on the project closing mission, no major outstanding cases of non-compliance were reported.
   However, there were some delayed environment and social (E&S) activities, such as the establishment of
   the GRM in the remaining 351 kebeles and the submission of reports, including the Green Legacy Initiative
   (GLI) and E&S corrective action plan implementation report (ICR, para 89). There was also security-related


                                                                                                 Page 15 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Oromia Forested Landscape Program (P156475)



  instability in some of the areas, which represented a barrier to undertaking E&S activities. These gaps and
  any other E&S issues would be assessed as part of the Environmental and Social Due Diligence Audit for
  Retroactive Carbon Accounting under the succeeding project.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement: Procurement and contract management performance was a persistent challenge
  throughout project implementation, although no major complaints, mis-procurement, or integrity issues
  were raised by contractors or consultants regarding procurement and contracting procedures and
  processes. Staff in PIU gained reasonable expertise in procurement and contract management in
  implementing World Bank-financed operations despite procurement staff turnover, though there were
  significant delays in procurement processes due to capacity constraints. These delays were caused by
  deferrals mainly in the preparation of technical specs and description of the technical requirements of
  goods and services to conclude procurement processes. This however led to inadequate procurement
  record keeping and deficient and incorrect documentation for uploading in the Systematic Tracking of
  Exchanges in Procurement. Procurement was rated as Moderately Satisfactory at the project closing.

  Financial Management: The financial management (FM) challenges which have persisted over the
  project life include staff turnover at woreda level which adversely affected timely accounting and financial
  reporting by the woredas, lack of involvement of internal auditors in reviewing the project accounts at
  woreda level; challenges to supervise woredas where security issues existed (following up inactive
  accounts was also a challenge); and delays in addressing audit findings. In addition, motivation was also
  yet another challenge as the project FM activities were incremental tasks for the assigned staff in addition
  to their regular tasks. Nevertheless, in the latter years of project implementation, improvements were noted
  in terms of using computerized accounting at the woreda level, reporting on fund balances in addition to
  expenditures, submission of Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) with improved quality and timeliness,
  improved budget utilization; and enhanced regional supervision. Improvements were achieved with the
  proactive engagement of the regional financial management team, which also sought the support of the
  Ministry of Finance (MoF), especially in designing the IBEX software for accounting and reporting on
  project funds. Audit reports were generally submitted in a timely manner. Where there were delays for a
  couple of years, it was only for a couple of weeks. Qualified opinions were provided by the auditors for a
  couple of years, and these were due to low budget utilization and outstanding advances which had been
  addressed by the close of the project. Budget utilization improved during the final years of implementation
  and the outstanding advances were cleared by following up and supporting the woredas. The project
  submitted a status report for actions taken on the EFY 2014 (2022) audit findings, which required the
  project unit to provide further updates for several findings (Task Team’s Response). Financial
  Management was rated as Moderately Satisfactory at the project closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  Not reported in the ICR.




                                                                                                 Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Oromia Forested Landscape Program (P156475)



d. Other
   Not reported in the ICR.



11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory         Satisfactory
                                                                              Both Quality-at-Entry and
Bank Performance               Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory   Quality of Supervision are rated
                                                                              moderately satisfactory.
Quality of M&E                 Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                  Modest


12. Lessons

The ICR (paras 104-115) presented eleven lessons. Three of them are presented below with
rephrasing as these may inform the similar operations regarding the Emission Reductions Purchase
Agreement (ERPA).

Developing a solid understanding regarding the following key factors may support
successful implementation of Emission Reduction (ER) and Emission Reduction Credit (ERC)
payments: (i) identify the type and scale of interventions in forestry and agriculture that generate
ER; (ii) assess the importance of addressing fundamental issues and reforms related to land use
and private sector business climate, including access to financing; and (iii) analyze if and how a
better interface between forestry and agriculture contribute to the intended results.

Establishing the required Emission Reduction Payments instruments such as Monitoring,
Reporting, and Verification systems and Benefit Sharing Plan may ensure adequate
preparation resources. Along the same lines, the timely design and implementation of adequately
funded complementary livelihood interventions to forest-dependent communities is essential to
generate community motivation, capacity building and engagement in the longer-term benefits
pursued by the program.

Providing regular and close monitoring and supervision at lower level (woreda level) may
address the major problems created by staff turnover and lack of motivation. This project
experienced a challenge of high staff turnover, particularly among woreda coordinators, which
resulted in the limited technical support provided to A/R and PFM cooperatives in some project
woredas and kebeles (ICR, para 81). Organizing training for woreda level staff and explaining the
nature of the project is also critical to addressing root causes of motivational issues.

IEG adds the following lesson regarding livelihoods based on the project documentation review.



                                                                                                    Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Oromia Forested Landscape Program (P156475)



Measuring outcomes of livelihood support investments and to what extent these contributed
to incentivizing the communities to participate in the PFM system and the ER system may
strengthen the enabling environment for implementing the ER and the ERC payments in
communities. Behavioral changes by communities and farmers largely depended on incentives
from grant support for livelihoods, according to the testimonies provided by a group of representative
beneficiary communities during the May 2023 ICR workshop (ICR, para 102). However, no evidence
was provided regarding any outcomes related to incentivizing the communities to be involved in the
PFM system and the ER system. The ICR (para 81) noted that the project’s livelihoods support
investments did not fully achieve the expected benefits due to the insufficient budget allocation and
the limited business skills and experience among A/R and PFM cooperatives. The project task team
noted that, if they were to repeat the project, the livelihoods of communities would take a higher
priority during design to ensure alignment of incentives with the project objective, as well as grants
to beneficiary communities, would start earlier in order to expand and to allow more time to
implement, support, and improve the support provided to households (Task Team Response).



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a detailed overview of the project. The narrative supported the ratings and available
evidence. The report followed most of the guidelines with efforts to triangulate data to reach conclusions in line
with the project development objective. The quality of evidence and analysis was aligned with the messages
outlined in the ICR. The ICR’s lessons were clear, useful, and based on evidence outlined in the ICR.

On the other hand, the ICR provided insufficient evidence regarding the achievements of Objective 2, as
described in Section 4. The team provided additional evidence on IEG's request. The theory of change (ICR,
figure 2, page 8) did not clearly specify causal chains among activities, outputs, and outcomes. The ICR did not
provide a detailed description of implementation for each triggered safeguard policy. A few inconsistencies of
information regarding the revisions of indicators were observed between the ICR and the first Restructuring
Paper. Furthermore, the ICR is of an excessive length at 31 pages, compared to the OPCS-recommended 15
pages. Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated modest.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                     Page 18 of 19
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Oromia Forested Landscape Program (P156475)




                                                                           Page 19 of 19
