     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Albania Fiscal Sustainability and Growth (P169524)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023787

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                                Operation Name
 P169524                                     Albania Fiscal Sustainability and Growth

 Country                                     Practice Area (Lead)
 Albania                                     Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-91790                                  31-Dec-2021                                           80,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 11-Dec-2020                                 31-Dec-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                              80,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                               80,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                           80,000,000.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Antonio M. Ollero            Judyth L. Twigg              Gabriela Chamartin Escobar      IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

According to the Program Document (page 3), the program development objective of the Albania
Fiscal Sustainability and Growth Development Policy Loan was “to support Albania in strengthening the
transparency and sustainability of public finances, enhancing finance for recovery and growth, and supporting
key sectoral opportunities for sustainable growth.”


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Albania Fiscal Sustainability and Growth (P169524)



This ICR Review parses the program development objective as follows:

    1.   To strengthen the transparency and sustainability of public finances
    2.   To enhance finance for recovery and growth
    3.   To support key opportunities for sustainable growth in the telecommunications sector
    4.   To support key opportunities for sustainable growth in the forestry sector

The original statement “supporting key sectoral opportunities for sustainable growth” lacked specificity and
has been separated into third and fourth sector-specific objectives for purposes of this Review.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The operation had three pillars.

Strengthening Fiscal Transparency and Sustainability supported measures to: (a) improve transparency
on tax expenditures; (b) strengthen the functions of the Large Taxpayers Office (LTO) in the Ministry of
Finance and Economy; and (c) to strengthen the selection and monitoring of public-private partnerships
(PPPs).

Enhancing Finance for Recovery and Growth supported measures to: (a) facilitate the out-of-court
restructuring of non-performing loans (NPLs); (b) strengthen the legal, regulatory, and supervisory framework
for capital market development; (c) enable a broader range of investment funds to operate while
strengthening investor protection; and (d) enable access to a wider range of electronic payment services while
strengthening consumer protection.

Supporting Key Opportunities in the Telecommunications and Forestry Sectors for
Sustainable Growth supported measures to: (a) enable the public electricity transmission company,
Operatori i Sistemit Te Transmetimit (OST), to provide wholesale capacity services over its fiber optic cable
network to internet service providers (ISPs); and (b) establish a legal framework for the management of
forestry resources.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Program Cost and Financing. The program was estimated to cost US$80 million at appraisal and was financed
by an International Bank for Reconstruction and Development loan to the Republic of Albania of the same
amount. The loan was fully disbursed.

Dates. The program was approved on December 11, 2020, became effective on March 11, 2021, and closed as
scheduled on December 31, 2021.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Albania Fiscal Sustainability and Growth (P169524)



Binding Constraints. The Albania Systematic Country Diagnostic - 2019 Update cited various binding
constraints to Albania's drive for an economic transformation anchored on integration into the global economy,
more effective local governments, and enhanced social and economic inclusion. The following provided
context to the three policy reform areas supported by this operation.

      Fiscal. Albania had taken years to recover from a macro-fiscal crisis in 2008-2014. Substantial fiscal
       consolidation helped achieve positive primary fiscal balances in 2016-2019, but fiscal space remained
       limited. The state relied primarily on indirect taxes, but even value-added tax collection remained
       limited at about 10 percent of total consumption, half of the potential revenue – Albania’s VAT C-
       efficiency ratio, defined as the ratio of actual VAT revenues to theoretical revenues from a perfectly
       enforced VAT levied at the uniform standard rate on all final consumption, was a low 0.54 in 2018,
       compared to 0.8 for Montenegro and 0.61 for Serbia among South Eastern Europe non-EU countries
       and 0.79 for Croatia and 0.64 percent for Bulgaria among South Eastern Europe EU member states
       (International Monetary Fund (IMF), 2022, Albania Technical Assistance Report - Tax Policy Reform
       Options for the Medium Term Revenue Strategy). The base for personal income taxation, meanwhile,
       was small and made even more meager by recent decisions to reduce the dividend withholding tax and
       to widen the lower brackets for the personal income tax. Personal income tax revenues amounted to
       only 2.2 percent of GDP in 2018 compared to an average 16 percent of GDP for countries in the
       Central and Eastern Europe region (IMF, 2022, Albania Technical Assistance Report - Tax Policy
       Reform Options for the Medium-Term Revenue Strategy). Raising public revenues by broadening the
       tax base, strengthening spending efficiency, and containing off-budget fiscal risks, underpinned by a
       sound Medium Term Revenue Strategy, were seen as crucial conditions for growth (IMF, 2021, Albania
       - Staff Report for the 2021Article IV Consultation).
      Finance. Albania’s financial system was ranked 102nd (out of 141 countries) in the World Economic
       Forum Global Competitiveness Report 2019, with domestic credit to the private sector amounting to
       only 36 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) versus an average 50 percent among the other five
       West Balkan states. Banks, which dominated the financial sector, were highly liquid but strongly risk
       averse and lacked "the incentives or capacity to explore new and innovative approaches to finance."
       NPLs had declined from a peak 25 percent of the bank loan portfolio in 2014 but remained high at 11
       percent in 2018 (the highest among the six West Balkan states), burdening bank balance sheets and
       dampening lending to corporates. Beyond banks, the financial sector remained shallow and
       undiversified. Weaknesses in financial intermediation limited the accumulation and use of financial
       assets. Stock market capitalization was zero percent of GDP, and insurance premiums, 0.9 percent of
       GDP.
      Telecommunications. An underdeveloped digital infrastructure posed a roadblock to regional and
       global integration, particularly into the European Union, spawning inefficiencies in downstream value
       chains and discouraging new business ventures including through e-commerce. Coverage by the fiber
       optic network of inter-urban and rural areas was both low and poor, impeding the ability of enterprises
       to link to global value chains through information and communication technology. The recent inclusion
       of Albania in the Balkans Digital Highway Initiative was intended to strengthen digital connectivity
       through the commercialization of fiber assets.
      Forestry. The drive toward green growth compelled renewed attention to sustainable forestry. The
       surface area of forest cover had decreased dramatically in the last two decades. Only 23 percent of the
       surface of the country was covered by forest canopy in 2018 (6 percent by dense and 17 percent by
       light forest canopy) from 30 percent in 2005, induced by overbuilding, fragmentation, and overuse of
       firewood for heating and cooking (World Bank, Albania - Systematic Country Diagnostic, 2019 Update).
       The legal framework governing forestry had changed multiple times, raising issues about forest
       management. Specifically, the transfer in 2016 of forest and pasture management to municipalities,

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Albania Fiscal Sustainability and Growth (P169524)



        which lacked budgets, staff, and technical capacity, heightened sustainability risks in highly degraded
        and overexploited forest areas (World Bank, Albania - Systematic Country Diagnostic, 2019 Update).
        Essentially, the changed governance framework for forest management – the shift from central
        agencies to under-resourced municipalities – undermined the government’s performance on many
        aspects of forest management.

Bank Group Country Strategy. The program objectives were aligned with the Bank Group-supported
Country Partnership Framework for Albania 2015-2019 (CPF). The objective to strengthen the transparency
and sustainability of public finances was aligned with the first CPF focus area, “Restoring macroeconomic
balances,” and the third CPF focus area, “Strengthening public sector management and service delivery.” The
objective to enhance finance for recovery and growth and the objective to support key opportunities in the
telecommunications and forestry sectors for sustainable growth were aligned with the second CPF focus area,
“Creating conditions of accelerated private sector growth.”


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

The operation contained nine prior actions (PAs) mapped to its four objectives.

 Objective 1 – To strengthen the transparency and sustainability of public finances
 PA1 – The Borrower has (1) issued a decision to mandate regular publication of tax expenditure reviews
 as evidenced by Order No. 389 dated November 14, 2019; and (ii) has published a tax expenditure
 review, dated December 2019, and published on the Ministry of Finance and Economy’s website.
 PA2 – The Borrower has adopted measures to more effectively enforce tax compliance including (i) a
 decision to reorganize staffing at the General Directorate of Tax (GDT) that establishes a dedicated risk
 analysis unit at the large taxpayer office (LTO), as evidenced by Order No. 86 dated May 2, 2019; and (ii)
 a decision to broaden the criteria for identification of large taxpayers as evidenced by Regulation No.
 8442 dated October 4, 2019.
 PA3 – (i) The Amendment of the PPP Law to strengthen PPP selection and to establish a PPP monitoring
 framework has been enacted; and (ii) the Borrower has (a) adopted an instruction for implementing a
 PPP monitoring framework as evidenced by Instruction No. 35 published in the Official Gazette on
 December P8, 2019 and (b) published a first PPP monitoring report dated December 2019 and published
 on the Ministry of Finance and Economy’s website.
 Objective 2 – To enhance finance for recovery and growth
 PA4 – The Bank of Albania has adopted an out-of-court NPL restructuring instruction and extended its
 effects until January 1, 2022, as evidenced by Decision No. 51, published in the Official Gazette on July
 24, 2019, and by Decision No. 34 published in the Official Gazette on June 4, 2020.
 PA5 – The Law on Capital Markets has been enacted, strengthening the legal, regulatory, and
 supervisory framework for capital market development.
 PA6 – The Law on Collective Investment Undertakings has been enacted, enabling a broader range of
 investment funds to operate in Albania and strengthening investor protection.
 PA7 – The Payments Services Law has been enacted, enabling access to a wider range of electronic
 payment services, and strengthening consumer protection.



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Albania Fiscal Sustainability and Growth (P169524)



Objective 3 – To support key opportunities for sustainable growth in the telecommunications
sector
PA8 – The government has amended the statute of the public electricity transmission company (OST),
enabling OST to provide wholesale capacity services over its fiberoptic cable network to internet service
providers for the purpose of providing retail high-speed internet to the end users as evidenced by Record
No. CN-427459-12-19 dated December 12, 2019.
Objective 4 – To support key opportunities for sustainable growth in the forestry sector
PA9 – The Forestry Law has been enacted, establishing a legal framework for the management of
Albania’s forestry resources.



Objective 1 – To strengthen the transparency and sustainability of public finances

      PA1, PA2, and PA3 comprised a set of prior actions supporting fiscal sustainability: revenue
       mobilization– the surveillance and analysis of tax expenditures; tax administration – tax collection from
       large taxpayers; and public-private partnerships – selection, performance reporting, and risk monitoring.
      PA1 would strengthen the monitoring of tax expenditures. The IMF Albania Staff Report for the 2019
       Article IV Consultation warned about tax incentives, stating that "the tax system has become
       increasingly fragmented and complex, with many exemptions and preferential treatments," narrowing
       the tax base. Foregone revenue from tax incentives, often indiscriminate was sizeable at 5.5 percent of
       GDP in 2018. In the context of a weak revenue base and elevated public debt (73 percent of GDP),
       greater transparency with respect to tax expenditures was seen as a way of enhancing fiscal discipline
       and fostering accountability. Biennial tax expenditure reviews, the first of which would be published as a
       prior action, would estimate the impact of tax incentives on the value-added tax (VAT), the profit tax, the
       personal income tax, and excise and customs duties, and conduct cost-benefit assessments. Although
       there is some evidence that regular tax expenditure reviews and analyses have the potential to facilitate
       more informed policymaking and deter the introduction of unnecessary tax incentives (Brixi et al, 2004,
       Tax Expenditures Shedding Light on Government Spending through the Tax System, and Lanre and
       Mansour, 2018, Tax Expenditures Reporting in Developing Countries: An Evaluation), a more
       sustainable approach would have been to improve the governance framework for granting exemptions
       to make it more difficult to introduce new exemptions in future (World Bank, 2023, World Bank Support
       for Domestic Revenue Mobilization - An Independent Evaluation). The relevance of PA1 is rated
       moderately satisfactory.
      PA2 would strengthen the functions and institutional capacity of the Large Taxpayers Office (LTO),
       which serviced large taxpayers paying VAT, excise duties, corporate taxes/income taxes, and service
       taxes under a single window. Patterned after similar arrangements in other countries, the LTO collected
       only 38 percent of all revenue collected by the General Directorate of Taxation (GDT) in 2018,
       compared to over 50 percent in some other emerging market economies. Large Taxpayer Offices or
       Large Taxpayer Units have had a long history in tax administration globally beginning in the 1980s when
       the IMF recommended that member countries facing revenue crises and looking to strengthen tax
       administration may want to segment their taxpayer bases and establish Large Taxpayer Offices to
       increase control over the largest taxpayers and improve their tax compliance (IMF, 2002, Improving
       Large Taxpayers’ Compliance - A Review of Country Experience). A survey of 89 IMF member
       countries in 2013 found that 70 (20 low-income, 23 low-middle-income, 21 upper-middle-income, and 6
       high-income), or 84 percent of the respondents, used size as the most common means to segment
       taxpayers and had Large Taxpayer Offices (IMF, 2017, Understanding Revenue Administration -

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Albania Fiscal Sustainability and Growth (P169524)



      Results from the Second Survey of the Revenue Administration Information Tool). For Albania, technical
      assistance from the IMF recommended a range of measures to develop core functions and institutional
      capacity at the LTO, part of an overall tax administration reform, including by risk profiling all large
      taxpayers, implementing a risk differential framework plan, upgrading the skills of staff in modern audit
      techniques, and assigning audit case selection to a risk unit (Cartwright, 2019, Albania: Improving the
      Effectiveness of the Large Taxpayer Office and IMF, 2021, Enhancing Tax Administration Capacity
      During Challenging Times). This two-part prior action would establish a risk analysis unit at the LTO to
      implement a risk identification and compliance management framework for large taxpayers. The prior
      action would also broaden the criteria for identifying large taxpayers, as the current system imperfectly
      picked up high-value taxpayers. The measures were expected to help boost tax collection by the LTO.
      The relevance of PA2 is rated satisfactory.
     PA3 would improve the selection and strengthen the monitoring of PPPs. Unsolicited public investment
      proposals were the norm in Albania, accounting for 75 percent of PPPs signed in 2012-18, a practice
      that gave initiating companies an advantage in the bidding process. Moreover, PPPs were not subject to
      fully competitive tendering procedures, resulting in poor integration with sector strategies, weak
      screening for fiscal risks, and anemic interest among foreign investors. An Amended PPP Law would
      restrict unsolicited proposals to a limited set of technologically complex sectors. In addition, the prior
      action would establish a centralized monitoring framework for PPPs, providing for the systematic
      reporting of performance and the methodical analysis of fiscal and other risks. The World Bank
      Technical Assistance Recommendations for PPP Monitoring Framework for the Government of Albania,
      supported by the Strengthening Accountability and the Fiduciary Environment (SAFE) Trust Fund (of the
      European Commission and the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs), proposed requiring all
      agencies to regularly report the performance of their PPPs using the framework set in the World
      BankIMF PPP Fiscal Risk Assessment Model. The relevance of PA3 is rated satisfactory.

Objective 2 – To enhance finance for recovery and growth

     PA4, PA5, PA6, and PA7 comprised a set of prior actions to address specific development constraints in
      four areas in finance – sizable NPLs in banking, underdeveloped capital markets, a limited range of fund
      types in the investment industry, and the prevalence of cash over electronic payments in the national
      payments system.
     PA4 would facilitate the resolution of NPLs, which continued to burden bank balance sheets and deter
      new bank lending. Both the World Bank Albania Financial Sector Assessment Update (2014) and the
      IMF Albania Financial Stability Assessment (2014), products of the Joint Financial Sector Assessment
      Program for Albania of 2013, highlighted the importance of unwinding legacy NPLs. Despite recent
      improvements, NPLs remained relatively high at 8.4 percent of total gross loans in Albania in 2019,
      compared to the average 5.4 percent in the West Balkans. The adoption by the Bank of Albania of an
      out-of-court NPL resolution framework (called the “Tirana Approach”) would add to a range of measures
      the government had adopted beginning in 2015 to address the buildup of NPLs in the banking system,
      including the enactment of a new Bankruptcy Law, amendments to the regulations on write-offs, and
      modifications to the licensing of NPL servicing firms (International Finance Corporation, 2021, NPL
      Resolution – Country Cases). The key mechanism – the adoption of a resolution decision by the
      majority of creditors (representing 65 percent of creditors’ claims and a majority of 50 percent of banks)
      that would be binding on the minority – would eliminate the problem of “holdouts” in the resolution
      process. The out-of-court resolution would be especially suitable for addressing the NPLs of large
      corporates with exposures to multiple lenders; some 22 of these large corporates with multiple lenders
      accounted for a quarter of the stock of NPLs in Q3-2019. There would be limitations, however: (a) to
      participate in an out-of-court resolution procedure, a borrower would have to meet “distressed borrower”

                                                                                                 Page 6 of 22
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Albania Fiscal Sustainability and Growth (P169524)



  eligibility criteria (see Section 4), and (b) the out-of-court resolution option would expire at the end of
  2021. The relevance of PA4 is rated satisfactory.
 PA5 would upgrade the legal, regulatory, and supervisory framework governing capital markets to
  international norms and standards, including to the European Union (EU) acquis, to foster the
  development of non-bank finance for long-term investment. Albania’s financial system was dominated
  by banks, which represented over 90 percent of financial system assets (equivalent to 90 percent of
  GDP), with bank credit concentrated in the corporate sector, which owed 75 percent of the value of all
  loans. The remainder of the financial system was small, representing just under 10 percent of financial
  system assets – investment funds (3 percent), non-bank financial institutions (2.5 percent), insurance
  companies (1.6 percent), and savings and loan associations (0.8 percent) (IMF, 2014, Albania -
  Financial System Stability Assessment). The capital markets were under-developed – the stock
  exchange had yet to list a single share issue, government bonds lacked a functioning secondary market,
  and the outstanding stock of corporate bonds amounted to a meager 0.5 percent of GDP (compared to
  an average 30 percent of GDP among EU member states). To begin to develop the capital markets,
  which lacked a modern legal framework, the new Law on Capital Markets would facilitate corporate
  nonbank term financing by streamlining the process by which corporates issued bonds either through
  public sale or through private placement. More broadly, the new legislation would: (a) provide a
  comprehensive set of definitions of financial instruments; (b) enable the Albanian Financial Supervisory
  Authority to regulate the capital markets by activity rather than by business type; (c) improve the custody
  of client assets; (d) establish a central securities depository; (e) allow different investment products to be
  targeted to different clients, with appropriate disclosure requirement(f) create an investor compensation
  scheme; and (g) enable the establishment of credit rating agencies. Capital market development was
  doubly relevant to Albania in the context of a planned regional economic area among six West Balkan
  states. The World Bank Practical Guide on the Potential of Capital Markets Development in Small
  Economies (2019) recommended that Albania and the other West Balkan states strengthen their capital
  markets development and regulatory frameworks, adjusted to the specific country context of small
  economies, if they were to better integrate their economies. The relevance of PA5 is rated satisfactory.
 PA6 would expand the range of funds that the investment industry could offer to the investing public,
  thereby helping mobilize savings to fund public and private sector economic activity. The current
  investment law – Law No. 10198, “On Collective Investment Undertakings," of December 2009 – was
  highly restrictive, permitting only a limited number of investment structures and investment in a limited
  number of securities, with the result that only five registered investment funds were operational in a
  US$15 billion economy, with the largest cornering 75 percent of the market, and investing largely in
  government bonds. The new Law on Collective Investment Undertakings would lay down uniform rules
  on investment funds and on the organization and functioning of Undertakings for Collective Investment
  in Transferable Securities, funds that invested in securities (stocks, bonds, stocks and bonds, short-term
  Treasury instruments, and cash). The new law would also set the legal framework for the authorization,
  supervision, and oversight of Alternative Investment Funds, investment schemes including hedge funds,
  private equity funds, venture equity funds for start-ups and innovative firms, real estate funds, and other
  funds designed for institutional investors. To better protect investors, the new law would tighten the rules
  governing the marketing of the funds and vest the supervisors with stronger enforcement powers. The
  new law would be compatible with the EU Undertakings for Collective Investment in Transferable
  Securities Directive and the EU Alternative Investment Fund Managers Directive. The relevance of PA6
  is rated satisfactory.
 PA7 would foster the use of electronic payments to reduce transaction costs and improve financial
  inclusion. Cash was the prevalent means of payment in Albania, accounting for 66 percent of all
  payments received and 99 percent of all payments made by businesses, exacting substantial
  transaction costs compared to electronic payments. Several reasons explain the dominance of cash in

                                                                                                 Page 7 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Albania Fiscal Sustainability and Growth (P169524)



      the economy: (a) informality was prevalent; (b) financial literacy was low; (c) less than 40 percent of
      adults had a bank account; and (d) financial access points – bank branches, automated teller machines,
      point-of-sale terminals – were scarce (World Bank and Bank of Albania, 2018, The Retail Payment
      Costs and Savings in Albania). By setting the legal framework for the creation, licensing, and
      supervision of new payment institutions pursuant to the National Strategy on Retail Payments, adopted
      in 2018, the new Payment Services Law would expand the range of permissible payment instruments,
      including debits cards issued by financial institutions and credit cards issued by commercial and retail
      trade firms. Aligned with the EU Revised Payment Services Directive, the new law would also improve
      financial inclusion, especially for women, only 38 percent of whom had an account at a formal financial
      institution (compared to 42 percent of men). The relevance of PA7 is rated satisfactory.

Objective 3 - To support key opportunities for sustainable growth in the telecommunications sector

     PA8 focused on a sector deemed important for economic growth: telecommunications, where limited
      broadband penetration constrained the participation of many in the digital economy.
     PA8 would make the fiber optic cables of the Operatori i Sistemit Te Transmetimit (OST), the
      stateowned electricity transmission company, available for commercial use by ISPs to provide
      broadband access to the public. Albania faced a wide digital gap, with only 58 percent of households
      having broadband access in 2019, significantly less than neighboring countries. The scheme would
      expand broadband access without requiring significant new civil works. Greater broadband access
      would in turn expand economic opportunities in the country, including for businesses (e-commerce and
      e-services), schools (remote learning), and households (digital connectivity). The relevance of PA8 is
      rated satisfactory.

Objective 4 - To support key opportunities for sustainable growth in the forestry sector

     Apart from the telecommunications sector, the forestry was considered important to economic growth.
      The Program Document (pages 36-37) cited three reasons for the focus on forestry, arguing that a
      depleted forest cover posed risks to economic activity in many sectors, including agriculture (irrigation),
      urbanization (water quality), tourism (natural landscape), and the environment (erosion prevention and
      carbon capture). First, forest products were an important export item – wood was 3 percent of all
      exports in 2018, including 10 percent of all exports to Greece (second largest export partner) (World
      Bank and UNCTAD, World Integrated Trade Solutions Database). Second, forest areas were a big
      draw for tourism (itself a fifth of GDP) (National Strategy for Sustainable Tourism Development 2019-
      2023). And third, the ecosystem was important to rural residents and agriculture households (40 percent
      of the workforce). Notwithstanding the arguments advanced by the Program Document, the priority
      placed by this operation on forestry raises a question about the relative importance of the sector to the
      economy, as opposed to the other industries considered highly valuable to Albania’s growth strategy –
      agri-business, automotive parts and apparel manufacturing, tourism, and information and
      communications technology (see “Annex 3 - Strategic Sectors in Albania’s Export-Oriented Growth
      Model” in World Bank, 2019, Albania - Systematic Country Diagnostic, 2019 Update).
     PA9 would create a new legal and institutional framework for forest management to help reverse
      deforestation and promote sustainable forest use. Albania's forest resources were depleted, with forest
      cover down to 1.3 million hectares or 46 percent of the territory in 2018 from 1.5 million hectares or 52
      percent of the territory in 2004. Overexploitation, illegal logging, inadequate forest investment, and
      ineffective law enforcement were the key causes. In addition, the transfer in 2016 of key management
      functions for 80 percent of forest and pasture lands to the municipalities and the dissolution of central
      planning, extension, and management structures were aggravating factors. Within the context of the

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Albania Fiscal Sustainability and Growth (P169524)



         Albanian National Forest Policy 2019-2030, the new Forestry Law would: (a) guarantee traditional user
         rights over forests and forest products to favor local communities; (b) support the sustainable
         development of forest products for domestic use and exports; (c) require the preparation of forest
         management plans and the creation of a forest management information system for evidence-based
         policymaking; (d) promote the integrity of the ecosystem to protect the most vulnerable; and (e) create a
         National Forest Agency. The new legal and institutional framework for forest management would install
         a reformed governance system for forest management led by the National Forest Agency at the central
         level and involving better equipped and trained municipalities and communities at the local level. The
         new measures aimed to complete and adopt forest management plans for at least 400,000 hectares by
         2021. While forecasts of private investment in forestry were not spelled out, the Government expected
         that the reform would facilitate additional support from rural development and agro-environment
         financing mechanisms provided by the EU under the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance for Rural
         Development (Albania and the European Union began accession negotiations in July 2022). Albania
         had previously obtained agro-forestry grants for farmers and forest user groups from the Government of
         Sweden and the Bank. The relevance of PA9 is rated moderately satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

                                                                                       Actual
                                                                                    Change in
                                                                                      Results
     Results    Associated Relevance                                   Actual        Indicator Achievement
                                              Baseline     Target
    Indicator Prior Action        Rating                               Value        Relative to    Rating
                                                                                   the Targeted
                                                                                    Change, in
                                                                                      Percent
               Objective 1 - To strengthen the transparency and sustainability of public finances
      RI1 -
  Periodic tax
  expenditure
     review                    Moderately
                    PA1                           No        Yes         Yes             100        [High]
 published (at                Unsatisfactory
 least second
     review
   published)
   RI2 - Total
      gross                    Moderately
                    PA2                          38.3        42          38              0        Negligible
    revenue                   Unsatisfactory
    collected

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Albania Fiscal Sustainability and Growth (P169524)



through LTO
  (percent of
  total gross
    revenue
 collected by
   the GDT)
       RI3 -
     Periodic
       PPP
  monitoring
                            Moderately
      report      PA3                           No        Yes         Yes          100          [High]
                           Unsatisfactory
published (at
   least third
      report
  published)
                        Objective 2 - To enhance finance for recovery and growth
 RI4 - NPLs
    for which
     debtor-
     creditor
 agreements
  negotiated
 and signed
using the out               Moderately
                  PA4                            0         25         12.7         50.8        Modest
     of court               Satisfactory
  framework
  (percent of
    Q3-2019
      large
   corporate
      multi-
lender NPLs)
 RI5 - Value
        of
 outstanding                Moderately
                  PA5                           7.4        8.9         9.7         173          High
   corporate                Satisfactory
 bonds (ALL
     billion)
       RI6 -
   Number of
                            Moderately
   registered     PA6                            6         8           11          250          [High]
                            Satisfactory
  investment
      funds
  RI7 - Adult     PA7       Moderately         49.3         52        52.5         119          High
  population               Unsatisfactory      43.8        46.5       53.1         372        (women)
 with a debit                                (women)     (women)    (women)      (women)



                                                                                                Page 10 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Albania Fiscal Sustainability and Growth (P169524)



     card
  (percent)
    Objective 3 - To support key opportunities for sustainable growth in the telecommunications sector
     RI8 -
 Number of
   internet
  providers
   offering
   internet
                   PA8       Satisfactory       0             0           1            100           High
   services
through the
  electricity
 company’s
    cable
   network
           Objective 4 - To support key opportunities for sustainable growth in the forestry sector
     RI9 -
 Hectares of
forests with
                              Moderately
   adopted         PA9                          0         400,000      454,364         114          [High]
                            Unsatisfactory
    forest
management
     plan

 Note: RI achievement ratings note achievement of the targeted change for the RI. RI achievement ratings
in brackets reflect ratings that may have been adjusted based on weak relevance of the results indicator
(discussed in efficacy section).

Objective 1 - To strengthen the transparency and sustainability of public finances

      RI1 (PA1) – publication of at least the second periodic tax expenditure review – would indicate
       continuing progress toward the transparency objective, following the order to publish periodic tax
       expenditure reviews and the publication of the first review in 2019. As the prior action was limited
       to the issuance of Order No. 389, the results indicator would be adequate to measure the impact
       of this prior action. However, the indicator provided little assurance that the periodic reports were
       and would be of sufficient quality to facilitate informed policymaking about tax incentives and
       domestic revenue mobilization as intended. Hence, the indicator cannot reflect the degree of
       achievement of the sustainability objective. The relevance of RI1 is rated moderately
       unsatisfactory.
      RI2 (PA2) – total gross revenue collected by the LTO as a percentage of total gross revenue
       collected by the GDT – aimed to measure the impact of a new regulation broadening the criteria
       for identifying large taxpayers coupled with measures to upgrade the risk management functions of
       the LTO. While the indicator was a reasonable measure of the impact of the innovations, it
       neglected to account for other factors that may differentially affect tax payments by large taxpayers
       versus tax payments by all taxpayers. The relevance of RI2 is rated moderately unsatisfactory.
      RI3 (PA3) – publication of at least the third periodic PPP monitoring report – would indicate
       continuing progress toward the transparency objective, following the adoption of a PPP monitoring

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Albania Fiscal Sustainability and Growth (P169524)



      framework and the publication of the first report in 2019. However, the publication of the
      monitoring report indicated little about the content of the report or the quality of the
      analysis. Moreover, the indicator did not convey any information or measure any outcome toward
      the fiscal sustainability objective, which would have been expected from the passage of the
      Amended PPP Law (the amendment restricted the use unsolicited proposals to port, airport,
      electricity generation and distribution, and natural gas distribution projects and stopped the use of
      the bonus system in the tendering process for PPP contracts). A more relevant indicator would
      have been the use of unsolicited PPPs in the unrestricted sectors beginning after the passage of
      the Amended PPP Law. The relevance of RI3 is rated moderately unsatisfactory.

Objective 2 - To enhance finance for recovery and growth

     RI4 (PA4) – the percentage of large corporate multi-lender NPLs for which debtor-creditor
      agreements were negotiated and signed using the out-of-court resolution framework – was
      adequate to measure the impact of the prior action to adopt an out-of-court resolution procedure.
      However, the indicator was inadequate to reflect overall progress toward reducing the
      accumulated stock of NPLs in the banking system. The problem stemmed from the application of
      the rules governing the out-of-court resolution procedure. A borrower could participate in an out-of-
      court resolution only if it were a "distressed borrower": (a) it was exposed to more than one bank;
      (b) its total exposure to all banks was greater than ALL 250 million; and (c) its debt to one or more
      banks had been in default for at least 90 days. Twenty-two large corporates with multi-lender NPLs
      were eligible to participate in an out-of-court resolution beginning in September 2019; altogether,
      they accounted for a quarter of all NPLs at that time. However, over the next two years, as they
      resolved their overdue loans or as they cut the number of banks to which they were exposed to
      just one (the eligibility cut-off), 11 of the 22 large corporates were no longer eligible for an out-of-
      court resolution procedure (i.e., the 11 were no longer considered "distressed borrowers"). A more
      robust indicator to reflect overall progress toward reducing the accumulated stock of NPLs would
      have been the proportion of their NPLs that the 22 borrowers (who originally participated in the
      out-of-court resolution process) had settled over the duration of this operation. The relevance of
      RI4 is rated moderately satisfactory.
     RI5 (PA5) – the value of outstanding corporate bonds (in Albanian Lek [ALL] billion) – was mostly
      adequate to measure the impact of enacting the new Law on Capital Markets, which aimed to
      boost corporate bond financing by streamlining and simplifying the issuance of corporate bonds
      through public sales and private placements. An increase in the stock of corporate bonds would
      reflect an improvement in the availability of non-bank term finance for corporate investment and
      economic growth. A more direct measure would have simply been new bonds issued (in ALL
      billion). The relevance of RI5 is rated moderately satisfactory.
     RI6 (PA6) – the number of registered investment funds – was mostly adequate to measure the
      impact of enacting the Law on Collective Investment Undertakings, which aimed to expand the
      range of investment funds that could be offered by the investment industry. An increase in the
      number of registered investment funds would only partly reflect progress toward the objective of
      enhancing finance for economic growth. A better measure than the number of funds would have
      been the amount of gross flows into the funds, which would indicate the extent to which new
      financing was mobilized. The relevance of RI6 is rated moderately unsatisfactory.
     RI7 (PA7) – the percentage of the adult population with a debit card – only partly measured the
      impact of enacting the Payments Services Law – which aimed to expand the use of a wide range
      of electronic payments services in a national payments system historically dominated by using
      cash. Financial inclusion (i.e., access to useful and affordable financial products and services that

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Albania Fiscal Sustainability and Growth (P169524)



      meet transactions, payments, savings, credit, and insurance needs) can contribute to inclusive
      growth and economic development (Demirguc-Kunt et. al., 2017, Financial Inclusion and Inclusive
      Growth - A Review of Recent Empirical Evidence, WB PRWP 8040). Moreover, digital financial
      inclusion can accelerate economic growth (Khera et. al., 2021, Is Digital Financial Inclusion
      Unlocking Growth?, IMF WP/21/167). For this operation, the digital finance equivalent of
      traditional financial inclusion indicators would have been superior measures to the debit card
      indicator – e.g., number of registered mobile money agents per 100,00 adults, percent of adults
      with mobile money account, percentage of adults who use the internet to pay, percent of adults
      who use mobile phones to receiver wages, percent of adults who use mobile phones who use
      mobile phone to make utility payments (Khera et. al., 2021, Measuring Digital Financial Inclusion in
      Emerging Market and Developing Economies, IMF WP/21/90) or e-money accounts per 1,000
      adults, mobile money transactions per 100,000 adults, retail cashless transactions per 1,000
      adults, made or received digital payments (% aged 15+), made payments using mobile phone (%
      aged 15+), made payments using internet (% aged 15+) (Global Partnership for Financial
      Inclusion, 2016, G20 Financial Inclusion Indicators). Data for these indicators could be obtained
      from WB Global Findex, WB Global Payments Systems Surveys, and IMF Financial Access
      Surveys, and would be available as a time series (permitting monitoring even beyond program
      closing). However, recent data for Albania from these sources would not be available by program
      closing in 2021. Albeit its limitation, the indicator, percentage of the adult population with a debit
      card, would be a suitable proxy for the broader indicators. The relevance of RI7 is
      rated moderately satisfactory.

Objective 3 - To support key opportunities for sustainable growth in the telecommunications
sector

     RI8 (PA8) – the number of ISPs offering internet services through the electricity company’s cable
      network – was adequate to measure the impact of the prior action to amend the statute of the OST
      to enable the public electricity transmission company to provide wholesale capacity services over
      its fiberoptic cable network to ISPs. With ISPs providing retail high-speed internet to end users
      using the available fiberoptic cable network, the indicator was adequate to reflect progress toward
      the objective of sustainable growth in the telecommunications sector. The full benefits of expanded
      broadband internet access would be realized in the medium- to long-term as more ISPs entered
      the market, expanded their territorial coverage, upgraded the quality of their services, and reduced
      their operating costs. The relevance of RI8 is rated satisfactory.

Objective 4 - To support key opportunities in the forestry sector for sustainable growth

     RI9 (PA9) – the number of hectares of forests for which forest management plans were adopted –
      was only partly adequate to measure the impact of the enactment of the Forestry Law. One of the
      requirements of the new law was the preparation of forest management plans to underpin a
      reforestation drive. An increase in the territorial coverage of forest management plans would
      reflect some progress toward the achievement of the objective to support key opportunities for
      sustainable growth in the forestry sector. However, there was no assurance that the forest
      management plans would be enforced. Hence, the indicator does not measure improved forest
      coverage. The relevance of RI8 is rated moderately unsatisfactory.




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 22
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Albania Fiscal Sustainability and Growth (P169524)



   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To strengthen the transparency and sustainability of public finances

               Rationale
                    RI1 – The Second Tax Expenditure Review was published by the Ministry of Finance and Economy in
                      December 2021, meeting the target that periodic tax expenditure reviews be published (at least the
                      second one), after the First Tax Expenditure Review was published in December 2019 (part of PA1).
                      The reviews were included in the annual budget and included data on tax expenditure estimates for
                      the VAT, the corporate income tax, and excise taxes, both in nominal terms and as a percentage of
                      GDP. Post-closing, the Third Tax Expenditure Review was under preparation in 2022. However, the
                      results indicator is insufficient to measure the fiscal sustainability objective (i.e., there is no evidence
                      that tax expenditures declined). The degree of achievement is rated substantial.
                     RI2 – Total gross revenue collected by the LTO as a proportion of total gross revenue collected by the
                      GDT remained the same, at 38.3 percent in the baseline and 38 percent at closing, failing to achieve
                      the targeted increase to 42 percent. Although the number of active LTO taxpayers increased from 682
                      in 2018 to 871 in 2021, total revenue collected by the LTO remained flat in percent of total revenue
                      collected by the GDT; the only tax category for which the ratio rose was the personal income tax. The
                      GDT explained that the following were factors: (a) the closure of gambling-related businesses; and (b)
                      the termination by some large companies of some business lines and activities. The degree of
                      achievement is rated negligible. Meanwhile, progress was being made with the reorganization of the
                      LTO: (a) transfer-pricing teams at the GDT were consolidated at the LTO; (b) a new audit section was
                      added to the old three; and (c) the registry of large taxpayers was updated.
                     RI3 – The Third PPP Monitoring Report (covering the year 2020 and involving 52 PPP contracts) was
                      published by the Ministry of Finance and Economy in June 2021, meeting the target that periodic PPP
                      monitoring reports would be published (at least the third one), after the First PPP Monitoring Report
                      was published in December 2019 (covering the year 2019 and involving nine PPP contracts) (part of
                      PA3) and the Second PPP Monitoring Report was published in May 2020 (an update covering the
                      year 2019). The monitoring reports were made part of the annual budget execution reports and
                      included data on PPP contractors (profiles), amount of investment, quarterly and annual performance
                      (indicators), and risks (fiscal risk among 12 classes of risks). Data coverage improved from 2019 to
                      2021, but information on several energy contracts was still missing. Post-closing, the Fourth PPP
                      Monitoring Report (covering the year 2021 and involving 65 PPP contracts) was published by the
                      Ministry of Finance and Economy in November 2022. According to the ICR, the collaboration by the
                      Ministry of Finance and Economy and the PPP sponsors to produce the monitoring reports would
                      likely help strengthen the PPP selection and management process in the future. However, the results
                      indicator is insufficient to measure the fiscal sustainability objective (e.g., there is no evidence that
                      contingent liabilities were reduced). The degree of achievement is rated substantial.




                                                                                                                   Page 14 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Albania Fiscal Sustainability and Growth (P169524)




Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To enhance finance for recovery and growth

Rationale
     RI4 – The value of debtor-creditor agreements negotiated and signed using the out-of-court resolution
       framework was 12.7 percent of the stock of large corporate multi-lender NPLs in Q3-2019 (the initial
       Tirana Approach loan portfolio), achieving only half of the target of 25 percent by closing. Meanwhile,
       albeit not directly supported by this operation, NPLs continued to decline from 8.4 percent of total
       gross loans in 2019 to 5.7 percent in December 2021 (at project closing) and to 5.1 percent in
       September 2022, as the authorities launched other measures to support the banking system in
       response to economic shocks triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic. These new measures included
       the restructuring of bank loans and the provision of government guarantees on new loans, both of
       which would have helped contain any rise in the NPL ratio over 2020-22. Within this larger context, the
       out-of-court resolution mechanism (which was adopted in July 2019 and expired in December 2021)
       would "likely have indirectly pushed banks toward reaching solutions without signing multi-lender
       agreements," according to the ICR. However, the contribution of the out-of-court resolution framework
       to the decline in the overall NPL ratio was not measured by RI4 or by any other analysis conducted by
       the authorities or the Bank. The degree of achievement is rated modest.
      RI5 – Outstanding corporate bonds increased from ALL 7.4 billion in the baseline to ALL 9.7 billion
       (EUR 82.9 million) by closing, exceeding the target of ALL 8.9 billion. The new bond issues were all
       sold through private placement, and the issuers included five banks, one microcredit company, and
       one commercial firm. Post-closing, the outstanding stock rose further to ALL 12.6 billion (EUR 107.2
       million) by September 2022. Meanwhile, to implement the new Law on Capital Markets, five new
       regulations were approved and another 13 were drafted and disseminated to the public for comment.
       The degree of achievement is rated high.
      RI6 – The number of registered investment funds increased from six in the baseline to 11 by closing,
       exceeding the target of 8. There is no data, however, about fund flows (e.g., the amount of portfolio
       investment mobilized by the funds) or fund values. Post-closing, the number of registered investment
       funds rose further to 14 by June 2022. Higher interest rates in 2022 reduced net fund assets and
       prompted partial investor redemptions. The Albanian Financial Supervisory Authority has since
       required more frequent reporting by the investment funds (including weekly reporting on redemptions
       and monthly reporting on liquidity) and ordered more frequent stress testing (stress tests were
       conducted in March 2022 and September 2022). However, the indicator does not convey any
       information about funds flows or fund values, which would be more important than the number of
       funds. The degree of achievement is rated substantial.
      RI7 – The proportion of the adult population with a debit card increased from 49.3 percent in the
       baseline to 52.5 percent by closing, exceeding the target of 52 percent. The proportion of women with
       a debit card increased from 43.8 percent in the baseline to 53.1 percent by closing, exceeding the
       target of 46.5 percent. Post-closing, the proportion of the adult population with a debit card increased
       further to 53.6 percent by June 2022. Additionally, the proportion of cash-based payments has
       dropped from 75.8 percent of total payments (in value terms) in 2018 to 71.7 percent in 2021 and 69.3

                                                                                                Page 15 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Albania Fiscal Sustainability and Growth (P169524)



       percent in June 2022. The value of debit and credit card payments rose 50 percent in 2021 from 2020,
       and electronic payments (internet banking), 15 percent. Meanwhile, the Bank of Albania has
       completed drafting all regulations to implement the new law, including on the transparency of fees and
       the supervision of payment services. RI7 and the additional information provided by the ICR indicates
       that the proportion of cash-based payments in the economy has steadily declined from 2018 to 2022,
       conveying progress with the objective to boost the use of electronic payments to improve financial
       inclusion and promote growth. The degree of achievement is rated high.



Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To support key opportunities for sustainable growth in the telecommunications sector

Rationale
     RI8 – There was one ISP offering internet services using the electricity company's cable network by
       closing, achieving the target. OST commercialized its fiber infrastructure, investing EUR 1.3 billion in
       2017-22 on additional fiber capacity of 20 gigabytes each in 22 electrical substations and extending its
       fiber cable network to 2,000 kilometers covering the whole country. In July 2021, OST signed a three-
       year contract with the ISP TIBO, achieving the target. TIBO started operations using the OST's fiber
       optic network in late 2021. Altogether, the penetration rate for fixed broadband access topped 78.3
       percent of households by end-2021, some 9.6 percentage points higher than in end-2020.
       Postclosing, OST signed a one-year contract with the ISP MirBoNet in September 2022 and started
       negotiations for another contract with the ISP Abissnet. The degree of achievement is rated high.



Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
To support key opportunities for sustainable growth in the forestry sector

Rationale
RI9 – The number of hectares covered by forest management plans reached 454,364 hectares by closing,
exceeding the target of 400,000. The forest management plans include plans prepared by the National
Agency for Protected Areas and those prepared by municipalities. The government has also adopted several
bylaws to implement the new Forestry Law covering the: (a) leasing of forests; (b) criteria for the utilization of
forest funds; (c) certification of forest engineers; and (d) determination of costs for the preparation of forest
plans. However, there are limitations with the results indicator. The degree of achievement is rated
substantial.


                                                                                                    Page 16 of 22
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Albania Fiscal Sustainability and Growth (P169524)




                      Rating

                      Moderately Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

With the degree of achievement of the objective to strengthen the transparency and sustainability of public
finances rated moderately satisfactory, the objective to enhance finance for recovery and growth rated
satisfactory, the objective to support key opportunities for sustainable growth in the telecommunications sector
rated satisfactory and in the forestry sector rated moderately satisfactory (objectives 3 and 4 maintain a combined
weight equivalent to the original objective) the overall efficacy of the operation is rated moderately satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory


      6. Outcome

      Rationale

      With the relevance of prior actions rated satisfactory, and efficacy rated moderately satisfactory, the outcome of
      this operation is rated moderately satisfactory.


      a. Rating

      Moderately Satisfactory

      7. Risk to Development Outcome

      Macroeconomic Risk. Slower economic growth amid more volatile global conditions will likely keep
      Albania's fiscal deficit at an average 4.3 percent of GDP in 2023-2024, according to the World Bank Europe
      and Central Asia Macro Poverty Outlook of October 2022, exerting even greater pressure on the
      government's revenue mobilization drive. Meanwhile, policy rate increases, both domestically and globally,
      have reduced fund values and prompted investor redemptions, posing market risk to investment funds,
      especially bond funds (see Section 5 - Objective 2).

      The Albania First Resilience and Green Development - Development Policy Loan, approved in March 2023,
      which aims to strengthen the resilience of the government and household sectors (one of three objectives),


                                                                                                           Page 17 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Albania Fiscal Sustainability and Growth (P169524)



may help alleviate the risks to the gains made with revenue mobilization. The DPL supports further
broadening of the tax base, with a new tax law to cover taxation of the self-employed and high net-worth
individuals, and further strengthening tax administration, with an amendment to the Tax Procedure Code to
authorize tax audits of high net-worth individuals. Meanwhile, continuing technical assistance from the IMF
on a medium-term revenue strategy will help Albania prioritize and sequence measures over the medium
term, including measures to enhance tax compliance, strengthen governance, and build capacity.

Institutional Capacity Risk. The weak capacity of the LTO to recruit and retain qualified staff, in the face of
competition from the private sector for finance professionals, poses risks to the revenue mobilization drive.
The limited budgets of many municipalities pose risks to the hiring of forestry technical experts and to the
preparation and implementation of municipal forestry management plans.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


Analytic Underpinnings. Each of the prior actions was informed by analytic work produced by the Bank,
the IMF, and the government (see Section 3.B).

Technical Assistance at Design. The Bank extended the following technical assistance to various
agencies to help the government fulfill the prior actions of this operation:

      the Ministry of Finance and Economy for the preparation of the first Tax Expenditure Review in
         December 2019;
        the Ministry of Finance and Economy for the production of the first PPP Monitoring Report in
         December 2019, supported by a grant from the SAFE Trust Fund of the European Commission and
         the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs;
        the Bank of Albania for the design of the out-of-court NPL restructuring framework, supported by
         the Financial Sector Advisory Center (FinSAC), based in Vienna, and the World Bank Finance,
         Competitiveness, and Innovation Global Practice - Global Insolvency and Debt Resolution Team;
        the Albania Financial Supervisory Authority for the preparation of the Capital Markets Law and the
         Law on Collective Investment Undertakings, supported by the Swiss State Secretariat of Economic
         Affairs;
        the Bank of Albania for the preparation of the Payments Services Law;
        the Ministry of Infrastructure and Energy for the preparation of pre-feasibility studies for Balkans
        Digital Highway Initiative, supported by the Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF);
        the OST for preparation of plans to offer broadband internet services through the electricity
         company’s fiber optic cable network; and
        the Ministry of Tourism and Environment for capacity building for the staff of the National Forestry
         Agency and the staff of municipalities to implement the new Forestry Law, supported by the
         Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency.


                                                                                                     Page 18 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Albania Fiscal Sustainability and Growth (P169524)



Donor Coordination. The Bank coordinated the design of the fiscal and financial sector reform program
supported by this operation with the IMF. The IMF First Post-Program Monitoring mission in September
2020 advised the authorities to: (a) redouble their efforts to raise tax revenue by building a fairer, simpler,
more efficient, and more transparent tax system – related to PA1 and PA2; (b) establish a unified process
for preparing, prioritizing, and evaluating all public investment projects, including PPPs, and discontinue
the use of unsolicited PPPs – related to PA3; and (c) operationalize and enforce the corporate insolvency
and resolution framework and implement the regulatory framework for out-of-court restructuring of loans –
  related to PA4. Meanwhile, the Bank also coordinated with the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic
Affairs on the Capital Markets Law and the Law on Collective Investment Undertakings, and the Swedish
International Development Cooperation Agency, on the Albanian Forestry Policy Document that
underpinned the new Forestry Law.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

According to the ICR, the Bank closely monitored the implementation of the reform program supported by this
operation. The Bank conducted implementation reviews in February 2021 and October 2021, identifying areas
where the pace of reforms lagged and where achievement of the results targets was most at risk at that time:
the conduct and publication of the tax expenditure reviews, and the negotiation and signing of out-of-court
settlement agreements for NPLs. The Bank drafted operational plans that subsequently boosted
implementation of reforms. The Bank extended technical assistance and advisory services to the government to
continue with the implementation of reforms supported by this operation.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

With Bank performance at both design and implementation rated satisfactory, overall Bank performance is
rated satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating



                                                                                                       Page 19 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Albania Fiscal Sustainability and Growth (P169524)



Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The ICR did not present any evidence to assess the ex-post poverty and social impact of this operation.



b. Environmental

Other than to state that the enactment of the Forestry Law, the preparation of forest management plans, and the
creation of a forest management information system strengthened the management of natural resources, the ICR
did not present any evidence to assess the ex-post environmental impact of this operation.




c. Gender

According to RI7, the proportion of women with a debit card increased from 43.8 percent in the baseline to 53.1
percent by closing (exceeding the target of 46.5 percent) and to 53.6 percent by June 2022, progressively
narrowing the gender gap in the ownership of debit cards, an indicator of financial inclusion in an expanded
national payments system.



d. Other

---

10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

Consistency with Guidelines. The ICR is consistent with OPCS guidelines on ICRs for development financing
operations and includes sections on the relevance of prior actions and the relevance of results indicators.

Conciseness. The account of the project’s performance is well informed and concisely presented.

Results Orientation. The efficacy assessment is outcome-oriented and based on the degree of achievement of
the results targets.




                                                                                                  Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Albania Fiscal Sustainability and Growth (P169524)



Quality of Evidence. The ICR presents ample evidence to support its assessment of the Bank’s performance at
design and during implementation.

Quality of Analysis. The assessment of the efficacy of the program is candid and evidence-based.

Lessons. The ICR draws lessons that would be valuable to reform programs that address development
constraints across a range of sectors and require considerable technical assistance for design and
implementation.



a. Rating

High

11. Ratings
                                                                                      Reason for
Ratings                            ICR                      IEG
                                                                                      Disagreement/Comments
                                   Moderately
Outcome                                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                                   Satisfactory
Bank Performance                   Satisfactory             Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                   ---                      Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                     ---                      High


12. Lessons

Two lessons are drawn from the ICR, with some adaptation, and a third is added by this ICR Review.

Technical assistance is instrumental to the design and the implementation of complex reforms in a
multi-sector operation. In this development policy operation, technical assistance by the Bank, the IMF, the
European Commission, the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs, the Swedish International
Development Cooperation Agency, and the multi-donor trust funds SAFE, FinSAC, and PPIAF helped the
government fulfill prior actions in wide-ranging reform areas including tax expenditures, PPP monitoring, out-
ofcourt NPL resolution, capital markets development, payments system regulation, the wholesale market for
broadband internet services, and forest management information systems. Moreover, continuing technical
assistance proved instrumental in advancing the reforms beyond the original set of prior actions, including in the
refinement of the analysis of tax expenditures following changes to the tax laws, the expansion of the scope of
PPP monitoring, and the design and drafting of rules and regulations to implement the new capital markets law
and the new payments services law.

Capacity constraints may prove binding to continuing with reform initiatives after the completion of a
development policy operation. Post-closing information collected by the ICR indicates that government
institutional and budgetary constraints have been limiting the ambition of the reform program in important areas:
the analysis of the incidence of tax expenditures by taxpayer income group, the extension of the PPP monitoring

                                                                                                        Page 21 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Albania Fiscal Sustainability and Growth (P169524)



report to the whole registry of PPP contracts, the recruitment of forestry experts to implement forestry
management plans, and the recruitment of financial experts for the LTO. Greater attention at appraisal to the
sustainability of reform initiatives, including by securing future budgetary commitments from the government for
continuing reform activities, would help address these challenges in future operations.

Reforms that tighten the governance framework for the granting of exemptions are often the more
effective and sustainable approach to reducing the use of tax exemptions. This operation promoted the
publication of tax expenditures statements as an effective way to reduce the use of tax exemptions, purportedly
to strengthen accountability in granting tax exemptions. However, a recent evaluation by the Independent
Evaluation Group, World Bank Support for Domestic Revenue Mobilization - An Independent Evaluation (2023),
found that changes in governance frameworks that made it more difficult to grant exemptions tended to be the
most resilient reform measure. Meanwhile, eliminating specific exemptions was frequently overridden over time
under pressure from vested interests.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                   Page 22 of 22
