     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZIRP (P171114)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023913

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P171114                                    ZIRP

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Zimbabwe                                   Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D5090                                  30-Jun-2023                                         72,490,629.98

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Jul-2019                                30-Jun-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           72,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            72,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        72,490,629.98                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Paul Robert Honeybone      Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was “to address the early and medium-term resilient disaster
   recovery needs of cyclone-affected people”.

   The two-fold objective is consistent throughout, from the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (e.g. page 1,
   p.15), in the Financial Agreement (Grant Agreement D509-ZW).



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZIRP (P171114)



   For the purpose of the analysis in this ICRR, the PDO will be parsed into the following two objectives:

        1. To address the early resilient disaster recovery needs of cyclone-affected people; and
        2. To address the medium-term resilient disaster recovery needs of cyclone-affected people.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had three components:

   Component 1: Providing Immediate Support for Cyclone Recovery (Estimated cost at appraisal: US$27
   million. Actual cost at completion: US$31.63 million.)

   This component provided immediate, integrated livelihoods and healthcare solutions to cyclone-affected
   people, including: (a) restoration of livelihoods through conditional cash transfers for food assistance, and
   through unconditional cash transfers for the most vulnerable groups; (b)restoration of agricultural crop and
   livestock production, including distribution of agricultural inputs for small farmer households, and the
   restocking and treatment of livestock and poultry; and (c) provision of basic health services, including a
   basic package of health services, GBV and sexual exploitation and assault (SEA) support services, child
   protection measures, and education services. It also financed project management and overhead costs for
   these activities, such as needs and beneficiary assessments, preparation of technical designs, and
   technical quality control.

   Component 2: Enabling Medium-Term Cyclone Recovery and Resilience-building (Estimated cost at
   appraisal:US$33.40 million. Actual cost at completion: US$32.48 million.)

   This component supported the rehabilitation of critical community infrastructure, such as: water and
   sanitation systems, irrigation networks, community schools, and community roads; as well as community-
   level risk reduction efforts such as slope protection and environmental rehabilitation. It also financed project
   management and overhead costs for these activities, such as needs and beneficiary assessments,
   preparation of technical designs, and technical quality control.

   Component 3: Providing Project Management and Technical Assistance (Estimated cost at appraisal:
   US$8.60 million. Cost at completion: US$7.89 million.)

   This component included: (a) Project management support to the United Nations Office for Project Services
   (UNOPS) for overall coordination and oversight function and for centralized project services across all
   components, including monitoring and evaluation (M&E), environmental and social systems, technical
   quality assurance, grievance redressal, GBV/SEA and referral and protection systems, and for engaging
   independent verification assessment (IVA) services for project results validation; and (b) technical
   assistance, which included supporting community risk assessments, monitoring and preparedness planning,


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ZIRP (P171114)



  community infrastructure damage assessments, displacement monitoring and targeting systems, health
  information and epidemic surveillance systems, project strategic communications, and citizen engagement.

  Plus, an Unallocated Amount (allocation at appraisal:US$3.0 million. Actual cost at completion: US$0.0
  million.) US$3 million was unallocated (i.e. under 4.2% of the total grant was classified as unallocated at the
  outset). The July 2022 restructuring formalized this allocation.

  Restructuring:

  In July 2022 when US$69.9 million was already disbursed, the project underwent one relatively minor
  restructuring. This rounded out allocations, rather than lead to a distinct shift in focus.

      a. Unallocated funds (US$3 million). These funds were programmed as follows: (i) US$2.5 million to
         Component 1 to scale up the livelihood activities implemented through the Project; and (ii) US$0.5
         million to Component 1 to scale up the health interventions implemented through the Project.
      b. Reallocation of funds between Components. The grant amount was reallocated between the three
         components to harmonize Project-level disbursements, expenditures, and commitments by
         component.

  The restructuring refined the Results Framework (RF). This increased five targets and more precisely
  specified them as estimated ranges were formulated at approval. Two targets were revised downwards
  (90km of road rehabilitation rather than the original target range of 142 – 203kms; and 12-14 wards with risk
  mitigation infrastructure constructed rather than 14 – 20 wards). Three new intermediate indicators were
  added to capture the Project’s investments in (i) health, (ii) gender-based violence (GBV) support services,
  and (iii) education. The Citizen Engagement indicator was also adjusted to better measure Project
  responsiveness and timeliness in redressing grievances. Since the changes to the RF increased five
  targets, and the downscaling of two indicator targets were relatively minor compared to the overall project, a
  split rating will not be done.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost

  The total project cost of the Zimbabwe Idai Recovery Project (ZIRP) was US$ 72.00 million (Original and
  Revised). The Actual disbursed cost was US$ 72,490,630.

  Financing

  The Zimbabwe Idai Recovery Project (ZIRP) was fully financed by an IDA Grant.

  Borrower Contribution

  There was no borrower contribution (planned or actual) at appraisal.

  Dates




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZIRP (P171114)



   The project was approved on July 16, 2019 (Grant Agreement signed July 22nd, 2019), with the project
   becoming effective on July 29, 2019. The MTR was conducted on September 9, 2021, while the original
   and actual closing date was June 30, 2023.

   Other changes

   As noted above (Section D, Components), there was one minor restructuring late in the project. This
   primarily resulted in final fund allocations to round-out disbursements, along with some improved target
   indicator specification.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context: Zimbabwe was in a state of fragility with ongoing vulnerability and increasing poverty prior to the
regional disaster and humanitarian situation unfolding from the impact of Cyclone Idai. The cyclone made
landfall in Zimbabwe on March 15, 2019. It heavily damaged properties, crops, livestock, and basic
infrastructure in the eastern provinces. This resulted in several hundred deaths and 270,000 people in need
of humanitarian assistance, including 129,600 children and 60,000 newly displaced people.

The Government of Zimbabwe (GoZ) declared an emergency on March 16, 2019; seeking emergency relief
in a letter (dated April 11, 2019) requesting funding. They provided no objection to the direct channeling of
funds outside of the Government e.g. through UN agencies. Zimbabwe was in non-accrual status (an
inability to repay loans) since October 2000, making the country ineligible to receive funding from the IDA
and the World Bank. The Bank agreed to mobilize emergency support across all sectors and to provide
exceptional financing on grant terms from the IDA Crisis Response Window (CRW) to the United Nations
Office for Project Services (UNOPS).

Alignment with Country Priorities:
The project objective furthered key priorities (e.g., water use efficiency) in Zimbabwe’s National Climate
Change Response Strategy from 2015, which remained in effect. It accorded with the GoZ’s National
Development Strategy 1 (2021-2025) (NDS1), which set ambitious targets, e.g., regarding rural water
access. The objective also aligned with the GoZ’s Vision 2030, which covered wide-ranging factors, e.g.,
sanitation infrastructure, health care, and gender equality.

Alignment to World Bank Strategies:
Given Zimbabwe’s non-accrual status with the Bank, there was no World Bank Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) or Country Partnership Strategy (CPS). However, the engagement was well aligned with
World Bank strategic initiatives. Following the 2022 World Bank Zimbabwe Country Economic
Memorandum (CEM), the project was consistent with the Bank’s guidance on increasing productivity, jobs,
and macroeconomic growth. The project was also aligned with the ambitions of the Zimbabwe
Reconstruction Fund (ZIMREF).

Bank Experience:
With a humanitarian crisis unfolding and the country cut-off from direct development financing, the Bank
was instrumental in advancing recovery finance. The Bank brought technical expertise in FCV contexts to

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      ZIRP (P171114)



               help design and operationalize the recovery programs. It acted as a trusted convener and provided support
               for GoZ-led coordination through outside technical assistance, grant resourcing, and through the Project’s
               engagement and guidance mechanisms e.g. steering committees.

               Regional Rationale and Priorities:
               Following the regional states of emergency being declared, the Bank prepared a broader regional package
               comprising a set of operations totaling around US$700 million in IDA resources. This included up to
               US$545 million from the CRW to support response in Malawi, Mozambique, and Zimbabwe. This response
               was aimed at mitigating the crisis, negative spillovers, and population displacement to other countries to
               strengthen the effectiveness of IDA’s humanitarian response. The operation met the emergency provisions
               under Section III Paragraph 12, Projects in Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints
               of the Bank Policy: Investment Project Financing.

               Level of the PDO:

               Overall, the PDO focused on both immediate and medium-term disaster recovery needs, which is
               acceptable given the emergency situation and in a fragile post-disaster context.

               The PDO formulation was relevant to the circumstances, and the overall rating is Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Address the early resilient disaster recovery needs of cyclone-affected people.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change:

                             The PAD’s Theory of Change (ToC) was logical, but largely limited to output specification. It focused on types
                             of input allocation (labelled as activities) resulting in outputs (also activity description). The output of these
                             activities (the number of people benefiting) were called outcomes. The objective was restated at the end of
                             the results chain as a high-level outcome. The ToC in the ICR followed the same pattern, thus focusing on
                             quantifying essentially output-level results. Objective 1 captures the initial wave of response activities. This
                             was “immediate recovery and strengthening coping mechanisms for cyclone affected communities”. This
                             focused on three activity areas: (i) addressing food vulnerability, (ii) supporting agriculture and livestock
                             production, along with (iii) basic social support services (i.e. health, GBV and education services). These
                             activities were expected to lead to the following outputs: food assistance provided, seeds, tools and fencing
                             distributed, Vaccinated/treated livestock, Healthcare, medicine, GBV and education services and training

                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ZIRP (P171114)



provided. These outputs were in turn expected to lead to the following outcomes: people benefiting from
conditional and unconditional cash transfers, households benefiting from provision of agricultural inputs and
livestock support, people reached with accelerated basic package health, GBV and education services.
These three outcomes were expected to feed into the objective of Immediate cyclone recovery and
strengthening coping mechanisms for cyclone affected communities.

Outputs

Emergency Livelihood assistance for early recovery provided

      239,324 people received cash transfers in the first 18 months, significantly exceeding the target range
       of 67-96,000. This included 5,776 people receiving cash-for work payments (no target).
            o Of the total 239,324 people who received cash transfers, 151,165 were women and girls,
               significantly exceeding the target range of 33-48,000.
      142,864 female headed households benefitted from conditional and unconditional cash transfers for
       food, significantly more than the target range of 27-38,000.
      1,645 displaced people benefited from conditional and unconditional cash transfers for food,
       substantially fewer than anticipated an 13-19,000. This reflected the reality that many Internally
       Displaced People (IDPs) left camps quickly to either integrate into host communities or move away
       from the affected districts.

Agricultural crop and livestock production restored

      22,027 households benefitted from agricultural inputs and livestock support, achieving the target of
        22,000, including:

Agricultural:

- 2,320 households benefited from the establishment of 64 community gardens

- 1,753 metric tons of drought tolerant rainfed crops and fertilizers provided to restore self-reliance and
improving production yields

Livestock:

- 1,605 metric tons of cattle feed, 175,000 kgs of poultry feed, black soldier fly (BSF) production intensification
services to 500 poultry farmers, and 1,260 goats supplied (with associated training and support led for
improved productivity).

- 3,044,003 livestock treated/vaccinated, exceeding the original target range of 2,068,200 – 2,954,500
animals. This included: 483,256 cattle, 500,000 sheep and goats, and 2,178,234 birds received disease
treatments (e.g. deworming and vaccinations), reduced six diseases and resulted in less tick-borne disease,
death and increased productivity.

Accelerating the revitalization of basic package health, Gender-based Violence (GBV) and educational
services



                                                                                                     Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ZIRP (P171114)



- 661,692 people provided with integrated healthcare support (coordinated by WHO, UNICEF, and UNFPA)
exceeding the target of 619,074.

- 12,111 people reached through the mobile One Stop Centre with GBV services, exceeding the target of
8,600 people.

- 88,516 students, including 43,410 girls, benefiting from education services, achieving the targets (88,000
and 43,000 respectively).

Outcomes

The RF lacked indicators at outcome level beyond number of beneficiaries. The achieved outputs did
however clearly contribute to the objective of early resilient disaster recovery. The outputs were
comprehensively delivered and relevant in the given context, all targets were achieved or exceeded.
Objective 1 is thus rated High.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Address the medium-term resilient disaster recovery needs of cyclone-affected people.

Rationale
Theory of Change:

This objective captures the second wave of response activities focusing on the rehabilitation of damaged
community infrastructure, including the construction of schools, community health facilities, community
access roads, water supply systems, markets, and community risk reduction and protection work. The
activities were expected to lead to the following four outputs: repaired water systems and sanitation facilities
(WASH facilities), restored storm drains, contours, terraces, water ways among others, repaired schools
including construction of new classroom blocks and sanitation facilities, and repaired roads, irrigation
schemes and erosion control measures e.g. slope protection. These outputs were in turn expected to lead to
the following outcome: people benefiting from rehabilitated community infrastructure and risk reduction
interventions.

The ToC did not specify what kind of outcomes were to be expected from these outputs beyond number of
beneficiaries. With the RF presented a range of relevant metrics as ‘PDO indicators’, these were essentially
output-level reporting.

Outputs:

Rehabilitating communal WASH facilities




                                                                                                   Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ZIRP (P171114)




      44,106 households benefitted from the rehabilitation of damaged communal WASH facilities
         (households with restored access to water and sanitation), exceeding the target of 35,000 (increased
         from the original range of 10,000 to 14,400 households).

Restoring communal irrigation schemes in support of agrarian livelihoods

      6 damaged communal irrigation schemes were restored, where the target was 7–9 schemes. Some
         schemes were descoped due to technical complexity, implementation risks, and time limitations. The
         irrigation schemes finished had commercial and O&M Plans completed.

Rehabilitate damaged community schools

      5,921 students benefited from restored education services, exceeding the target of 3,200-4,500
         students.

     - This included 2,884 girl students, exceeding the target of 1,500-2,200 girls.

Rehabilitate damaged community and risk mitigation infrastructure

      82.47 kilometers of roads were rehabilitated across 11 roads, short of the target of 90km of
         rehabilitated roads. Overall, 346,002 people benefiting from rehabilitated community infrastructure and
         risk reduction interventions. This exceeded the target of 270,000 people.

Number of wards with risk mitigation infrastructure constructed

      13 wards had risk mitigation infrastructure constructed. This met the revised target of 12-14 wards, but
         fell short of the original target of 14-20 wards.

Additional achievements reported by the ICR but not included in the RF, and hence without target values,
were:

      94 sanitation facilities improved across 32 health facilities, and 482 communal water points were
         developed that contributed to water and sanitation systems
      437 community latrine builders were trained
      94 sanitation facilities improved across 32 health facilities, and 482 communal water points were
         developed that contributed to water and sanitation systems
        150 community health volunteers and 451 village health workers trained on participatory health and
         hygiene education
        Community school rehabilitation included the rehabilitation of 7 schools, with 429 sanitation facilities
         also improved across 48 schools
        26 farmer field schools were established for watershed planning and management
        4 health facilities were rehabilitated, and 1 women’s market was rehabilitated.

Outcomes

While some output targets were not achieved, most were achieved and some exceeded the targeted number
of beneficiaries under this objective. The achieved outputs did however clearly contribute to the objective of

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                ZIRP (P171114)



                            addressing medium-term resilient disaster recovery needs. However, the results framework lacked indicators
                            at outcome level beyond number of beneficiaries. Since the objective was pertaining to medium term resilient
                            recovery needs, the indicators could go beyond the people benefitting from rehabilitation measures and
                            specifically include whether the rehabilitated works met any given resilient standards to demonstrate
                            resilience. Given the shortcomings in achievement of some outputs, as well as lack of outcome indicators
                            that adequately reflected medium-term resilience, Objective 2 is thus rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The first objective is rated High as all outcome targets were exceeded. The targeted number of beneficiaries
                            for both immediate and medium-term support were exceeded. The second objective is rated Substantial due
                            to shortcomings in achievement of some outputs, and for the lack of relevant indicators to adequately reflect
                            that the outputs met the resilient standards. Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency:

   The total ERR for all investments relating to the two components was estimated at 63 percent over a 15-year
   period. The NPV is estimated at US$256 million at a 12 percent discount rate (US$446 million at a 6 percent
   discount rate). A number of channels of impact were analyzed and sensitivity tested. Notably, the channel of
   emergency food, nutrition and livelihood produced an ERR of 73%, based on the NPV of US$107 million at a
   12% discount rate (ICR source 8.e, p 44).

   The original PAD calculated ERRs in three key areas of activity at appraisal, namely:

   (a) food and cash assistance at 28% – based on improved health and nutrition, and lives saved, including
   improved community infrastructure and skills acquired though for-for-assets.

   (b) rehabilitating WASH services at 27% – based on the value of improved health outcomes and saved lives,
   premised on restored water and sanitation e.g. toilets in households, rehabilitation of water systems, and female
   and child-friendly toilets in schools and clinics.


                                                                                                                             Page 9 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ZIRP (P171114)



(c) rehabilitating damaged community infrastructure at 33% – based on a PAD estimate of 216 km of road in
poor and fair condition rehabilitated at an average cost of US$40,000 per km.

Post-completion analysis presented substantially higher ERRs: (a) from 28% to 73%, (b) 27% to 47%, and (c)
33% to 63%. The actual number of project beneficiaries vastly exceeded the number used for the PAD analysis
(e.g., 209,023 persons benefiting from the unconditional cash transfer program versus the 59,400 in the PAD).

Additional spillover effects and positive externalities are likely to be under-reported so as to take a conservative
approach; and as data on wider economic impacts was not available. Further, without the project interventions
to provide immediate relief for cyclone recovery, the economic cost of the disaster would have been
considerably higher due to vastly higher death and illness rates and difficulties in accessing economic
opportunities among beneficiaries. The costs of this potential ‘downward spiral’ were not calculated.

Administrative efficiency

Administrative efficiency was high, with a partnership-driven approach and resources reaching those in need ‘on
the ground’. The project did not experience any noteworthy slippage due to Covid-19. Overall, the project
disbursed resources in a timely fashion, and the project closed per the original closing date. There was TTL and
key staff consistency through delivery. The results across the board provided a strong basis, supported by
operational delivery performance, to produce a rating of high efficiency.


Efficiency Rating
High


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                63.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Despite the lack of a CPS for Zimbabwe due to the country’s non-accrual status, the relevance of objectives is
rated substantial given the alignment with the country's priorities and the regional context. Efficacy is rated
Substantial. While the first objective to address immediate resilient disaster recovery needs is rated as High, the
second objective related to addressing the medium-term disaster recovery needs is rated as substantial due to
minor shortcomings in the achievement of outputs, as well as lack of project results at outcome level beyond



                                                                                                       Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ZIRP (P171114)



number of beneficiaries. Efficiency is rated High based on high economic returns and administrative efficiency.
The overall outcome rating is thus Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government Risk: The Government of Zimbabwe’s (GoZ) ability to sustain the development outcome may
be limited. While capacity building expenditure indirectly supported the GoZ e.g., healthcare outputs and
related training helped to strengthen the country’s healthcare system, and the GoZ’s commitment was high
to continue building on the outcomes of disaster recovery with continued longer-term resilience building,
fiscal constraints remained significant, limiting service provision continuity. Additionally, many UNOPS staff
departed the country at the conclusion of the project, reducing support to the operations.

Economic Risk: Zimbabwe’s weak economic position presented a fundamental ongoing risk. The support
for mitigation investment (e.g., flooding prevention and roading infrastructure), asset maintenance and
service continuity is likely to be hampered by wider macro-economic circumstances. The continuance of high
macroeconomic risk and inflationary pressures appeared enduring at completion.

Technical Risk: Due to Zimbabwe’s resource and capacity-restricted Disaster and Risk Management (DRM)
institutional context, technical risk continued to remain unabated by the project, given it only sought to be a
stop-gap emergency response and initial recovery measure. There was some expectation that UN TA
agencies would retain a presence and have a high commitment to ongoing support. The World Bank
maintains an office in Harare, providing technical support through other Trust fund activities.

Institutional Risk: Institutional-level risks are not reported. They may continue to feature as barriers to
progress towards long-run disaster resilience outcomes. Transitional arrangements were put in place for
ongoing management and maintenance to help mitigate and manage this risk, but as noted under
Government risks, it is likely to be difficult to sustain progress.

Political Risk: Volatility of the political system is likely to remain a risk due to (a) limited government
investment in infrastructure and DRM systems progress, and (b) the likelihood of further unprecedented
climate-related events occurring.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Emergency circumstances resulted in a fast establishment phase. Following Cyclone Idai and GoZ’s
  request for assistance being received, the Bank utilized emergency procedures to prepare the project
  and received Board approval in three months. Channeling support directly to the people of Zimbabwe as
  part of a regional three-country approach (with Malawi and Mozambique) was deemed the best strategy.

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZIRP (P171114)



  The Bank undertook a remote Rapid Post Disaster Estimation and led a multi-sector Rapid Impact
  Assessment to quantify the extent of damages and losses, verify the need for emergency resources and
  inform the design of the project.

  There was a clear understanding of the problems to be solved in light of the overarching risk present –
  namely inaction to provide support. A whole-of-Bank approach to preparation across sectors was
  important in achieving approval. The approach taken saw a team of 42 people across 9 technical
  disciplines in the Bank helped to facilitate the rapid startup. Technical, financial and economic aspects
  were well considered and benefited from the team approach.

  Environmental and Social (E&S) safeguards were evident, although gender-related considerations were
  added after the delivery of the first component, introducing a weakness in the short-term response
  planning and delivery.

  From a fiduciary perspective, given Zimbabwe’s status, UNOPS was selected to be the implementing
  agency as the project recipient of the IDA grant, the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and the technical
  coordinator. Speed was evident, with the grant being declared effective within two weeks of approval, and
  the first disbursement was released on August 8, 2019. Fiduciary competency and systems were a
  precursor to UNOPS engagement, and the Bank established a sound approach.

  Given Zimbabwe’s non-accrual status and institutional circumstances, the Bank ensured the
  government’s involvement by mobilizing additional trust fund resources (US$3 million technical
  assistance program through the Zimbabwe Reconstruction Fund (ZIMREF) for a Zimbabwe Recovery
  and Resilience Framework (ZRRF) and to help strengthen government-led systems for DRM and
  emergency responses. The Bank formed a Consultative Group (CG) during preparation to engage the
  GoZ in consultations. The GoZ endorsed the Bank’s strategic multi-sectoral plan, enabling government
  coordination, input, and some influence on recovery and resilience during project implementation.

  M&E arrangements with UNOPS ensured strong output management and delivery oversight. Outcome
  assessment appeared limited based on what has been reported. Overall, the Bank’s capacity, including
  its inputs and processes, proved fit-for-purpose and flexible enough to handle establishing
  unconventional arrangements, i.e. UNOPS as recipient. Recognizing no GoZ funding was available, the
  project took a capacity building approach with the government. Prior DRM lessons were drawn upon in
  design and establishment. Despite this, due to the lack of relevant outcome indicators, the quality-at-
  entry, recognizing the difficult nature of the situation and the timeliness of the response achieved, is rated
  as Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Under the Banks’ supervisory role, UNOPS assumed the role of grant recipient and implementing partner.
 The project was contingent on a high level of collaboration and dialogue with the Bank guiding and
 managing other key stakeholders such as the GoZ. With the project being the only Investment Project
 Financing (IPF) Bank project in Zimbabwe, it benefited from the support of Bank sectoral experts across

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZIRP (P171114)



 Agriculture, Disaster Risk Management, Education, Health, Social Protection, and Water Practices, working
 closely with their international counterparts.

 The Bank provided implementation support through in country and virtual missions during the project
 operation. These were initially monthly, then reduced over the project life to bimonthly and quarterly
 frequencies. Nine ISRs were filed that systematically documented project performance. These highlighted
 challenges faced by the project and agreed steps to address them.

 The Bank’s Environment and Social (E&S) staff conducted technical missions and monthly progress
 meetings to ensure due diligence throughout. Task Team leadership changed once during implementation.
 The project was effectively restructured mid-term with good local and international teams coordination.

 UNOPS provided data and input to the ICR. It also conducted its own evaluation, noting the operating
 model successful and replicable to address other potential future crises. When providing rapid cross-cutting
 project management and specific engineering services in post disaster and post crisis response, UNOPS
 had the ability to establish mechanisms to coordinate with national and local structures while retaining full
 fiduciary control. This aided Bank over-sight.

 The community engagement focus that the Bank emphasized throughout the project helped foster local
 ownership for continued management of interventions. Starting just after the MTR, Bank sector specialists
 worked with UN partners to ensure sustainability programming in all UNOPS and TA interventions to
 guarantee proper mechanisms for post-closure maintenance and sustainability of assets. The Bank
 ensured training for Asset Management Committees (AMCs) with closure handovers of context-specific
 operational and maintenance manuals.

 The quality of supervision is rated Highly Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s PDO was clear and aligned to the emergency response need, ensuring both flexible short-run
 responsiveness and longer-run community-embedded resilience building. While the baseline performance
 levels were estimated in a rapid appraisal phase, the two objectives (short-term support and medium-term
 rehabilitation) were clear.




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZIRP (P171114)



 The Results Framework (RF) identified relevant output indicators. However, the indicators at the outcome
 level were limited to the number of beneficiaries without demonstrating and reporting on results beyond
 that, especially pertinent for the second objective regarding medium-term resilient disaster recovery needs.

 Initial target estimates proved relatively accurate, given the crisis response circumstances. The recovery
 disbursement targets under Objective 1 were delivered (or exceeded) within 18 months of implementation
 and were not revised.



b. M&E Implementation
  The indicators in the Results Framework were comprehensively measured and reported. As the agency
  responsible for M&E data provision to the Bank, UNOPS collected, verified and collated results from the
  TAs on a monthly basis, analyzing the data to produce monthly reports. Beyond the Banks’ RF indicators,
  UNOPS monitored a total of 106 indicators at the activity and output level. UNOPS established the
  project’s management information system (MIS) to integrate eight UN TA-specific M&E reports. This was
  upgraded in Year 2 to include a risks and issues log, procurement results, lessons learned, and the
  triangulation of programmatic and financial results. Data and reporting updates were submitted on a
  monthly basis for verification with the PIU, in addition to procurement, financial, and safeguards
  information.

  The weakness in Objective 2 where resilience-building developments did not cover the delivery of health,
  GBV and education services, was corrected during implementation. However the consideration of
  outcome assessment and analysis (i.e. getting beyond the drive for a wide suite of appropriate output
  metrics) did not influence M&E implementation.

  High levels of project engagement and consultation with beneficiaries helped to define, and in some
  cases refine, target indicators. The fiduciary and safeguards reports were provided by UNOPS. Targets
  were revised to better reflect viable results and realistic outputs at restructuring.

  To ensure compliance and data quality, the project employed Independent Verification Assessments
  (IVAs). Seven IVA processes were carried out from July 2019 to June 2023 on a biannual basis. These
  served to further verify the collected M&E data and triangulate through field assessments. The first three
  IVA processes were carried out remotely due to COVID-19 pandemic related movement restrictions, with
  the final four performed in-country and with field visits. Owing to detailed field monitoring and reporting,
  the IVAs were able to verify the achievements of all outcome indicators and review the implementation of
  all E&S measures.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were well communicated to key decision-making groups and wider involved stakeholders
  such as the Government of Zimbabwe. The M&E system provided data almost exclusively at either an
  output level, or on project performance to inform project management and decision making. It helped
  identify where progress was lagging in areas such as procurement, implementation, and activity results
  against expenditures. UNOPS submitted quarterly updates on overall project implementation to all
  stakeholders, facilitating decision making at Control Group meetings.



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZIRP (P171114)



  The system identified where beneficiaries could be maximized and where resources could be most
  quickly and effectively deployed. Results were updated monthly through the MIS, with clear geographical
  and site-specific information. This helped monitoring, including assessments of expenditure progress
  against results. It enabled CG meetings to focus on lagging activities or other issues needing attention.

  The M&E system helped to shape restructuring, with information highlighting the need to revise targets
  and reallocate funds. It also highlighted areas where stronger connections could be made between the
  proximate activities of different UN TAs (such as ensuring that a new school constructed by one TA
  would be supported by infrastructure built by another TA). Based on the results and assessment findings
  of the seven IVAs conducted bi-annually, each IVA resulted in a series of recommendations for UNOPS
  and UN TAs.

  However, data to provide evidence of achievement of outcomes was a weakness not remedied. In
  summary, the M&E system enabled a systemic tracking of project progress, and flagged issues for rapid
  remediation in the delivery of outputs. It provided a layer of verification and validation through the IVA
  process, that was used to inform decisions on project implementation, agency performance, and
  compliance. Outcome assessment which was especially pertinent for the second objective was limited,
  and thus the overall M&E rating is Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Safeguards were managed through the World Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework (2017), that
   sets out a suite of requirements for borrowers relating to the identification and assessment of environmental
   and social risks. Following this regime, Environment and Social (E&S) Risk was assessed as Moderate at
   the time of design. The project complied with all applicable ESF standards.

   The E&S risk level throughout the project remained rated as Moderate. An operationalized Environmental
   and Social Management Framework (ESMF) with an accompanying Environmental and Social Commitment
   Plan (ESCP), and Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) were completed, complying with requirements. The
   Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts at project close, was rated
   Satisfactory.

   The ESMF was finalized and disclosed before Board approval. This was revised after six months of
   implementation to harmonize TA screening processes. A second ESMF revision took place in January 2021
   as the project transitioned to medium-term recovery to optimize the monitoring and reporting facilitated by
   UNOPS’s Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS).

   The Bank conducted Environmental and Social Standards (ESS) capacity building to support this first-of-a-
   kind operation with UN entity delivering a complex emergency response. This included intensive Bank




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ZIRP (P171114)



  support for ESS compliance owing to the lack of UNOPS staff experience, and Bank organized training on
  the ESMF for all implementing agencies.

  The UNOPS Project Implementation Unit (PIU) employed an Environmental Specialist and a Social Officer
  to lead the implementation of the ESMF. To address requirements, UNOPS set up a Community of Practice
  (COP) that hosted quarterly meetings at TA focal points, a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM), and
  incident management protocols, a Gender Action Plan (GAP), and Labor Management Procedures (LMP).
  From an operational perspective, each TA appointed an E&S focal person to coordinate the activities and
  ensure they were consistent with ESMF requirements.

  Gender-based violence (GBV), child protection, and a female inclusion lens were applied to support
  mainstream sensitization and raise awareness about support services and protection. GBV interventions
  were scaled up through the project. It was reported that an emphasis on GBV concerns generated positive
  results in infrastructure prioritization, for example, with a more female-friendly latrine design adopted
  nationwide.

  To address environmental and social risk compliance, a number of key activities were delivered given
  circumstances faced in the project. These included:

        E&S screenings of local projects – 360 screenings were reviewed by the PIU.
        “Moderate Risk” activities were reviewed by the Bank and GoZ with detailed ESMPs, resulting in all
         measures being implemented in full by the TAs. “High Risk” activities were not permitted.
        Occupational Health and Safety (OH&S) – a total of 43 occupational health and safety incidents
         were reported during implementation, which were managed and closed.
        Implementation Grievances – a total of 1,311 Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) cases were
         received, addressed, and closed (all but one was closed within 45 days). The GRM included: local
         help desks, suggestions boxes, direct TA personnel engagement, direct local leadership
         engagement, direct local government engagement, a toll-free phone line, and the dissemination of
         10,000 GRM posters and 10,000 GRM cards.

  Emerging issues management – 2 incidents were flagged, being the identification of asbestos waste and a
  livestock mortality event (goat deaths), where the responses were effective and in-compliance, i.e. an
  Asbestos Management Plan was developed and Best Practice Standards for livestock restocking were
  developed.

  Overall, the project invested in ESF Framework compliance, addressing the Environmental and Social
  Standards. This led to a project-assigned Satisfactory rating. The moderate risk classification identified at
  project initiation was reviewed on a regular basis as required, remaining unchanged. In summary, the
  project was deemed to have complied with relevant ESF standards. The Assessment and Management of
  Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts at project close was rated Satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement:



                                                                                                   Page 16 of 20
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        ZIRP (P171114)



   As permitted under the World Bank’s Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA), UNOPS followed its
   procurement procedures. Moderate delays in procurement owing to external or macro factors such as the
   COVID-19 pandemic, inflation, and availability of supplies, were resolved. Measures taken to review and
   enhance procurement capacity, resulted in the allocation of more resources to procurement delivery, and
   consolidation to bulk-buy items with joint procurement across TAs, (e.g. Covid-19 personal protective
   equipment).

   At the same time, in other cases where a consistent supply of specific construction materials was lacking,
   the project sped-up procurement by splitting purchasing into lots. The procurement teams worked with
   local trade associations to build a database of vendors with adequate experience and capacity to
   participate in tenders. They added optional site visits to the tendering process of major procurement
   activities to improve results.

   The project worked to improve procurement reporting and clarified procurement performance during
   implementation, e.g., by tracking the stages of procurement at the component level. Procurement
   performance was rated Satisfactory or Moderately Satisfactory throughout the project.

   Financial Management (FM):

   UNOPS’s finance team was responsible for implementation, employing the Bank’s disbursement
   guidelines. They submitted Interim Financial Reports and cash flow forecasts regularly in form and content
   satisfactory to the Bank. Other FM arrangements, including budgeting, accounting, internal controls, and
   reporting were carried out by UNOPS. This included external auditing and reporting annually to the UN
   General Assembly. Supervision missions and interim financial report (IFR) reviews were conducted in
   accordance with UN Financial Regulations. Quarterly meetings reviewed financial performance, and
   following discussions with the Bank at MTR, it was agreed to organize FM at the component level,
   furthering the project’s flexibility and the associated financial expenditures. Additionally, it was noted that
   fluctuations in exchange rates between the USD and the SDR resulted in the Grant providing an additional
   $490,629.98 to the project, which was fully utilized. The FM performance rating in the ICR at closure was
   Satisfactory, and the FM risk rating was moderate.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   --



d. Other
   --



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment


                                                                                                     Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ZIRP (P171114)



                                                                                Efficacy was rated based on a
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory              high rating of one objective and
                                                                                a Substantial rating of the other.
                                                                                While the project was well
                                                                                designed, prepared and
                                                                                supervised, quality-at-entry is
                                                                                rated satisfactory due to a lack
                                                                                of relevant outcome level
Bank Performance                Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory
                                                                                indicators under Objective 2.
                                                                                Overall Bank Performance is
                                                                                thus Satisfactory, noting quality
                                                                                of supervision was Highly
                                                                                Satisfactory.
                                                                                Despite a good quality M&E, the
                                                                                lack of relevant outcome
                                                                                indicators beyond number of
Quality of M&E                  High                  Substantial
                                                                                beneficiaries under objective 2
                                                                                limited the quality of evaluative
                                                                                performance.
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

If strong coordination mechanisms that emphasize a collaborative operating culture are
fostered, this can help lift the quality of multi-stakeholder crisis responses. The project
adopted a “One Project, One Team” approach and emphasized a culture of inclusivity and respect in
all interactions, recognizing the need to work together in trying circumstances. With a total of eight
implementing UN Technical Agencies, alongside government agencies, local communities, and
other parties, managing, synchronizing, and coordinating the project’s activities was critical for
operational effectiveness and efficiency. Regular well-managed meetings and leadership modeling
exemplary inclusion provided a strong platform for a highly collaborative response.

Monitoring and Evaluative transparency can assist cooperation and outcome
achievement. An open and transparent M&E system enabled stakeholders to witness how their
efforts toward achieving collective outcomes were better realized through coordinated action. This
was supported by TAs complying with the project framework and the Project Operational Manual
(POM), using the agreed results measurement yardsticks, communicated and utilized results for
programming, developing approaches for sustaining project impacts, sharing integrated and
harmonized beneficiary databases, and maintaining clear division of responsibilities in interventions
and geographic distribution.

If a country’s government is not the direct recipient of World Bank funds and resources,
focused engagement can contribute to offsetting missed learning opportunities. Partnering
with government stakeholders and agencies – particularly in a country with non-accrual status when
project funds are provided to an intermediary such as UNOPS – can transfer learning that can have
longer-run benefits to the country. By working together with GoZ counterparts alongside UNOPS
and familiarizing them with the projects activities, processes, and systems, the Bank-led project

                                                                                                   Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ZIRP (P171114)



strengthened the capacity of GoZ, the districts, and the communities for their longer-term
improvement.

Participatory involvement in community asset decisions and design, may improve the quality
of disaster recovery interventions in an FCV context. The project consistently supported
activities to engage affected communities e.g. regular communications. This generated a strong
partnership between beneficiaries, the GoZ, and project implementers. This was particularly
valuable in the fragile environment post-disaster, with services provided by non-government actors.
Rather than imposing infrastructure designs on the communities externally, a participatory approach
resulted in infrastructure that was fit-for-purpose e.g. water point locations and sanitation design that
involved women end-users in the design process. The project built strong ownership of daily-use
infrastructure (e.g. water pumps) and static structures (e.g. gabion walls for flood prevention).
Ensuring that villages had annual maintenance plans in place with trained responsible people
identified, helped ensure effective longer-term risk reduction.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Overall, the ICR provided a comprehensive overview of the project. It provides a coherent explanation of the
project’s development objectives, the Results Framework and achievements (including through video resources
in Annex 7). This demonstrated the delivery of timely emergency response in the immediate term (e.g., cash
disbursements), as well as to address medium-term resilient disaster recovery needs. The report is
detailed and includes salient lessons learned and reflections. It reported the project’s importance as the primary
response to the crisis, in the context of Zimbabwe’s financial position and ability to respond, with detailed
output-level results. Overall the quality of the ICR is Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 19 of 20
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
ZIRP (P171114)




                                                                  Page 20 of 20
