        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        IQ: PFM Oversight & Accountability (P170704)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0024064

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                    Project Name
 P170704                                       IQ: PFM Oversight & Accountability

 Country                                       Practice Area(Lead)
 Iraq                                          Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                              Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-B1910                                      31-Aug-2022                                             538,440.59

 Bank Approval Date                            Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Oct-2020                                   13-Sep-2023

                                               IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                   8,500,000.00                                  8,500,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                    8,500,000.00                                    538,440.59

 Actual                                                 538,440.59                                     538,440.59




 Prepared by                    Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Alma Pekmezovic                Christopher David             Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC (Unit 1)
                                Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective was "to strengthen institutions and mechanisms of fiscal accountability and
   oversight at federal and regional levels." (PAD, p. 15).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?


                                                                                                      Page 1 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IQ: PFM Oversight & Accountability (P170704)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project comprised three components:
   Component 1: Enhancing Fiscal Accountability (Appraisal: US$7.70 million, Actual: US$0.60 million):
   This component was expected to contribute tofiscal accountability through three sub-components. These
   included: (a) refining payroll processes for transparent reporting; (b)improving efficiency and oversight in
   public procurement to prevent fund misuse; (c)and strengthening fiscal oversight over budget and non-
   financial State-Owned Enterprises (SOEs). Initiatives such as expanding coverage of digital payment
   systems, automating employee identification, and establishing an e-government procurement system were
   expected to contribute to achieving these objectives. Additionally, enhanced external audit and legislative
   oversight would ensure proper resource management and fiscal discipline. This component aimed to enable
   the following: (i) scaling up the coverage of the Central Payroll Management Information System (CPMIS),
   (ii) automating the process for generating unique employee identification (IDs), (ii) expanding the coverage
   of the Central Bank of Iraq’s e-payment, (iii) establishing and piloting an e-government Procurement (e-GP)
   system and coordinating the ongoing e-procurement activities of the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG)
   with those of the Federal Ministry of Planning (MoP), and (iv) strengthening external audit and legislative
   oversight of the budget, and financial oversight of nonfinancial SOEs.

   Component 2: Transparency, Integrity and Legal Certainty (Appraisal: US$ 3.95 million, Actual: US$
   0.00 million, Undisbursed): This component was designed to improve fiscal transparency such that financial
   information would be more accessible to the public. This component also included measures for the
   identification and mitigation of corruption risks within fiscal processes,and promoting integrity. Other
   interventions around legal clarity and the establishment of clear guidelines and regulations, were expected
   to contribute to a reduction in ambiguity and enhance compliance within the fiscal system.

   Component 3: Project Management and Implementation Support (Appraisal: US$ 0.85 million, Actual:
   US$0.00 million): This component included activities such as coordinating project activities, providing
   technical assistance, and ensuring proper monitoring and evaluation to facilitate the successful execution of
   reform initiatives.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The Project was approved as Investment Project Financing of $12.5 million of which $8.5
   million were Recipient Executed (RE) and $4.0 million were Bank Executed (BE) on behalf of the client. The
   actual project cost was significantly lower than the cost estimated at appraisal because of implementation
   constraints.

   Financing: Of the approved total of US$12.5 million, only US$0.60 million was utilized, accounting for just
   about 5% of the approved funds. The project was funded through a WB Grant, Grant No TF0B1910.

   Borrower Contribution: At appraisal, no borrower’s contribution was estimated, and none materialized at
   project closing.


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IQ: PFM Oversight & Accountability (P170704)



   Dates: The project closing date was extended from August 31, 2022, to September 13, 2023. This
   extension did not involve any alterations to the PDO Result framework, or Components. The decision to
   extend was prompted by the Government's request, dated March 3, 2022, for additional time to finalize
   project implementation, which had experienced delays since its inception. The Government also requested
   that certain priority activities be implemented by the Bank on its behalf under the Recipient-Executed via the
   Bank-Executed arrangement. However, the request for Bank Execution on behalf of the Government was
   not accommodated.

   A desk-based Mid-term Review (MTR) conducted in August 2022, replacing the initially planned in-country
   MTR scheduled for April 2022. The in-person mission was not feasible due to security concerns and the
   client's reluctance to engage in virtual meetings. Additionally, disruptions arose from the suspension of
   World Bank missions in August 2022 due to security reasons. Consequently, a proactive restructuring
   during the MTR extended the project implementation period by 13 months, with a revised closing date of
   September 13, 2023. While the European Union (EU) approved the extension to allow more time for project
   activities, the EU did not agree to convert Recipient-Executed (RE) to Beneficiary Engagement (BE).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context: Following the regime change in 2003, Iraq endured prolonged social and political
turmoil, rendering it one of the world's most fragile states in 2020 ranked the 17th most fragile country in the
world according to the 2020 Fragile States Index).

At the time of appraisal, governance in Iraq had declined, evidenced in various indicators. Perceived
governance along its six dimensions captured by the World Governance Indicators, was low.\ Previous
gains in controlling corruption, political stability, and regulatory quality had diminished. Transparency
International's Corruption Perceptions Index placed Iraq among the lowest performers, ranking 168th out of
180 countries. Trust in public institutions eroded significantly, with 47% of respondents citing corruption as
their main concern in 2019, while 83% believed corruption was worsening.

    1. Trust in public institutions had eroded and corruption undermined government effectiveness In terms
       of fiscal oversight, the 2017 Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Assessment found
       Iraq's Public Financial Management system unsatisfactory, with significant weaknesses such as
       poor financial monitoring of State-Owned Enterprises (SOEs) and weak external audit
       functions. Trust in justice and lower government tiers also deteriorated. The lack of legal certainty
       and availability of information made it difficult for citizens and investors to hold public officials
       accountable, since the underlying rules were not fully disclosed, (PAD, pg. 2).

Alignment with Government Reform Agenda: The Government of Iraq (GoI) and the KRG prioritized
governance reforms and accountability. GoI aimed to rebuild state legitimacy and enhance public resource
management efficiency through the adoption of a modern financial management system. The enactment of
a new Financial Management Law demonstrated this commitment. KRG, on the other hand, focused on
fighting corruption, ensuring transparency in economic fields, and supporting key institutions like the
Supreme Audit Institution and the Commission of Integrity and Public Prosecution.


                                                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      IQ: PFM Oversight & Accountability (P170704)



               The PDO was closely aligned with Iraq's overarching development strategies, including the National
               Development Plan 2018-2022, the Poverty Reduction Strategy 2018-2022, Iraq Vision 2030, and the 2020
               Iraq’s Council of Ministers White Paper. Specifically, Pillar 5 of the White Paper emphasized the importance
               of enhancing economic governance and strengthening the legal and regulatory framework of public
               administration. This focus aimed to empower institutions and individuals to implement reforms that promote
               transparency, combat corruption, and enhance the effectiveness of public procurement and administration.

               Alignment with World Bank Strategy (WB) and Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 2021-2025:
               The project supported the WB’s engagement and policy dialogue in Iraq on fiscal and economic
               governance reforms. The PDO was fully aligned with Pillar 1 of the WB’s Country Partnership Framework
               (CPF) 2021-2025: Improved Governance, Transparency, and Accountability through Transparent, Open,
               And Effective Government which underscored the critical importance of improving governance and
               implementing fundamental reforms that promote transparency and accountability in the public sector.

               The project was also in line with the two pillars of the World Bank Group’s MENA Strategy, focusing on
               renewing the social contract and supporting recovery and reconstruction efforts. It aimed to enhance
               government effectiveness and strengthen its social contract with citizens by bolstering fiscal oversight,
               accountability mechanisms, and institutions. This also included improving revenue collection, managing
               fiscal risks (including those incurred by SOEs), and ensuring the efficiency of public expenditure.
               Furthermore, the project sought to facilitate dialogue between the government and civil society by
               promoting public participation in the budget process.

               Overall, the project's objectives were inherently ambitious, particularly within the context of Iraq's fragile,
               conflict-ridden, and volatile (FCV) status, which was compounded by a challenging security landscape.
               Building upon previous Bank initiatives such as the Modernization of Public Financial Management Systems
               Project (IFMIS) and the Iraq Reform, Recovery, and Reconstruction project (I3RF), the project aimed to
               strengthen institutions and mechanisms of fiscal accountability and oversight at both federal and regional
               levels. However, despite aligning with both the Bank’s and the country’s objectives, there was a notable
               lack of acknowledgment regarding capacity constraints and the project's intended short duration. Given
               these complexities, adjustments were necessary to ensure optimal alignment with Iraq’s context and
               constraints. Given the moderate shortcomings, the relevance of Objectives is assessed as Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen institutions and mechanisms of fiscal accountability and oversight at federal and regional levels

                             Rationale

                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 12
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IQ: PFM Oversight & Accountability (P170704)



According to the Theory of Change (ToC) outlined in the PAD (p. 23) the project aimed to enhance financial
accountability and oversight by addressing critical constraints such as decentralized payroll management,
procurement accountability issues, weak oversight on SOEs, and limited external audit capacity. In addition,
the project sought to address significant deficiencies in Iraq's financial management systems, particularly
regarding budget transparency and adherence to international standards in the extractive industry. The ToC
targeted three main issues: Operationalizing the CPMIS which was expected to streamline payroll processes
and ensuring centralized control and improving transparency in salary disbursement across government
entities. Second, responding to the low Open Budget Index Rating and the lack of compliance with the
Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative (EITI) 2019 standards. Third, the ToC concentrated on project
activities aimed at enhancing the weak external audit function within the context of Iraq's PMF systems, which
were rated poorly (“rated D”) on various fiscal accountability dimensions. Additionally, the Federal Board of
Supreme Audit (FBSA) had not published the Annual Financial Statement audit report since 2014; and in KRI,
no budget was appropriated for this purpose for the past five years.

Recognizing these challenges, the ToC sought to implement measures to enhance budget transparency,
including improving public access to budget information, gender-based budgeting, enhancing reporting
mechanisms, and strengthening accountability mechanisms. Additionally, the project aimed to address the
completion of risk-based external audit reports, aiming to incentivize their publication based on risk
assessments. Moreover, efforts were to be made to develop and adopt manuals for auditing oil revenue and
social expenditures, aiming to enhance social auditing. These reforms were expected to lead to strengthened
fiscal management information systems, as well as enhanced fiscal accountability and oversight mechanisms
at both the federal and regional levels.

Outputs:

      Piloting of centralized payroll management information system (CPMIS): (Not Achieved).
      Operationalization of an e-procurement IT platform: Despite efforts to establish the platform and pilot
       it for 10 percent of large procurement transactions in two federal ministries, the platform's deployment
       and piloting were not realized. This setback underscores the challenges faced in integrating electronic
       procurement mechanisms into government operations. (Not Achieved).
      Increased rating on budget transparency (under the Open Budget Index): Despite efforts to enhance
       budget transparency, the actual rating fell significantly short of the ambitious target (an increase to
       20.00), reaching only 6.00 from a baseline of 9.00, highlighting the need for further steps to improve
       transparency in budget processes. This represents a regression from the baseline rating rather than
       any progress. While efforts may have been exerted to enhance budget transparency, they proved
       insufficient to meet the ambitious target set. This shortfall underscores the need for further steps to be
       taken to effectively enhance transparency in budget processes in the future. (Not Achieved).

Progress in implementing Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative (EITI) 2019 standards: While Iraq made
some (moderate) progress in implementing the EITI 2019 standards, as attested by the EITI board in a report
released in July 2022 that Iraq made moderate progress in meeting the 2019 EITI standards, this fell short of
the significant advancements anticipated at the project's closure, indicating a need for continued efforts to
strengthen governance and accountability within the extractives sector. (Not Achieved, with some partial
progress toward achievement).




                                                                                                   Page 5 of 12
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                IQ: PFM Oversight & Accountability (P170704)




                                  Completion of risk-based external audit reports: Only 0.50 risk-based external audit reports were
                                   completed against a target of two, indicating a delay or shortfall in achieving the planned external
                                   audit reports. (Not Achieved, with only half a report completed).
                                  Design of e-GP strategy and roadmap: Separately, the draft e-GP strategy and roadmap, developed
                                   under the Bank-Executed part of the project, were not approved and launched. Despite efforts to
                                   strengthen anti-corruption measures and enhance public investment management, this aspect of the
                                   initiative did not progress as anticipated. (Not Achieved)

                            Overall, the theory of change was sound with clear activities aligned to driving reforms to governance
                            processes and operational needs. However, progress towards the achievement of the PDO is deemed
                            negligible. Very little activity was carried out, was partially delivered and not sufficiently supported which
                            ultimately led to limited progress made towards the objective.



                            Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            There was one over-arching objective with a range of governance tools aligned to moving ahead to improve
                            and strengthen institutions and their functions. However, delivery against these commitments was poor and
                            ultimately little progress was made. Thus, the overall efficacy is rated Negligible.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                                 Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   The PAD anticipated significant economic benefits, including improved efficiency in procurement processes,
   wage bill management, and the operational and financial management of SOEs. However, no quantitative
   economic analysis was conducted during the project's design phase to assess cost-effectiveness or compare
   cost to benefits. These anticipated economic benefits were not realized due to the limited implementation of
   project activities. Additionally, actual fund disbursement was much lower than forecast. Only seven percent of
   the Recipient-Executed project funds were disbursed, resulting in negligible results. Thus, efficiency is rated
   negligible.


   Efficiency Rating
          Negligible


                                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 12
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IQ: PFM Oversight & Accountability (P170704)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the objectives is deemed Substantial. There was clear need for the reforms and a reasonable
set of activities aligned to this end. However, given that efficacy of the project is rated Negligible, and its’
efficiency is rated Negligible, the overall outcome is rated Highly Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The lack of substantial advancements in project implementation and PFM reform in preceding years,
combined with the Government's inclination to cancel main activities, suggests a significant shift in priorities.
This circumstance diminishes the likelihood of sustaining the minimal outcomes achieved thus far.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The WB’s quality of entry for the project is considered unsatisfactory. Despite notable efforts to align it
  with the country's development challenges and capacity constraints, the project's scope was too broad
  and ambitious, as noted in decision review meetings and by peer reviewers. Objectives and indicators
  were overly ambitious, given the short implementation timeline and the challenging context of fragility,
  complex institutional arrangements, and low capacity at both Federal and Regional levels. The tight
  timeline, influenced partly by EU financial programming constraints and the Administrative Agreement
  with the WB, led to a technical design prioritizing financing availability over technical soundness.
  Implementing reforms, such as automating payroll and procurement systems, proved complex, requiring
  extended procurement processes. Additionally, insufficient consideration of lessons learned from
  previous projects hindered a more realistic project design and implementation strategy. Finally, the

                                                                                                       Page 7 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IQ: PFM Oversight & Accountability (P170704)



  intended reforms relied on intentional change management activities, which were not adequately
  incorporated into the project design and implementation phase. Thus, the quality at entry is rated
  unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The WB sought to engage with government counterparts amid challenging security concerns, as evidenced
 by the production of five Implementation Status and Result Reports (ISRs) spanning March 2021 to March
 2023. These reports offer insights into the efforts undertaken to address challenges, particularly regarding
 Recipient-Executed activities. While 2022 saw no official field or virtual implementation support missions,
 and two ISRs relied on desk reviews, the WB utilized alternative strategies such as regular monthly check-
 in meetings with government counterparts to advance project implementation.

 Moreover, through Beneficiary Engagement (BE) initiatives, the team provided hands-on support by
 assisting with critical tasks like payroll requirement analysis, risk-based audits, and facilitating the adoption
 of digital asset declaration systems. Despite these proactive measures, however, the quality of supervision
 remained unsatisfactory, primarily due to the absence of official missions in 2022 and the identified need
 for more robust engagement in specific project areas to move activities along and align them with required
 changes.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 There were several weaknesses in M&E design. The ToC framework exhibited various inconsistencies and
 weaknesses. Crucially, the TOC failed to include necessary assumptions, such as political stability or
 stakeholder cooperation, which are essential for understanding external factors impacting project success.
 Furthermore, it lacked indicators for activities on behalf of the client and failed to differentiate between
 results at the Federal and Kurdistan Regional Government levels.

 It's also worth noting the lack of alignment between the project's objectives and the indicators outlined in
 the TOC. While most of the indicators were measurable, achieving them within the project's short timeline

                                                                                                        Page 8 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IQ: PFM Oversight & Accountability (P170704)



 was unrealistic. Specifically, the absence of an Intermediate Result Indicator for the Payroll system
 hindered progress measurement. Additionally, there was a notable lack of indicators to assess outcomes
 related to Component 3. In summary, these shortcomings highlight the need for a comprehensive revision
 of the TOC to effectively address these deficiencies and ensure a robust framework for project planning
 and monitoring.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project encountered several issues with M&E implementation within its framework. Firstly, the
  absence of recruited M&E Specialists at the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) hampered the monitoring
  of all indicators outlined in the Result Framework. Moreover, semi-annual progress reports, mandated by
  the Grant Agreement, were not generated due to recipient-executed activities not being included in the
  national budget. Additionally, although indicators were reported in Implementation Status Reports by the
  WB team, data collection and reporting were not conducted by implementing partners as intended,
  resulting in gaps in project monitoring and evaluation processes.



c. M&E Utilization
  The WB team periodically updated M&E data to facilitate decision-making. During implementation
  support missions, both the WB and the Government utilized actual progress data from the result
  framework to guide discussions and actions aimed at enhancing project implementation performance.
  Nevertheless, more effective utilization of the M&E data could have enabled more realistic corrective
  actions, such as restructuring and revising indicators. Weaknesses in the design, implementation, and
  utilization of the M&E system led to challenges in effectively evaluating progress toward objectives.
  Consequently, there was limited proactive assessment of progress and inadequate support for informed
  decision-making, highlighting a critical need for improvements in M&E practices.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Negligible

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was developed but remained non-operational. The online
   complaint registration system was not implemented, and alternative measures, such as a complaint box
   accessible to all stakeholders, including those with disabilities, were not provided. Additionally, the hiring of
   an experienced communication professional for stakeholder awareness programs and the recruitment of a
   Social Safeguard Specialist at both Federal and Regional levels did not occur as planned.




                                                                                                       Page 9 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IQ: PFM Oversight & Accountability (P170704)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The Financial Management (FM) performance had a number of shortcomings: (i) failure to open all Project
   Designated Accounts except at KRG-MoP, (ii) lack of experience among FM seconded staff in WB-
   financed project policies, (iii) absence of updated accounting books by implementing entities except KRG-
   MoP, and (iv) non-inclusion of the project in the national budget.

   Similarly, the Procurement performance was constrained, with three implementing agencies maintaining
   minimum procurement capacity, leading to progress only in KRI component activities. However, no
   progress was made in other project components due to the project's exclusion from the annual budget,
   hindering contract signings and implementation activities under Federal components.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The project made some contributions to strengthening institutional and human resource capacities in
   several areas including various trainings, committee support and knowledge exchanges, though the impact
   of these activities remains inconclusive.

   Additionally, although the project was not gender-tagged, capacity-building activities were provided to
   women. Thus, ten women from the Parliament received training on budget analysis and monitoring, and
   ten women from the FBSA and KRG-BSA participated in training on International Public Sector Accounting
   Standards (IPSAS) and got the IPSAS certificate. The Bank requested counterparts to be gender-sensitive
   when selecting participants for training. (ICR, p. 10).



d. Other
   n/a



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                  IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Highly
Outcome                                             Highly Unsatisfactory
                                Unsatisfactory
Bank Performance                Unsatisfactory      Unsatisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Negligible          Negligible

Quality of ICR                  ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 12
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IQ: PFM Oversight & Accountability (P170704)



The IEG agrees with the lessons outlined in the ICR. With some modification, they are provided
below:

        Realism in Project Expectations and Timelines: Assessing implementation capacity,
         especially in areas like e-GP, payroll, and corruption, should have informed the
         establishment of more flexible expectations. Given the intricate nature of PFM reforms,
         particularly in contexts characterized by low capacity and poly-crisis situations, it is
         imperative to foster realism and adaptability in project planning, choose appropriate activities
         and ensure disciplined execution.
        Proactive Course Correction: Despite initial efforts to extend the project's closing date and
         provide support to bolster performance, the underlying issues persisted, necessitating a
         reevaluation of the project's trajectory. In such circumstances, proactive restructuring or
         considering non-extension becomes imperative, especially when rooted in underlying political
         economy factors that remain unresolved. Where limitations exist in the project design, radical
         course correction should acknowledge the fundamental areas for change.
        Robust Analytical Bases: Lastly, while high-level governance reform aspirations outlined in
         the Government of Iraq's 2020 White Paper failed to materialize into tangible reforms,
         conducting a repeat Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment,
         supplemented by Climate Responsive Public Financial Management (PEFA Climate) and
         Gender Responsive Public Financial Management (GRPFM) assessments, could have
         provided a comprehensive understanding of the Iraq PFM landscape. Such assessments,
         coupled with stakeholder participation and oversight at the highest levels, are necessary to
         provide the groundwork for a comprehensive reform strategy, fostering transparency and
         accountability in PFM reforms.

The IEG adds the following:

        Co-ordination with Development Partners in FCV Contexts: In developing programs for
         fragile and conflict-affected contexts like Iraq, it is vital to align interventions with evolving
         priorities amidst the transition to a more stable environment. Identifying comparative
         strengths and focusing on areas where effective delivery is feasible should guide strategic
         planning. Coordination with relevant stakeholders, including other donor partners and
         governmental bodies, is essential for increasing the likelihood of success for reform projects.
        Scoping of Achievable Project Activities in Long-Term Reform Projects: Additionally,
         extensive consultations with local stakeholders and the government are essential to better
         assess implementation capacity and to facilitate effective collaboration. Such engagement
         enables a comprehensive understanding of the local context, including potential challenges
         and gaps, thereby allowing for more precise scoping of project activities.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


                                                                                                        Page 11 of 12
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IQ: PFM Oversight & Accountability (P170704)




The ICR is candid, internally consistent and concise, offering a clear overview of the project and its objectives.
The report draws attention to the weaknesses in the ToC framework, and identifies strengths and weaknesses
in the M&E system, offering lessons for future reform projects in FCV contexts. Nevertheless, the report lacks
in-depth coverage of implementation issues (especially those pertaining to the regional versus federal levels),
which could have enriched the understanding of project execution. Also, it would have been advantageous to
delve further into the specifics of some of the indicators.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 12
