     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kiribati Fifth Economic Reform DPO (P167263)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023389

1. Program Information



 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Kiribati                                   Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                          Approved Operations
 0                                           0

 Operation ID                                Operation Name
 P167263                                     Kiribati Fifth Economic Reform DPO




 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-D3880                                  30-Sep-2020                                            4,989,286.74

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Nov-2018                                30-Sep-2020
                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                                5,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                                 4,999,946.02                                            0.00

 Actual                                             4,989,286.74                                            0.00




P169179_TBL
 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Kiribati                                   Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P169179                                    Kiribati Inclusive Growth & Resilience 2 ( P169179 )




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kiribati Fifth Economic Reform DPO (P167263)




  L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
  IDA-D3880,IDA-D7380                        28-Feb-2022                                               5051700.00

  Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
  03-Dec-2020                                28-Feb-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                                5,000,000.00                                              0.00

  Revised Commitment                                 5,000,000.00                                              0.00

  Actual                                             5,051,700.00                                              0.00



 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 William F. Steel             Clay Wescott                  Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

This was a programmatic series of two operations . The original program development objectives (PDOs) in the
first development policy operations (DPO) in this series (Fifth Economic Reform) were to (i) strengthen public
financial management (PFM) with respect to financial and physical assets; and (ii) support the prospects for
inclusive growth by strengthening fisheries sector management and improving access to basic services (PD1
[program document for DPO1], para. 5). These were revised (while retaining the focus on PFM and inclusive
growth) in the second Inclusive Growth and Resilience (DPO2) as follows (ICR, para. 15), which are used for the
purpose of this report:

      PDO 1: Strengthen sustainable management of sovereign wealth and improve PFM; and
      PDO 2: Support the prospects for inclusive growth and more resilient livelihoods under global economic
       uncertainty and climate change threats.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The revised pillars and (implicit) policy areas, which were consistent with the original, were as follows (ICR,
paras. 17-18):

      Pillar 1: Strengthening sustainable management of sovereign wealth and improving PFM
             o Sovereign wealth
             o Public financial management

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kiribati Fifth Economic Reform DPO (P167263)



      Pillar 2: Supporting the prospects for inclusive growth and more resilient livelihoods under global
       economic uncertainty and climate change threats
           o Fisheries and food security
           o Water supply
           o Early childhood care and education

Each policy area had a pair of related policy actions (PAs) across the two operations. Each operation had one
additional PA (related to cash management in DPO1 and public debt in DPO2). Each DPO had 6 PAs and 8
specific actions/sub-actions, for a total of 12 PAs and 16 sub-actions.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The total program cost of US$ 10 million was financed through two IDA grants of SDR 3.6 million (US$5 million
equivalent) each. DPO1 (Fifth Economic Reform DPO) was approved in November 2018 and closed 30
September, 2020, as expected. DPO2 (Second Inclusive Growth and Resilience DPO) was delayed by a year
when concerns emerged over the adequacy of the macroeconomic framework due to an expansionary budget
in 2020 and a major increase in recurrent spending in 2021, which were expected to deplete cash reserves
below the GOK’s minimum requirement of 3 months of public spending by 2024 (ICR, para. 21). Disbursement
was eventually approved in December 2021, after a substantial improvement in the medium-term fiscal
projections and updates to the GOK’s policy framework (ICR, para. 22). DPO2 was finally approved in
December 2020 and closed on 28 February, 2022, as expected. Actual disbursements were US$ 4,989,286.74
and US$ 5,051,700.00 for DPO1 and DPO2, respectively, totaling US$ 10,040,986.74 (ICR p. 1).


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 This pair of development policy operations (DPOs) built upon two prior series of DPOs, which were intended
 to address key challenges of Kiribati’s sparse, spread-out population and heavy reliance on subsistence
 production, subsidies and public expenditures, financed mainly by revenues from fishing license fees, donor
 grants, and drawdowns from the wealth fund leaving Kiribati highly vulnerable to external economic shocks
 (PD for First Economic Reform Development Policy Operation, 2013, para. 2). The first two Economic Reform
 DPOs (2013-14) “focused on fisheries, public assets and liabilities, and private sector opportunities. (ICRR
 P155540, section 3.a). The second pair of Economic Reform DPOs (2016-18) dropped private sector
 development as a stated objective as being “beyond what could feasibly be achieved in Kiribati over a two-
 year period” (ICRR P155540, section 2.a). Their remaining focus on public financial management (PFM) and
 inclusive growth carried over as the PDOs for the Fifth Economic Reform DPO (DPO1 in the series under
 review).

 This programmatic series of DPOs addressed six of the nine priorities areas identified in the 2016 Systematic
 Country Diagnostic (SCD) for eight small Pacific Island countries: “maintaining and developing economic
 infrastructure, improving public expenditure management, and ensuring macroeconomic stability and
 sustainability… fisheries revenue, closing education and skill gaps, and closing gaps in public service delivery
 (in this case, water and sanitation)” (ICR, para. 7). The steady sequencing of objectives and reforms over this
 extended series of DPOs was appropriate for responding to the challenges identified in the Kiribati

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Kiribati Fifth Economic Reform DPO (P167263)



Development Plan for 2016-2019 and the priorities identified in the Pacific Island Countries Regional
Partnership Framework for FY2017–2021.

The second DPO in this series modified the title to “Second Inclusive Growth and Resilience” (rather than
Sixth Economic Reform) to better reflect the content of the program (PD2 [P169179], footnote 18). It likewise
modified the PDOs to highlight the importance of sovereign wealth fund management to Kiribati; broaden the
scope of “inclusive growth” to “livelihoods” rather than just “fisheries”; and make the threat of climate change
an explicit reason to bring “resilience” into the title.

These objectives responded to the strategic guidance of the Kiribati 20-Year Vision 2016-2036 (KV20), which
prioritized “sound management of the Revenue Equalization Reserve Fund (RERF); maximizing returns from
the sustainable exploitation of fisheries and marine resources; and supporting early childhood development”
(ICR, para. 5). The Kiribati Development Plan (2016-2019) to implement KV20 prioritized early childhood
education to help address low human development as a constraint on Kiribati’s economic growth prospects
“so that young people are equipped to fully exploit employment opportunities at home and abroad” (PD2,
para. 3). Early childhood care and education was introduced as a policy area in both DPO1 and DPO2.

The PDOs were “central to the World Bank’s overall engagement with Kiribati, as laid out in the Regional
Partnership Framework (RPF) FY17-FY21…[and] aimed at tackling key structural challenges to Kiribati’s
development (ICR, para. 2). PDO1 responded to the RPF’s focus area 4 on improving fiscal management,
and PDO2 addressed the prioritization of management of fisheries (focus area 1), basic services (focus area
4), and improving education outcomes (focus area 2) (PD 2, para. 82).

Table 1: Objectives and Prior Actions (PAs) for Kiribati DPO Series (Fifth Economic Reform and
Second Inclusive Growth and Resilience)

PAs under DPO1                                        PAs under DPO2
Objective 1: Strengthen sustainable management of sovereign wealth and improve public financial
management
Sovereign wealth
                                                      PA 2: The Recipient, through its Cabinet, has
                                                      adopted and published a rule-based withdrawal
PA 1: The Recipient, through its Cabinet, has         policy designed to preserve the capital value of the
endorsed a set of clear investment objectives for the RERF and take into account inflation and
RERF.                                                 population growth, to ensure the long-run
                                                      sustainability of the RERF and protect
                                                      intergenerational equity.
Public financial management
PA3: (i) The Recipient, through its Cabinet, has
approved a Cash Management Policy, including a
new cash target; and (ii) the Recipient, through its
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development
(MFED), has authorized initial transfers of excess
cash reserves to an interest-bearing account of the
Recipient, in accordance with the Cash Management
Policy.



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kiribati Fifth Economic Reform DPO (P167263)



 PA4: In accordance with the Kiribati Public
                                                        PA5: The Recipient has: (i) enacted the Public
 Procurement Reform Plan (KPPRP) - to establish a
                                                        Procurement Act of 2019; and (ii) through its
 Central Procurement Unit (CPU) within the MFED -
                                                        (MFED) promulgated the Public Procurement
 the Recipient has: (i) through its Cabinet, approved
                                                        Regulations 2020; in order to increase
 the establishment of posts for the staff complement of
                                                        transparency and value for money in public
 the new CPU; and (ii) through its MFED, appointed a
                                                        procurement
 chief procurement officer and procurement officer.
                                                        PA6: The Recipient through its MFED has included
                                                        a public debt annex in the 2020 National Budget
                                                        that includes: (i) all loan balances and annual
                                                        service costs for 2019 (actuals); and (ii) the total
                                                        debt stock and debt service profile for 2016-2028
                                                        and has published the budget on its website.
 Objective 2: Support prospects for inclusive growth and more resilient livelihoods under global economic
 uncertainty and climate change threats
 Fisheries and food security
 PA7: The Recipient, through its Parliament, has
                                                        PA8: The Cabinet has promulgated Regulations for
 enacted the Fisheries (Amendment) Act 2017, to
                                                        the Conservation & Management of Coastal Marine
 define Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU)
                                                        Resources 2019 to promote inclusive, resilient
 fishing, define serious fishing violations, raise the
                                                        livelihoods and safeguard food security against
 penalty provisions for serious offenses, and provide
                                                        climate change.
 for greater transparency, to combat IUU fishing.
 Water supply
 PA9: The Recipient, through its Cabinet, has
 approved the introduction of a tariff for residential
                                                        PA 10: The Recipient, through its Cabinet, has
 water use for the three pilot areas of South Tarawa
                                                        approved a tariff and community service obligation
 where households are provided with reticulated water
                                                        framework for the roll-out of climate-resilient piped
 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, a decision critical for
                                                        water and sanitation services across all of South
 the Public Utilities Board to develop and sustain safe
                                                        Tarawa, based on the results in pilot areas.
 water supply services to all of South Tarawa, thereby
 reducing the associated burden on women and girls.
 Early childhood care and education
 PA 11: The Recipient, through its Parliament, has      PA 12: The Recipient, through its Ministry of
 enacted the Early Childhood Care and Education Act Education (MoE), has promulgated the Registration
 2017, for the regulation, facilitation and support of  and Administration of Service Providers and
 early childhood care and education and preschool       Premises Regulations 2020, to boost quality and
 programs and services at national and local            access to early childhood education and facilitate
 government levels.                                     women’s labor force participation.

Source: ICR, Table 2.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Kiribati Fifth Economic Reform DPO (P167263)



Nine out of 12 PAs made a significant contribution to achievement of the relevant PDO through a logical
results chain based on credible analytical work and the lessons from previous DPOs. Only one PA was less
than satisfactory in terms of adding value. PD2 provided a detailed explanation of the context, rationale and
expected results for each PA. The ICR (Table 3) summarized these explanations in the form of a tabular
results chain (theory of change) linking each set of actions to the intended outputs/results and expected
outcomes.

Objective 1: Strengthen sustainable management of sovereign wealth and improve public financial
management

PAs 1 and 2 addressed the well-identified need to provide clear investment objectives and withdrawal rules
for the RERF, which “was established in the 1950s to invest royalties from Kiribati’s now-depleted phosphate
reserves” PD2 (para. 13) and which was considered essential to provide future generations with the funds
needed to invest in infrastructure and cope with climate change. PA 1 (The Recipient, through its Cabinet,
has endorsed a set of clear investment objectives for the RERF) took the first step of defining the investment
objectives, while PA2 (The Recipient, through its Cabinet, has adopted and published a rule-based
withdrawal policy designed to preserve the capital value of the RERF and take into account inflation and
population growth, to ensure the long-run sustainability of the RERF and protect intergenerational equity)
focused on adoption of a rule-based withdrawal policy. These actions were essential to achievement of the
objective of sound management of the RERF, with a clear results chain and a simple basis for monitoring.
However, the ICR (para. 105) noted weaknesses in the design of these actions in that (i) they were Cabinet
actions rather than laws, and hence could be reversed or modified at any time; (ii) they did not provide
guidelines for the rules that would protect against depletion under fluctuating rates of return; and (iii) the
“development purposes” for which funds could be used were not defined. Rating: PA 1: Moderately
Satisfactory; PA 2: Moderately Satisfactory.

PA 3 (i. The Recipient, through its Cabinet, has approved a Cash Management Policy, including a new cash
target; and ii. the Recipient, through its Ministry of Finance and Economic Development (MFED), has
authorized initial transfers of excess cash reserves to an interest-bearing account of the Recipient, in
accordance with the Cash Management Policy) was designed to harness the interest foregone on the
government’s substantial cash balances (ICR, para. 24)., Based on the 2015 IMF review, together with
management of the RERF, these action were important steps toward the objective of more sustainable
management of the country’s finances, although the Bank “could have pushed for a higher-quality withdrawal
rule (ICR, paras. 24 and 28). Rating: PA 3: Moderately Satisfactory.

PAs 4 and 5 addressed the absence of a functioning central procurement unit (PA 4: to establish a Central
Procurement Unit (CPU) within the MFED - the Recipient has: (i) … approved the … staff complement of the
new CPU; and (ii) … appointed a chief procurement officer and procurement officer; PA 5: The Recipient has:
(i) enacted the Public Procurement Act of 2019; and (ii) promulgated the Public Procurement Regulations
2020; in) PD1 (para. 42) noted that there were “no procurement regulations, procedures or standard bidding
and contract documents,” resulting in different agencies using different methods and diverting “scarce
administrative capacity from…its most effective use” to deal with the complexity. Based on the Kiribati
Procurement System Review Report (2016) and the Kiribati Public Reform Plan (prepared with technical
assistance from the Asian Development Bank; PD, para. 43), these actions “represent[ed] a major step
towards boosting transparency and competitiveness” in procurement (PD2, para. 52). While the effectiveness
of the actions rested on the assumption that they would be applied, the fact that GOK’s implementation




                                                                                                   Page 6 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Kiribati Fifth Economic Reform DPO (P167263)



progress was faster than expected was a sufficiently positive sign to warrant updating the prior action in
DPO2 (ICR, para. 31). Rating: PA 4: Satisfactory; PA 5: Satisfactory.

PA 6 (The Recipient through its MFED has included a public debt annex in the 2020 National Budget that
includes: i. all loan balances and annual service costs for 2019 [actuals]; and ii. the total debt stock and debt
service profile for 2016-2028, and has published the budget on its website) attempted to address Kiribati’s
“high risk of debt distress” by “embedding and extending recent debt transparency reforms” (ICR, paras. 33
and 36). However, the value added was unclear, given that “since the 2018 budget, the authorities [had]
reported on the total historical and projected debt stock and debt service profile for the next 13 years” (ICR,
para. 34). While the PA supported continuation of this practice, the results chain (ICR, Table 3) did not
specify how the indicated degree of debt transparency would enhance debt management\. Rating: PA 6:
Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Objective 2: Support prospects for inclusive growth and more resilient livelihoods under global
economic uncertainty and climate change threats

PA 7 (The Recipient, through its Parliament, has enacted the Fisheries (Amendment) Act 2017, to define
Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) fishing, define serious fishing violations, raise the penalty
provisions for serious offenses, and provide for greater transparency, to combat IUU fishing) and PA 8 (The
Cabinet has promulgated Regulations for the Conservation & Management of Coastal Marine Resources
2019 to promote inclusive, resilient livelihoods and safeguard food security against climate change) carried
forward past efforts to strengthen oversight of fisheries and put them in the context of threats to food security.
Reform of the legal and regulatory system was critical for several reasons: “offshore fisheries are one of
Kirbati’s primary assets and the main driver of the economy;” Kiribati was out of line with the European
Commissions guidelines on Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) fishing; and “coastal fisheries were
under threat from localized overfishing (ICR, paras. 37, 39 and 41; PD2, para. 61). Besides “promoting the
sustainable economic use of coastal fisheries,” the regulations also “recognized women, youth and
vulnerable groups’ contribution to coastal fisheries and promoted more inclusive fisheries management
platforms and livelihoods,” with the objective of achieving more “inclusive community-based fisheries
management and fairness in access to resources and in decision-making (PD2, para. 63). Implementation
was to be guided by the “Coastal Fisheries Roadmap 2019-2036, developed by the Ministry of Fisheries and
Marine Resource Development in conjunction with the Pacific Community and Australian Government” (PD2,
para. 53). A major shortcoming was that DPO2 did not explain how the regulations would be implemented to
achieve the intended results, noting that the Regulations came into effect in October 2019 (PD2, para. 65),
over a year before DPO2 was approved (after a delay), although it did indicate that implementation support
was to be provided through the World Bank-funded Kiribati Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program
project (launched in August 2020)…in coordination with other partners. Rating: PA 7: Satisfactory; PA 8:
Moderately Satisfactory.

PA 9 (The Recipient, through its Cabinet, has approved the introduction of a tariff for residential water use for
the three pilot areas of South Tarawa…) and PA 10 (The Recipient, through its Cabinet, has approved a tariff
and community service obligation framework for the roll-out of climate-resilient piped water and sanitation
services across all of South Tarawa, based on the results in pilot areas) were intended to address the severe
lack of availability of water and the absence of a tariff that would incentivize minimal usage and help fund the
costs of expanding supply. The Kiribati Development Plan recognized that inadequate water and sanitation
were contributing to widespread communicable diseases and that water collection imposed a substantial time
burden on households (ICR, para. 42). Complete reliance on government funding threatened the
sustainability of the Public Utilities Board (PUB), as well as its ability to expand and improve water services.

                                                                                                      Page 7 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kiribati Fifth Economic Reform DPO (P167263)



 Introducing a water tariff “was a major reform that reversed a long-standing policy that no one should pay for
 water” (ICR, para. 42). A pilot program was warranted to investigate the challenges of balancing the need for
 incentives and cost recovery with the objective of affordability for the poorest households (ICR, para. 44). PA
 10 then supported roll-out based on the pilot. Rating: PA 9: Satisfactory; PA 10: Satisfactory.

 PA 11 (The Recipient, through its Parliament, has enacted the Early Childhood Care and Education Act 2017,
 for the regulation, facilitation and support of early childhood care and education and preschool programs and
 services at national and local government levels) and PA 12 (The Recipient, through its Ministry of
 Education), has promulgated the Registration and Administration of Service Providers and Premises
 Regulations 2020…) responded to the Kiribati Development Plan’s emphasis on addressing human capital
 constraints to Kiribati’s long-term development prospects, including women’s labor force participation (PD2,
 para. 36; ICR, para. 49). Early childhood education had been identified as substandard in the 2107 Kiribati
 Early Human Capability Index, with “the lowest achievements were on early reading, writing, and maths skills”
 and very low rates of school progression (PD1, para. 59). The actions were a response to those findings and
 provided a basis for the public education sector to access public resources available to support facilities and
 early childhood education (PD1, para. 60). They were appropriately sequenced to provide and begin
 implementing a framework “to standardize and improve the services offered by preschools around the
 country” (ICR, para. 50). Rating: PA 11: Satisfactory; PA 12: Satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

The two operations used nine results indicators (RIs) to track implementation and results of 12 PAs. However,
two indicators consisted of two sub-indicators tracking different PAs or aspects of the PAs, making a total of 11
RI targets (as shown in Table 2). DPO2 revised five RIs in light of changes in action or circumstances and
updated the targets for two RIs.

Over half of the RIs are rated moderately satisfactory in tracking impact of the PAs, though they did not always
track progress toward the desired objectives. Three were fully satisfactory on both counts, while only two were
not satisfactory (due to problems of measurement). The definition, baseline and availability of data were
generally clear and credible.

Table 2: Results indicators by Objective and PAs; baseline and target values; status and achievement
                                                                                         Actual as
                                                                                                        RI
                       Associated      RI                       Target                      % of
Results indicator (RI)                         Baseline                   Actual (2021)            Achievement
                          PAs     Relevance                   (2021/22)                   targeted
                                                                                                      rating
                                                                                           change
Objective 1: Strengthen sustainable management of sovereign wealth and improve public financial
management
   RI 1: Any RERF         PA 1        MS      None (2017) Withdrawals           All      Achieved       H
 withdrawals conform                                        fully conform withdrawals

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kiribati Fifth Economic Reform DPO (P167263)



   to the published       PA 2                                 to the       since 2020
   withdrawal rule*                                        published rule conform to
                                                                          the published
                                                                                rule.
                                                                         7 basis points Target
                                                                           below OCR
  RI 2: The average
                                                71 basis    < 15 basis        (2022)     achieved
rate of return on cash
                          PA 3        MS      points below points below                                            S
      reserves is
                                              OCR (2018)        OCR      [but: 50 points    [but
      increased*
                                                                           below 2018 slippage in
                                                                               level]    objective]
  RI 3: [Procurement]
     transparency is                                           All medium-
   increased through                            No public-      and high-
                          PA 4
  online publication of                          cation            value
                                      MU                                          None            0%               N
    all medium-value                                            contracts
                          PA 5
  contracts and high-                            (2019)         published
value contracts award                                              online
          notices*
            RI 4:
                                              21 of 39 PEs
[Procurement] strateg
                                                 (54%)        100% of PEs
        ic planning
                                               submitted      submit annual
    strengthened, as      PA 4                                                12 out of 44
                                                 annual        procurement
     measured by an                   MU                                      PEs (27%)           -59 %            N
                                              procurement      plans for the
 increase in the share    PA 5                                               had submitted
                                                  plans        2022 budget
    of PEs submitting
                                                                 process
  annual procurement
                                                 (2019)
    plans to the CPU
                                               22 months
      RI 5: Debt
                                               old (actuals   Debt reporting
   transparency is                                                              Debt reports   Achieved
                                                for 2017;      is published
 promoted with the                                                              are included
                                                est. debt     online by Dec.
annual publication of                                                          in the annual     [but not
                          PA 6        MS         stocks &     of each year,                                        S
      timely and                                                                 Recurrent     adequately
                                                 flows for    with estimates
comprehensive debt                                                              Budgets for     related to
                                                2018-19)      of debt stocks
  reports [added in                                                               2020-22.      objective]
                                                                  & flows
        DPO2]
                                              (2018)
Objective 2: Support prospects for inclusive growth and more resilient livelihoods under global
economic uncertainty and climate change threats
   RI 6: A list of all PA 7       MU      No published   License          None       0%                            N
    fishing license                          license    conditions
  conditions for each                      conditions   published
  gear type (incl. IUU                                   every six
         fishing                              (2017)      months
 countermeasures) is
  published not less
    than every six


                                                                                                          Page 9 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kiribati Fifth Economic Reform DPO (P167263)



 months, to promote
   transparency in
accordance with the
       Fisheries
  (Amendment) Act
         2017.
 RI 7: More coastal
    fisheries have
       effective
                                                             At least 25
management plans in
                                                            Management                       240 %
   place to prevent                               No
                                                            Plans in force
   overfishing and                           management                         60
                                                              (covering                     [but not
 strengthen climate       PA 8       MU      plans in force                Management                         S
                                                              about 13                    adequately
    adaptation, as                                                         Plans in force
                                                              percent of                   related to
  measured by the                               (2019)
                                                               coastal                     objective]
 number of CBMPs
                                                            communities)
   approved and in
force. [replaced prior
          RI]
                                                                             480
                                                                       households in
                                                                          the three
                                                                           Kiribati
                                                                         Adaptation
  RI 8: Number of
                                                                       Project III pilot
households in South                                                                         13 %
                                             0 households                areas had
Tarawa with climate-                                      At least 480
                          PA 9        S                                  24/7 piped                           N
 resilient access to                                      households                      [3 hours
                                                (2017)                 water in 2019,
  piped water 24/7                                                                       out of 24]
                                                                         but in 2022
      increases
                                                                        service was
                                                                       interrupted by
                                                                       drought and is
                                                                       now 2-3 hours
                                                                           per day
RI 9: the affordability
  of piped water for
   poor household
                                                                           8-15 liters per
increases, measured                          0 piped water 37 liters per                   21.6-40.5
                          PA 10       U                                      capita per                       N
  by the affordable                              (2017)   capita per day                       %
                                                                               day.
level of consumption
   for the poorest
       quintile.
  RI 10: Preschool        PA 11      MS         19% of
 quality is improved,                           known
 as measured by the                           preschools 75 percent of Regulations          119 %             H
 share of preschools                          registered; all preschools have been
  meeting the ECCE                             60% pro-       are fully  issued and


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kiribati Fifth Economic Reform DPO (P167263)



     registration                               visionally    registered    245/276 of
   requirements.*                              registered;                  preschools
                                               45.2% un-                      are fully
                                               registered.                  registered.

                                                 (2019)                       (89 %)
    RI 11: Preschool
       participation                            76% of
  increases, thereby                           preschool      80% of
   reducing women’s                           age children preschool-age
 childcare burden and    PA 12        MS       attending    children are 94-96% (est.)      119 %             H
 helping to narrow the                         preschool     attending
  gender gap in labor                                        preschool
   force participation                           (2015)
        over time.*
*Modified from DPO 1.

Source: ICR, Table 2.

Objective 1: Strengthen sustainable management of sovereign wealth and improve public financial
management

RI 1 (Any RERF withdrawals conform to the published withdrawal rule) was appropriate to indicate whether the
rule-based withdrawal policy supported by PA 2 was being applied. The indicator was relevant, measurable and
clearly attributable to PA 2. However, with respect to measuring progress toward the objectives of the RERF’s
sustainability and contribution to development objectives, the RI suffered from weaknesses in the particular rule
that was adopted with respect to fluctuating annual returns, leading to some years with no withdrawals – e.g.,
2023 (as against $40 million in 2021 and $23 million in 2022) – and others with excessive withdrawals, rather
than a more stable mechanism such as 3 percent of the balance annually, which would contribute predictably to
long-term development projects while preserving the real value of the fund; PD, para. 105) Furthermore, the
failure to define “development purposes” enabled expenditures (such as copra subsidy and unemployed
benefits) that might “be achieved more efficiently in other ways” (ICR, para. 58). Rating: Moderately
Satisfactory.

RI 2 (the average rate of return on cash reserves is increased) as stated was intended to measure progress
toward the objective of strengthening the management of and return on surplus public funds. Although attribution
to PA 3 was limited because there are also other determinants of returns, it was an improvement over the
original focus of the Government of Kiribati just on reducing cash reserves earning zero interest, and the
particular measure used (gap between the Reserve Bank of Australia [RBA] Official Cash Rate [OCR] and
returns on cash reserves) appropriately put the measurement in relative terms. The TTL agreed that the
indicator would more accurately have been rephrased as “the average rate of return on cash reserves relative to
the RBA OCR is increased.” Indeed, the target was based on the gap between the OCR and returns on cash
reserves is reduced, and this assessment is based on the rephrased indicator. The indicator was measurable
with data available, and the TTL confirmed that 71 basis points below the OCR was the correct baseline.
Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

RI 3 (online publication of all medium-value contracts and high-value contracts award notices) tracked the
impact on procurement transparency of promulgating Public Procurement Regulations, as supported by PA 5

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kiribati Fifth Economic Reform DPO (P167263)



(which included steps toward implementing the Kiribati Public Procurement Reform Plan and Central
Procurement Unit that were supported by PA 4). While representing progress toward improving PFM and
attributable to the PA, the indicator did not capture progress to the ultimate objective of more cost-efficient
procurement but assumed these would result from increased transparency . The indicator was clear and the
terms defined (PD1, para. 56). Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory.

RI 4 (an increase in the share of PEs submitting annual procurement plans to the CPU) sought ot track the
impact on strategic planning for procurement of the actions under PA 5 (and PA 4). The implicit assumption was
that submitting annual procurement plans would incentivize better strategic planning by public enterprises (PEs)
and thereby lead to reduced costs and wastage in procurement. Although the RI tracked implementation of the
PA, it did not adequately measure progress toward the PFM objective, and the outcome could not necessarily be
attributed to the PAs, given many other determining factors. Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Note: RIs 3 and 4 are disaggregated here, but were combined into a single indicator in DPO2 and the ICR.

RI 5 (annual publication of timely and comprehensive debt reports) tracked implementation of PA 6 requiring a
public debt annex in annual budgets. This supported continuation of the on-going good PFM practice of
publishing a debt annex in the annual budget. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

Objective 2: Support prospects for inclusive growth and more resilient livelihoods under global
economic uncertainty and climate change threats

RI 6 (a list of all fishing license conditions for each gear type [incl. IUU fishing countermeasures] is published not
less than every six months) represented transparency in implementing the Fisheries (Amendment) Act 2017, as
supported by PA 7, which was expected “to deter illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing” (ICR, para. 73).
However, the indicator only confirmed that the PA was implemented without adequately tracking achievement of
the objective. Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory.

RI 7 (more coastal fisheries have effective management plans in place to prevent overfishing and strengthen
climate adaptation) similarly tracked implementation of PA 8 in terms of Community-Based Management Plans
in place. These plans were expected to contribute to the objectives of preventing overfishing and strengthening
climate change adaptation. However, the indicator did not measure these outcomes, only whether the PA was
implemented. There was no indicator that the plans were viable or adequately resourced or enforced. Rating:
Moderately Unsatisfactory.

RI 8 (number of households in South Tarawa with climate-resilient access to piped water 24/7 increases) directly
measured progress towards the development outcome of more resilient and affordable piped water and was
clearly attributable to the prior actions . The baseline (nil) and target for the pilot area were clear and
measurable. Rating: Satisfactory.

RI 9 (the affordability of piped water for poor household increases) directly measured the objective of making
water available on an affordable (though not free) basis, although such a result could only be partly attributed to
PA 10’s support for a tariff and community service obligation framework. Unfortunately, the measure used –
liters per capita per day tracked consumption, not affordability (and was apparently applied to average
households rather than “the poorest quintile,” as stated in the RI). Furthermore, the ICR (para. 81) noted that “it
did not specify if the poorest quintile should be measured only within the pilot areas, or across all of South
Tarawa”…[and] was difficult to measure as the water supply is unmetered.” Rating: Unsatisfactory.

Note: RIs 8 and 9 are disaggregated here, but were combined into a single indicator in DPO2 and the ICR.

                                                                                                       Page 12 of 21
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Kiribati Fifth Economic Reform DPO (P167263)



  RI 10 (preschool quality is improved) was considered to be part of the ultimate objective of human capital
  development for more inclusive growth. The indicator – the share of preschools meeting the Early Childhood
  Care and Education (ECCE) registration requirements – only tracked an intermediate output toward that longer-
  term outcome (which could not have been realized within the time frame of the DPOs). Registration
  requirements included meeting the minimum criteria of the Kiribati in nine areas (including infrastructure,
  learning materials, classroom management and assessment) and with respect to teacher assessment, with
  detailed indicators for the Ministry of Education to monitor progress over time (PD2, para. 77). While it was
  recognized that programs for upskilling professionals would be needed (PD1, para. 61), these requirements
  were reasonable to assure that registration implied a minimum level of quality. The indicator was readily
  measurable, with detailed baseline data available. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

  Ri 11 (preschool participation increase) appropriately tracked the extent to which the regulations supported by
  PA 12 increased participation in preschool. Nevertheless, it faced “some measurement difficulties because
  surveys generally ask whether children attended school during the current school year, rather than the actual
  frequency of attendance” (ICR, para. 86). Furthermore, the indicator was not clearly related to the stated
  objectives for inclusive growth of “reducing women’s childcare burden and helping to narrow the gender gap in
  labor force participation over time,” thereby improving women’s choices and ability to remain in the workforce
  (PD2, para. 81). Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.



  Rating

  Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Strengthen sustainable management of sovereign wealth and improve public financial management

               Rationale
               Two of the five RI targets had High achievement, but one did not adequately measure achievement of the
               objective. Achievement of two out of five was Negligible (even negative in one case). While the target as
               measured for the fifth RI was nominally achieved, the stated objective of improving the relative return on cash
               reserves was not. (The two Negligible results were counted as one in the ICR because the relevant RI had
               been formulated as a single two-part indicator.)

               Withdrawals from the RERF in 2021 and 2022 conformed to the Withdrawal Rule that was approved by
               Cabinet in 2019 and published online in 2020 (RI 1). “No withdrawal is planned for 2023, reflecting the
               volatility of the rule” that was adopted – which “was not what the Bank originally intended” (ICR, paras. 58 and
               105). While the rule was sub-optimal in that it exposes the RERF to the risk of depletion under fluctuating
               returns, it was considered an important step forward – which could readily be improved further, since it was
               adopted by Cabinet rather than as legislation (ICR, para. 113).


                                                                                                                Page 13 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kiribati Fifth Economic Reform DPO (P167263)



Achievement of RI 2 was based on reducing the gap in relative terms compared to the RBA’s OCR. While the
target was achieved as set (a gap of less than 15 basis points), in practice the average return went from
above the OCR to below it (ICR, Table 2), moderating the extent to which the stated objective was achieved.
(The TTL reported that the Government is raising this concern with the new cash manager.)

Procurement objectives were not achieved. Contract awards for 2022 were not published, contrary to RI 3.
“The GOK attributes this to IT issues and is working with the Information and Communications Technology
Department to resolve them” (ICR, para. 66). Nevertheless, some progress toward the objective of
transparency was made in that “all parties involved in a tender are sent the contract awards directly….making
the contract award transparent to the participants…though not the general public” (ICR, para. 66). Strategic
planning actually worsened, “as measured by an increase in the share of PEs submitting annual procurement
plans to the CPU” (RI 4). The share of PEs submitting procurement plans actually fell from 54 percent in 2019
to 27 percent in 2021.

Publication of the public debt annex in the budget (as in the 2020 and 2021 budgets) was continued. This
satisfied RI 5; although it did not in itself ensure that the practice would be continued in the future, this is now
being supported in the most recent DPO (ICR, para. 36). While the impact on public debt management is
unclear, improving transparency contributes to the objective of sound PFM.



Rating
Moderately Unsatisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Support prospects for inclusive growth and more resilient livelihoods under global economic uncertainty and
climate change threats

Rationale
Achievement of three of the six RI targets was High, although one was not well related to achievement of the
objective. Three of the RI targets (half) had Negligible achievement.

Although the Fisheries (Amendment) Act was passed in 2021, “no fishing license conditions were published
on the MFMRD website,” and there was “no evidence that the conditions are being circulated offline either”
(RI 6). “Publishing the license conditions…is a necessary precondition for reducing IUU fishing,” and hence
for making progress toward the objective of supporting more resilient livelihoods under climate change
threats.

On the other hand, substantial progress was made with respect to Community-Based Management Plans
(CBMPs) “to prevent overfishing and strengthen climate adaptation” (RI 7): the 60 CMBPs in place in 2022
constituted 2.4 times the target (and represented over 30 percent of the coastal communities). Nevertheless,
the gap between having a plan and having the capacity and resources to implement it was evident in the lack
of sufficient patrol boats and observers needed for enforcement (ICR, para. 128).


                                                                                                      Page 14 of 21
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Kiribati Fifth Economic Reform DPO (P167263)



                  Although the target (RI 8) of providing at least 480 households in the pilot project area with affordable piped
                  water on a 24/7 basis was initially satisfied in 2019, network losses remained extremely high (70-90 percent),
                  and in 2022 the water service was interrupted by drought and fell to 2-3 hours per day in the pilot area (ICR,
                  para. 83). Thus, the objective of 24/7, “climate-resilient” water supply was not met.

                  Progress toward the objective of making affordable water available to the poor on a sustainable basis is
                  difficult to assess because RI 9 as stated (“the affordability of piped water for poor households increases”) is
                  contradicted by the policy action (PA 9) to introduce a tariff in order to improve sustainability and discourage
                  excessive consumption. Implementing the action reduced affordability by replacing free water. In any case,
                  the tariff was not implemented in that “there is limited billing [and] collection rates among billed customers are
                  below 10 percent due to poor supply” (ICR, para. 83). Since introducing the tariff was an important action
                  toward the objectives of sustainability and resilience of water supply, the failure to take this step means that
                  progress toward objectives was essentially nil, even though the quantitative target as formulated (37 liters per
                  capita per day) was partially met. (The ICR reported in para. 83 that “the average person receives less than
                  eight liters per person per day” [although the RI was formulated with respect to “the poorest quintile,” not
                  average households], while Table 2 reported a result of 15 liters per day.)

                  The target for improving preschool quality (RI 10) was exceeded, as measured by the share meeting
                  registration requirements (89 percent as against the targeted 75 percent); with 22 preschools closed because
                  they didn’t meet the registration requirements (ICR, para. 88). The ICR (para. 87) noted that this result was
                  only an intermediate step toward the longer-term objective of raising educational attainment.

                  The corresponding target for increasing preschool participation (RI 11) likewise was exceeded, according to
                  estimates from survey data (consistent with more reliable but less available census data). Nevertheless, the
                  data did not capture the frequency of attendance during the year, which anecdotal evidence indicated may be
                  irregular (ICR, para. 89).



                  Rating
                  Moderately Unsatisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Achievement of both objectives is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. More than a third of the RIs indicated
Negligible achievement for each objective and overall.



Overall Efficacy Rating


                                                                                                                     Page 15 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kiribati Fifth Economic Reform DPO (P167263)




Moderately Unsatisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

Although the relevance of Prior Actions is Satisfactory, the Moderately Unsatisfactory Efficacy rating constrains
the overall Outcome rating to Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Thin public sector capacity, especially regarding IT, constrains implementation of reforms and
achievement of objectives regarding procurement transparency and fisheries management (ICR, paras.
66, 74 and 120). In both cases, the Government of Kiribati attributed the lack of progress to IT issues, and the
ICR (para. 114) suggested that the Bank could have provided more IT support for publishing policies online. On
the other hand, as mentioned earlier, a policy committed to publishing the debt annex in all future budgets is
being supported in a follow-on DPO, thus mitigating the risk to the sustainability of debt transparency.

Financial and physical losses of PUB put water sector reforms at risk. Tariff reforms were intended to
improve the financial viability of PUB and enable upgrades to the water supply system to ensure resilience in the
face of climate change and make piped water available to the poor and affordable. But heavy network losses (in
some cases close to 90%), compounded by drought, have limited supply to 2-3 hours per day, which in turn
prevented implementing the tariff reform because people would not pay for water they were not receiving, and
there was a high risk that water tariffs could be contested by the poor (ICR, para. 123-4 and para. 112).
Increasing costs and low revenues are forcing the WB and PUB to reconsider whether the energy business
should provide free electricity to upcoming water and sanitation operations, which would work against making
water available on an affordable basis.

Limited funding may constrain further progress toward objectives for early childhood education. “The
Ministry of Education has mentioned that it does not have enough resources to implement all elements of the
ECCE Act” (ICR, para. 88).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


                                                                                                    Page 16 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kiribati Fifth Economic Reform DPO (P167263)



The design was based on lessons from prior analytical work and experience with DPOs. The PDs explained the
rationale for and expected results of the PAs, and they identified key risks, although mitigating measures were
inadequate in several areas. The Economic Reform Taskforce provided a useful consultative and monitoring
framework, although the adequacy of consultation with a key agency was disputed.

Lessons from prior experience

This DPO series drew on lessons from implementing the previous DPO series, including (PD 1, para. 32):

      “The policy dialogue afforded by the DPO engagement can be more significant than the specific actions
       in the policy matrix;”
      Flexibility is “vital in fragile states and very thin-capacity environments,” and revisions between the
       programs is to be expected, “to reflect changing policy emphasis and/or more severe than expected
       capacity constraints;”
      “Tackling more contentious policy areas – particularly in fragile states – involves taking greater risks.” For
       example, rather than impose its preferred withdrawal rule for the RERF, the World Bank took the risk of
       facilitating the Government to consider a range of options (with the positive result that progress was
       made, but the downside was that the chosen rule was sub-optimal).

The design of reforms to sovereign wealth management drew on World Bank Treasury technical assistance
reports and the 2018 IMF Public Investment Management Assessment, and procurement reforms were based
on the 2016 Kiribati Procurement System Review Report (PD2, Annex 5). Actions to improve fisheries
management derived from the Coastal Fisheries Roadmap 2019-2036. In the absence of adequate data (ICR,
para. 109), DPO1 introduced a pilot program for water tariff reforms so that further implementation could be
based on actual experience.

Results chain

PD2 provided a detailed explanation of the context, rationale and expected results for each PA. The ICR (Table
3) summarized these explanations as a tabular results chain (theory of change) linking each set of actions to the
intended outputs/results and expected outcomes and development objectives.

Risk identification and mitigation

PD 1 (para. 86) rated macroeconomic risk “as substantial because Kiribati’s economic and fiscal situation is
inherently volatile and any negative economic or fiscal shock will inevitably detract from the policy focus on the
reform program.” Indeed, an expansionary budget in 2020 and “new public spending initiatives” in the 2021
budget raised “concerns about the macro-framework and disbursement was delayed” by a year (ICR, para. 10
and 21). The situation was mitigated by “a substantial improvement in the medium-term fiscal projections and
updates to GOK’s policy framework” (ICR, para. 22).

PD 2 (para. 83) identified important “institutional capacity challenges in the public sector, as well as
substantial political and fiduciary risks.” The PD expected “the well-established DPO dialogue in Kiribati and
the close involvement of development partners” to help “reduce technical, stakeholder, environmental and social
risks.”

PD 2 (para. 105) identified the “high risks to the operation’s outcomes stemming from the possibility of a COVID-
19 outbreak in Kiribati.” Although “geographic isolation and a decisive policy response prevented severe health

                                                                                                      Page 17 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kiribati Fifth Economic Reform DPO (P167263)



impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic,” the border closure nevertheless “had significant economic impacts” on
food security (due to reliance on imports), “donor funded projects, fresh tuna exports, and the small hotel and
restaurant sector” (ICR, para. 4).

Nevertheless, although “risks were appropriately defined…mitigating measures were not sufficient to address
them all” (ICR, para. 112). The failure to design adequate mitigation and supporting measures (especially IT)
affected implementation of procurement, fisheries and water reforms in particular.

Stakeholder consultation and coordination with Development Partners

The DPOs were “based on a joint policy matrix agreed between the GOK and the Economic Reform Taskforce
(ERT)… a joint government-donor working group…[that included] representatives of the World Bank, ADB,
Australia, European Union (EU) and New Zealand” (ICR, para. 110). “The Bank also collaborated closely with
the IMF and PFTAC on macro-fiscal policy and public financial management” (ibid.). “The World Bank also
consulted with the civil society and the private sector who were invited to provide feedback on drafts of the plans
and who indicated areas that they could support” (ICR, para. 109).

Nevertheless, “the PUB’s current management believes that their predecessors were not sufficiently consulted
on the tariff plan,” even though “the WB shared the final tariff report with the MISE Secretary and the then PYB
CEO and Water Engineering Manager for review and approval” (ICR, para. 48).



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Monitoring

The Economic Reform Taskforce provided a vehicle for systematic monitoring of progress and results (PD2,
paras. 84 and 103). RIs were generally designed to “rely on data that would be produced anyway or, where it
does not, technical assistance has been committed to support the GOK to measure the required indicator” (PD2,
para. 103).

Adaptation

The change in name of the DPOs from “Economic Reform” to “Inclusive Growth and Resilience” signaled a
desire to adapt – in particular to coping with the risks of the COVID-19 pandemic and of climate change (PD 2,
para. 42 and footnote 18). In light of the experience of DPO1 and changes in indicative triggers, seven RIs were
updated or modified, one replaced, and a new one (RI 5) introduced. The design team updated “some prior
actions…after the indicative triggers had been met ahead of schedule” (ICR, para. 115). “During the first DPO
the water tariffs in pilot areas were found to be unaffordable for poor households, and so were lowered when
extended to the rest of South Tarawa in DPO 2” (ICR, para. 111).



                                                                                                    Page 18 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Kiribati Fifth Economic Reform DPO (P167263)




Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Design is rated as Moderately Satisfactory and implementation as Satisfactory. The overall assessment is
weighted toward the former in view of several shortcomings identified in the ICR.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

It is too early for evidence to be available on possible social and poverty impacts.



b. Environmental

It is too early for evidence to be available on improvements in resilience to climate change and possible
environmental impacts.



c. Gender

It is too early for evidence to be available on the extent to which improved water supply and participation in pre-
school education would have the desired effects on women’s livelihoods and labor force participation.



d. Other

n.a.



10. Quality of ICR

                                                                                                     Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Kiribati Fifth Economic Reform DPO (P167263)




Rationale

The ICR provides a coherent narrative of the operation's context, rationale, design, and results, including a
summary results chain. It reviews the context for the program, including lessons learned from the previous DPO
series, and it points out design and implementation aspects that could have been handled better. It provides
adequate data to support the conclusions and interrogates the quality of certain data. The lessons learned are
rooted in the experience of the DPO series.


a. Rating

High

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                 IEG
                                                                                  Disagreement/Comments
                                                                                  Efficacy is rated MU because
                                                                                  over a third of results were
                                                                                  Negligible for each objective
                                                                                  (taking into account: (i) RI 2 was
                                                                                  flawed in terms of formulation
                                                                                  and baseline; (ii) disaggregation
                                  Moderately          Moderately                  of two RIs that were originally
Outcome
                                  Satisfactory        Unsatisfactory              formulated as two-part sub-
                                                                                  indicators) and highlighted the
                                                                                  extent of Negligible
                                                                                  achievement; (iii) at least a third
                                                                                  of RI targets were not achieved,
                                                                                  whether the RIs are
                                                                                  disaggregated or not.
                                  Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                  ---                 Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                    ---                 High


12. Lessons

Adequate budgetary resources are needed to ensure implementation of new regulatory reforms.
Enforcement of coastal fisheries management plans has been constrained by the lack of sufficient patrol boats
and observers (ICR, para. 128). Similarly, resources are lacking to implement “the ECCE regulations [that]
require all preschools to be evaluated and registered every three years.”




                                                                                                     Page 20 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kiribati Fifth Economic Reform DPO (P167263)



Technical assistance may be needed to ensure implementation of new regulatory reforms.
Implementation of measures to improve transparency in procurement and fishing license conditions was
reportedly held back by limited IT capacity.

“Tariff reforms should be timed to coincide with improvements in service delivery and data availability”
ICR, para. 129). New water tariffs were “calculated using very limited data, and under uncertainty about the
scope of future infrastructure.” Poor water supply made it impractical to introduce billing under the new tariffs.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                    Page 21 of 21
