     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Low Income Community Housing Support Pro (P130710)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023914

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P130710                                    Low Income Community Housing Support Pro

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Bangladesh                                 Social Sustainability and Inclusion


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-57800                                  31-Dec-2021                                            41,177,596.27

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 05-Apr-2016                                30-Jun-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           50,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                            43,999,969.92                                                 0.00

 Actual                                        41,700,223.58                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Alejandra Eguiluz          Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO), as stated in the Financial Agreement (CN5780-BD), page 6, is “to
   improve shelter and living conditions in selected low-income and informal settlements in designated
   municipalities in Bangladesh”. This formulation is identical to the one in the PAD (PAD522, page 8)

   The PDO will be parsed, for the purposes of this review (and as done in the ICR), as follows:



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Low Income Community Housing Support Pro (P130710)



          To improve shelter in selected low-income and informal settlements in designated municipalities in
           Bangladesh.

          To improve living conditions in selected low-income and informal settlements in designated
           municipalities in Bangladesh.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component A: Community Mobilization and Planning (cost at appraisal US$ 4.5 million; revised US$
   7.8 million; actual US$ 6.07 million): The component was designed to support community-driven
   organizations in mobilizing, engaging in community planning, and developing housing and upgrading
   solutions within their communities. Other activities included financing for surveys and planning in pilot towns
   to identify available lands. The GoB planned to donate the value of its land for the project’s land
   development and housing activities. Activities under this component would be managed by the National
   Housing Authority (NHA).

   Component B: Urban Community Improvements and Upgrading (at appraisal US$ 22 million; revised
   US$ 17.7 million; actual US$ 12.14 million): The component was designed to finance a multi-sectoral
   package of tertiary infrastructure and service improvements based on the expressed demands and needs of
   communities. Financing would be made available for selected infrastructure, where connections to
   municipal-level infrastructure were required. Activities under this component would be managed by the
   NHA.

   Component C: Shelter Component and Lending (at appraisal US$ 18 million; actual US$ 18 million):
   The activities planned supported the development of a credit line with loans to support shelter
   improvements, new construction, and cluster development. The credit lines would test different collateral
   and guarantee mechanisms, including those managed by community groups. Financing would
   include technical assistance (as a grant) for product development and the testing and learning activities for
   possible scaling up. Activities under this component would be managed by the Palli Karma-Sahayak
   Foundation (PKSF).

   Component D: Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), and Learning (at appraisal US$ 1 million; revised
   US$ 0.5 million; actual US$ 0.29 million). The activities under this component would support independent
   M&E and learning activities, including peer-to-peer learning programs between community groups,
   strengthening community networks at the town level and the robust use of participatory techniques for
   monitoring. These activities would be managed by the NHA.



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Low Income Community Housing Support Pro (P130710)



  Component E: Project Management, Training, and Capacity Building (at appraisal US$ 3.5 million;
  revised US$ 5 million; actual US$ 3.08 million): The component financed project management costs for
  the NHA, including capacity building, technical assistance, training, policy, and institutional support.
  Activities under this component were to be managed by the NHA.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. At appraisal, the total project cost was estimated at US$ 57.5 million, of which an IDA credit
  (CN 5780-BD) financed US$ 50 million. An amount of US$ 6 million was cancelled from the loan in
  December of 2021, bringing the revised project cost to US $44 million. The actual project cost was
  US$41.18 million, representing 81% of the initial IDA credit and 92.27% of the revised IDA amount.

  Financing. The Project was financed with an IDA credit of US$ 50 million (CN 5780-BD).

  Borrower contribution. At appraisal, the planned borrower contribution was US$ 7.5 million. The actual
  borrower contribution was US$ 1.7 million.

  Dates

  Approval date as April 5, 2016 (and advance agreement for project preparation had been previously
  approved in Sept 2012). Effectiveness date was Oct 20, 2016. Mide Term Review took place on April 1st,
  2019 (as planned). An amendment to the FA was approved in Dec 2021, cancelling the amount of US$ 6
  million from the credit. Original closing date was Dec 31, 2021 and the actual closing date was June 30,
  2023. The project was extended for 1 year and 6 months.

  The project underwent three restructuring processes:

        The first restructuring took place in September 2019, following the project Midterm Review (MTR),
         and introduced the following changes: (i) A substantial reduction in the PDO outcome targets and
         the introduction of 5 new intermediary indicators to better measure impact. The reasons presented in
         the ICR point at an overestimation of targets at appraisal, having taken the average household size
         as compounded by 5 people when a survey revealed that the more accurate number was 4; (ii) the
         relocation of funds from components B and E to components A and D (community mobilization and
         project management); (iii) a reduction of the funding allocated to infrastructure upgrades, which
         would take longer time than the project had left.
        The second restructuring, in September 2021, introduced the following changes: (i) the removal of
         the city of Narayanganj from the geographical scope and the addition of settlements from the
         participating towns of Sirajganj and Comilla, to retain the revised outcome targets and number of
         beneficiaries to be reached; (ii) a partial cancellation of the credit in the amount of US$6 million (for
         activities across the 4 components that were managed by the NHA and were likely to remain
         unutilized); (iii) due to COVID impact on borrowers, the funds under component C that could not be
         utilized were redeployed to establish a new activity, the “Housing Microfinance Risk Management
         Support Fund” (RMSF), that supported borrowers with emergency loans for livelihood activities
         towards income generation during the pandemic; (iv) The project was extended by one year from
         December 31, 2021, until December 31, 2022, mainly due to COVID-19 related delays.



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Low Income Community Housing Support Pro (P130710)



         The third restructuring, in December 2022, extended the project closing date by another six months,
          from December 31, 2022, until June 30, 2023 in light of the continuing impacts of COVID-19 on the
          implementation pace.

   A split evaluation is necessary as the reduction in the outcome indicators’ targets during the first
   restructuring is quite substantial and has an impact on the PDO. The second and the third restructurings
   made additional course corrections and adjustments, but retained the ambition of the project and the
   intended impact on beneficiaries.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at appraisal

At the time of appraisal Bangladesh had benefited from more than two decades of solid economic growth
(averaging annual GDP growth rates of 5.5% between 1995 and 2015), supporting the country’s graduation
from a low-income country to a lower-middle income country in 2015. A rapidly urbanizing economy was
being supported by expanding manufacturing, exports, and organized services, and about 500,000 people
migrated annually to urban areas in search of jobs. The urban population grew from 22% in 1996 to 35% in
2016, and poverty remained a challenge with more than 21 million people living below the international
poverty line of 2.15 dollars a day (ICR, page 5).

The rapid urban growth placed considerable strain on land use, housing, and urban infrastructure. An
estimated 8.5 million new housing units were needed between 2016 and 2021 to meet the demands. Low-
income households had limited options for affordable housing, which contributed to the unplanned and
informal expansion of under-served and crowded poorer urban residential areas, characterized by
environmental degradation, intractable land tenure problems, and poor infrastructure. In 2016, 53 percent of
the country’s urban population lived in slums. Over 70 percent of all urban dwellings were categorized as
inadequate or deficient (ICR, page 5).

Mortgage and housing finance markets did not serve low-income households (the penetration of mortgage
debt was significantly lower than East Asian countries or India), and the limited commercial housing finance
available catered exclusively to salaried or high-income households. Most small loan schemes were
focused on supporting entrepreneurship or livelihoods. Attempts by a handful of leading microfinance
institutions (MFIs) in the country to provide low-income housing microfinance had not succeeded in going to
scale.

Consistency with Country Strategy

The PDO formulation is well aligned with relevant GoB strategies, both at appraisal and at project closing.
At the time of appraisal, national policy frameworks and development plans prioritized access to housing,
basic infrastructure, and services. In 2008, the Government of Bangladesh (GoB) declared a commitment to
provide Housing for All by 2021. The draft National Urban Sector Policy (2011), the National Housing Policy
(2016), and the Perspective Plan of Bangladesh (2010-2021) emphasized the need for affordable and
accessible housing solutions for low-income urban residents. The Seventh Five Year Plan (FY2016-2020)

                                                                                                  Page 4 of 20
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Low Income Community Housing Support Pro (P130710)



also recognized the limited capacity and funding constraints of pourashavas (local government) in providing
basic infrastructure and services. It called for the involvement of community-based institutions and non-
government organizations.

At closure, the Eighth Five Year Plan (FY2020-2025) recognizes the deterioration in the quality of life of the
urban poor from constraints to land, housing, and inadequate infrastructure and services. It recommends
strategies consistent with the PDO and project activities, including implementation of participatory
approaches to land use planning, enabling effective mechanisms for housing finance, undertaking
programs for the physical improvement of informal settlements, and enhancing basic infrastructure,
services, and tenure security (ICR, page 9). The Perspective Plan 2021-2041 emphasizes improved quality
of life for urban residents and ensuring households have access to minimum housing quality standards as
key objectives.

Consistency with Bank strategy

The PDO is consistent with the current WB’s Bangladesh CPF FY2023-FY2027, contributing directly to the
CPF’s Progress Indicator “Number of people benefitting from access to housing loans and residing in newly
improved or constructed shelter.” The project’s bottom-up and citizen-centered approach to service
improvements addresses a key concern of the CPF, which states the need to tailor service delivery to the
needs of individual regions, districts, and municipalities. The PDO also aligns with 2 out of 3 High-Level
Outcomes and 3 out of 8 CPF objectives, namely, CPF objective 3: "Improved effectiveness of public
institutions to deliver better services to citizens and businesses"; CPF objective 4: "Improved equity in
access to quality services for human capital development"; and CPF objective 5: "Enhanced productive and
economic opportunities for women, poor, and vulnerable groups".

Previous Bank experience

The PAD states that the use of community-based development in urban areas and linking community
organizations to financing modalities for housing was a new approach to financing (PAD, page 8). The WB
leveraged global technical experience, building on the success of programs such as the Community
Organizations Development Initiative (CODI) in Thailand, the Urban Poor Development Fund in Cambodia,
the engagement with urban poor communities in the Kampung Improvement Project in Indonesia, the
Pamoja Trust in Kenya, and the city-wide development funds in the Philippines, as well as the Asian
Coalition for Community Action (ACCA) approach. The PAD states that the design also reflects the
experience in Latin America where participatory solutions had become the preferred approach in the
previous fifteen years.

PDO level. The PDO (to improve shelter and living conditions in selected low-income and informal
settlements in designated municipalities in Bangladesh) is pitched at the outcome level, as both concepts of
shelter and living conditions are outcomes that may contribute to long-lasting benefits in people’s lives.

Overall, the relevance of objectives is rated as High.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High



                                                                                                          Page 5 of 20
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Low Income Community Housing Support Pro (P130710)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To improve living conditions in selected low-income and informal settlements in designated municipalities in
               Bangladesh

               Rationale
               Theory of Change (ToC)

               The ICR presents a reconstructed ToC that was not explicitly presented in the PAD (ICR, page 6). The chain
               presented is logical and complete. The outreach activities undertaken in order to mobilize communities
               (input), the elaboration of plans by the community for improved living conditions (input), the leases executed
               to provide tenure security (input) and the design of new housing loan products (input) all lead to the
               development of the community plans that specify the services that the community decides to upgrade
               (output), the completion of infrastructure upgrades (output) and the disbursement of housing loans (output),
               which in turn lead to the improved access to services and the improved housing (the two outcomes of the
               PDO). The ICR includes a longer-term impact of improved socio-economic status, health and well-being of
               the selected settlements. It also incorporates the Emergency Loan Support (COVID-related addition to the
               project during implementation) as a tool that contributes to the outcome of improved housing.

               The logical chain of the ToC that applies to PDO1 is the following: the outreach activities undertaken in order
               to mobilize communities (input), the elaboration of plans by the community for improved living conditions
               (input) and the leases executed to provide tenure security (input) all lead to the development of the
               community plans (output) and the completion of infrastructure upgrades (output), which in turn lead to the
               improved access to and quality of services.

               This section assesses the efficacy of PDO1, comparing the final project results with the original targets. The
               PDO1 (improved living conditions) is evaluated using the first PDO-level indicator, “Increased number of
               beneficiaries in selected settlements with improved access to and quality of services.” The PAD
               defined improved access to and quality of services as the “Number of households benefiting from improved
               access and quality of water, sanitation, roads, drainage, electricity”. The list of services identified in the PAD
               were tentative at the appraisal; the services ultimately provided and reported in the ICR were determined by
               communities as part of the community planning process.

               Outputs

                     90% participation rate of settlement members in the planning and decision-making meetings,
                      exceeding the original target of 70%.
                     26,139 individuals benefitted from Community Upgrading Plans, exceeding the original target of
                      24,000.
                     95% of infrastructure works were evaluated as of good quality, exceeding the original target of 70%.
                      This achievement was evaluated based on inspections by the NHA site engineer and the members of



                                                                                                                     Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Low Income Community Housing Support Pro (P130710)



       Community Level Implementation Committees and Social Audit Committee reporting works completed
       as satisfactory.
      96 Community sub-projects completed, not achieving the original target of 120.
      42 sub-projects completed using NCB method, not achieving the original target of 90.

Outcomes

      86,523 beneficiaries were reported to have improved their access to and quality of services, not
       achieving the original target of 120,000.

The “number of beneficiaries” while useful, was not sufficient as an outcome indicator on its own to show
what kind of outcomes with respect to access and quality of services of the project were achieved.

According to the ToC, the development of the community plans and the infrastructure upgrades (outputs)
were to lead to improved access to and quality of services. The shortage in the output indicator regarding the
completion of community subprojects resulted in a lower-than-expected achievement of the outcome indicator
(number of beneficiaries reporting improved access and quality of services).

Based on the level of achievement of the outputs and outcomes achieved, the efficacy of PDO1 is Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improved living conditions in selected low-income and informal settlements in designated municipalities in
Bangladesh

Revised Rationale
The ToC applies to the revised PDO1 in the same way as it applied to the original PDO1. The restructuring
reduced the target of the main outcome-level indicator, from 120,000 beneficiaries to a new target of 85,000.
The outreach activities undertaken in order to mobilize communities (input), the elaboration of plans by the
community for improved living conditions (input) and the leases executed to provide tenure security (input) all
have indeed led to the development of the community plans (output) and the completion of infrastructure
upgrades (output), which in turn have contributed substantially to the improved access to and quality of
services.

Several intermediate indicators were revised and others were added.

Outputs

In addition to the achievements reported under the original targets, the project achieved the following outputs
and outcomes against the revised targets:



                                                                                                  Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Low Income Community Housing Support Pro (P130710)



a) The following indicators were added at 1st restructuring:

      90% of beneficiary households report that they feel that project investments reflected their needs, of a
       target of 90%. Achieved.
      99% of beneficiaries self-report a significant improvement in their quality of life as a result of improved
       housing or services, of a target of 70%, target exceeded.
      42 sub-projects completed using NCB method, achieving the revised target of 42.

b) The following indicators underwent a revision of their targets at 1st restructuring:

      26,139 individuals benefitted from Community Upgrading Plans, of a revised target of 15,000, revised
       target exceeded.
      96 Community sub-projects completed, exceeding the revised target of 90.

Other outputs reported in the ICR that are not part of the RF (from a final evaluation commissioned by
the NHA)

      Reblocking in Kobdaspara radically improved the layout and living space of the entire settlement,
       which was flood-prone and subject to frequent severe inundation. 82% of beneficiaries report that
       flooding has been reduced, thanks to the habilitation and construction of 36 km of surface water
       drains.
      The provision of tenure security protects residents in Kobdaspara from eviction.
      The access to new sanitation facilities (695 latrines, 674 washrooms, 643 septic tanks, and 635 soak
       wells)
      New and upgraded community assets constructed in settlements are meant to enhance common
       spaces and support community engagement activities, and the new roads and footpaths improved
       accessibility and mobility within the 17 settlements.

Outcomes

86,523 beneficiaries were reported to have improved their access to and quality of services, achieving the
revised target of 85,000.

Other outcomes reported in the ICR that are not part of the RF (from a final evaluation commissioned
by the NHA and PKSF)

      Between 78% and 91% of respondents (depending on the evaluation report) report benefitting from
       improved sanitation;
      84% report reduced prevalence of severe health conditions such as diarrhea, enteritis, and worms.

The rating of the revised Objective 1 is Substantial as the revised outcome target was achieved, and the
additional evidence provided with respect to access and quality of services.



Revised Rating


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Low Income Community Housing Support Pro (P130710)



Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve shelter in selected low income and informal settlements in designated municipalities in
Bangladesh.

Rationale
ToC

The section of the ToC that specifically applies to the achievement of PDO2 is the following: the design of
new housing loan products (input) lead to the disbursement of housing loans (output) and the completion of
infrastructure upgrades (output) which in turn lead to improved shelter (outcome).

The outcome related to improved shelter is evaluated using the second PDO-level indicator, “Number of
beneficiaries in selected municipalities with improved housing”.

Outputs

       15,900,000 US$ in lines of microcredit were disbursed, achieving the original target of 16,000,000
        US$ (the ICR states that the difference is due to the changes in the exchange rates at appraisal and
        by project closure).
       2.15 % of the housing loan portfolio was at risk, exceeding the original target of 10%.
       62% of loans were disbursed to lower-income categories of clients, exceeding the original target of
        40%.

Additional outputs reported in the ICR but not included in the original RF, and hence without target
values were:

       A new market-based housing microfinance (HMF) loan product was created, pilot-tested, and
        disbursed to 1200 beneficiaries.
       Customized underwriting tools were developed to assess the creditworthiness of these income groups
        with no formal credit history, thereby creating an ecosystem to facilitate access to and uptake of
        housing microfinance.

Outcomes

       48,008 beneficiaries from the selected municipalities improved their housing, exceeding the original
        target of 40,000.

The design of the new housing loan product with low risk for the bank facilitated the disbursements of the
loan, which in turn made it possible for beneficiaries to improve their houses with infrastructure upgrades.

While all targets at output and outcome level were achieved or exceeded, the only indicator at outcome level
refers to number of beneficiaries. While this is a required outcome indicator, it is not sufficient on its own to



                                                                                                    Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Low Income Community Housing Support Pro (P130710)



demonstrate the nature of the benefits achieved. Achievement of the revised Objective 2 is Substantial with
moderate shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve shelter in selected low income and informal settlements in designated municipalities in
Bangladesh

Revised Rationale
At restructuring, the target of the PDO-level indicator "Number of beneficiaries in selected municipalities with
improved housing" was reduced from 40,000 to 20,000. The ICR reports that the reduction was the result of
new findings of a survey on household data. An exchange with the team on April 11 revealed additional
reasons for the reduction: the project was witnessing a greater demand for bigger loan sizes than what was
estimated at appraisal and given that the total amount allocated to the shelter credit line could not be
increased, the project anticipated a lower number of borrowers receiving loans. However, reality proved
differently: the number of borrowers was expanded anyhow due to the efficient redeployment of loan
repayments using a revolving fund approach, helped also by the project 18-month extension. The reduction in
the target was, in hindsight, unnecessary, and both the revised and the original targets were exceeded.

In addition to achieving the outputs and outcomes reported under the original objective above, the project
reported the following achievements against the revised objectives:

Outputs

The following indicators were added at 1st restructuring:

      6.18% of the households in completed settlements have taken housing loans, exceeding the revised
       target of 5%. (the purpose of adding this indicator was to measure convergence between improved
       living conditions and improved shelter).
      12,002 housing loans disbursed, exceeding the target of 4,500 loans

The following indicators were added at 2nd restructuring:

      712 borrowers have received emergency loan support from the risk management support fund
       (RMSF), exceeding the target of 550 borrowers.
      US$ 641,000 was the volume used of the risk management support fund, achieving the original target
       of US$ 640,498

Other outputs reported in the ICR that are not part of the RF (based on an evaluation commissioned by
the PKSF)



                                                                                                 Page 10 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Low Income Community Housing Support Pro (P130710)




                                  Structural integrity of the houses was enhanced using durable quality materials (brick and concrete)
                                    which caused an increase from 34 percent (baseline) to 71 percent of permanent houses.

                            Outcome

                            48,008 beneficiaries from the selected municipalities improved their housing, exceeding the revised target of
                            20,000.

                            Other outcomes reported in the ICR that are not part of the RF (based on an evaluation commissioned by
                            the PKSF)

                                  98% of beneficiaries reported improved safety.
                                  More than 88% of beneficiaries reported that house improvements provided a more conducive
                                   environment for children’s education.
                                  Improvements in housing have contributed to positive perceptions among beneficiaries on dimensions
                                   of well-being and socio-economic status (for 97% of beneficiaries interviewed).
                                  97% of beneficiaries interviewed perceive increased social status associated with house construction,
                                   repairs, and extensions. Beneficiaries relate social status with increased respect in the community and
                                   better marriage prospects for their children.

                            The design of the new housing loan led to the disbursement of the loans and their use for housing
                            improvements. The number of beneficiaries taking up loans and using them for house improvements
                            exceeded both the revised and original targets. While the outputs and outcome targets were achieved or
                            exceeded, there are two shortcomings: a) the reduction in the outcome indicator target at 1st restructuring
                            proved to be unnecessary, and b) there was a need to include additional indicators in addition to people
                            benefitting from increased housing. As shown by the reported outcomes that were not included in the RF,
                            other outcome-level indicators could have been included, to measure improved quality of living, sense of
                            security, sense of increased social status and better marriage prospects etc., giving a better measurement of
                            relevant project achievements at outcome level.

                            The rating for the revised Objective 2 is Substantial.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The Original Objective 1 is rated Modest and the Original Objective 2 is rated Substantial with moderate
                            shortcomings, giving an overall original Efficacy of Modest




                                                                                                                            Page 11 of 20
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             Low Income Community Housing Support Pro (P130710)




         Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
         Modest                                                   Low achievement
 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         The Revised Objective 1 is Substantial and The Revised Objective 2 is Substantial, giving an overall revised
         Efficacy of Substantial



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency

The ex-ante economic efficiency analysis undertaken at appraisal yielded an Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of
25%, which was modified to 21.5% after the restructuring processes. The IRR estimation used probabilistic with-
project and without-project scenarios, focusing on Components A, B, and C (which represented 80% of the IDA
financing). The calculation used quantifiable benefits weighted by component costs and assumed increments of
30% for increased property values under Component A, 50% for the rise in house rents under Component B,
and a 12% rate of return under Component C.

The ex-post analysis of economic efficiency uses the same methodology as during appraisal but updates
increments for increased property values and house rents based on findings from the final project evaluation.
The post-completion IRR is 17.6%, lower than the IRR estimated at the appraisal of 23% (ICR, table 3). The ICR
explains this was due to changes in financing, outcome targets, and the revised geographic scope of the project.
However, it remains higher than the acceptable IRR threshold of 12 percent for the sector.

The PKSF-led component C (market-based lending product) was profitable, yielding a net margin rate of 4%.
The total cost of activities implemented towards achieving the PDO of improved living conditions for 86,523
beneficiaries was US$34.55 million, yielding a per capita investment of US$400, which falls in the range of
similar urban upgrading projects (ICR, page 17).

Other operational and administrative factors affecting efficiency:

The delays in the planned timeframe (three restructurings, high staff turnover and 18-month extension) impacted
efficiency by increasing the project timeline and the administrative costs; yet the same extension enabled the
achievement of several additional outcomes, such as tenure security for 316 households, completion of two
kitchen markets; completion of three community development centers; completion of reblocking in the
Kobdaspara settlement; and the disbursement of HMF loans to an additional 6,002 households. The delays in
the completion of contracts also prolonged completion, although the ICR notes that this is not uncommon in
projects of this nature and the seasonal context of construction in Bangladesh.



                                                                                                         Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Low Income Community Housing Support Pro (P130710)



Overall, despite the slightly lower ex-post EIRR compared to ex-ante and 18 months delay, the economic
analysis showed enough positive yields as well as additional outcomes, as noted above, and is assessed to be
Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                              Rate Available?               Point value (%)              *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The following table presents the ratings during the two periods analyzed:

Criteria                                  Before first restructuring           After first restructuring
Relevance of PDO                                               High
Efficacy PDO1                              Modest                                         Substantial
Efficacy PDO2                               Substantial                                  Substantial
Overall Efficacy                            Modest                                       Substantial
Efficiency                                                             Substantial
Outcome ratings                         Moderately Unsatisfactory                        Satisfactory
Numerical value of outcome
                                                3                                          5
ratings
Disbursement                             US$12.98 million                            US28.7 million
Share of disbursement                           31%                                     69%
Weighted value of outcome
                                              0.93                                        3.45
rating
                                                                Moderately Satisfactory
Final outcome rating
                                                            0.93+3.45= 4,38 (rounded to 4)


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory

                                                                                                           Page 13 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Low Income Community Housing Support Pro (P130710)




7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following risks to the sustainability of the outcomes have been identified:

Community ownership of infrastructure and assets: It was expected that the CDCs (Community
Development Committees) would be strengthened in the process, but the capacity of the implementation
agencies did not allow for this to happen. The weaknesses in the level of involvement of the communities
during implementation may limit their perceived ownership of the new assets, and this may affect the
sustainability of the community's involvement in the ongoing management of infrastructure and services
developed by the project.

Government commitment: All public utilities (roads, drains and lighting) and some community assets
(schools) developed by the project have been formally handed over to the city municipality and relevant local
authorities for future management and maintenance, with adequate arrangements that ensure that the
communities access the facilities (ICR and exchange with TTL on April 11). There is a low-level risk that the
required budget allocations will not continue to happen in the future.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  During the appraisal, significant efforts were deployed for an adequate choice of towns for
  implementation. The team supported the preparation of technical studies on land tenure status,
  ownership arrangements, and the review of building codes to provide the analytical foundation for
  implementation. Technical design and fiduciary assessments were developed in detail, including the
  institutional assessments of the Community Development Committees (CDC). The design was prepared
  in a way that gave flexibility for future adaptability in a complex sector.

  Despite the identification of the risk of the NHA having insufficient institutional capacity and the measures
  proposed, the NHA would have benefitted from more specific technical expertise from the PMU in areas
  such as community mobilization, land management, M&E, and stakeholder engagement to manage
  better the scope of the program and the consultants’ quality of work. The ICR acknowledges that the
  project design was complex given the institutional capacity. Coordination challenges resulted in limited
  convergence between improvements to housing and living conditions during implementation. This focus
  could have been strengthened in the design. Overall, the Bank performance is rated as Moderately
  Satisfactory at entry.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Low Income Community Housing Support Pro (P130710)



 A total of 14 implementation support missions and three technical missions were carried out during the
 project period. A minimum of two missions were held each calendar year (with the exception of 2021 in
 which one of the missions was substituted by extended negotiations for a project restructuring). At least 10
 additional field visits were conducted outside of implementation support and technical missions to track the
 quality of progress. Monthly project coordination meetings were held. The WB team included international
 housing microfinance and engineering experts to strengthen the quality supervision and implementation
 support provided to the government.

 The team was candid in reporting during implementation. When the project’s rating was downgraded to
 moderately unsatisfactory due to the poor implementation of the NHA components, the team maintained
 the project’s problem status for 13 months during 2018-2019, until satisfactory achievement was
 demonstrated through the achievement of the one-year action plan designed to accelerate momentum. The
 second downgrade was maintained for 6 months in 2021 to reflect the slowdown in implementation
 progress largely due to COVID-19, and was followed by another project restructuring to make necessary
 course corrections.

 The team worked proactively with the GoB to help prioritize sub-projects that were feasible to complete,
 resolving contract management problems and supporting the consolidation of small contracts into larger
 ones to accelerate implementation and alleviate the load of contract management. The efficacy of
 supervision was however affected between 2020 and 2021, due to COVID travel restrictions. As a
 shortcoming, stronger focus could have been given to building more M&E capacity in the PMU, to support
 the deeper learning and fulfil the evaluation agenda planned in the design.

 Overall, the Bank performance at supervision is rated as Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 As a pilot initiative, the project envisaged a strong M&E component to understand better the potential for
 scaling up in the future. Provisions were made for a dedicated consulting firm to independently develop and
 manage an integrated monitoring framework for the program beyond the results framework, develop a peer
 learning program and knowledge exchange activities, and ensure the robust documentation of
 implementation experience and lessons learned. The PDO-level objective indicators were straightforward
 and aligned to project activities. Since the project settlements were to be determined during
 implementation, outcome targets were based on a best-case estimate of the number of beneficiaries the
 project was likely to reach. The targets were revised during project restructuring using national statistics.
 The results framework at design did not include intermediate indicators mapped to Component B and no



                                                                                                  Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Low Income Community Housing Support Pro (P130710)



 indicator to track the convergence between the shelter loans and the infrastructure upgrades. The first
 project restructuring addressed these gaps by adding new IR indicators and adjusting targets.



b. M&E Implementation
  During implementation, each of the two implementing agencies established a separate M&E structure to
  monitor activities under their respective components, comprising: (i) bi-annual progress reports for
  mission reviews; (ii) periodic field visits by dedicated M&E staff and field officers; and (iii) additional
  surveys and studies. Overall, these activities enabled regular and timely project monitoring. Both
  implementing agencies carried out third-party evaluations to provide independent assessments of
  outcomes.

  M&E under Component C was managed by PKSF through a Management Information System (MIS) that
  consolidated data on housing loans provided monthly by partner MFIs. The MIS's indicators allowed
  adequate tracking of the loans' performance. In 2021, a beneficiary survey was carried out to document
  the progress of shelter improvements for every borrower.

  M&E for components A, B, D and E under NHA was managed by a dedicated consultant in the PMU. A
  baseline was conducted in 2018 and household surveys were administered in 2020-2021 to assess
  COVID-19 impacts on beneficiaries.



c. M&E Utilization
  Project data was used proactively to make implementation adjustments and course corrections. In 2019,
  the geographical coverage of the housing loans was scaled from five to 13 cities based on evidence
  from pilot test results. The Management information system data also helped manage COVID-19
  impacts on the quality of loan portfolio. A timely MTR informed critical adjustments to deliver on the PDO
  and justified the revision of components and the specific budget allocation. The physical and financial
  progress of the contracts was tracked with sufficient frequency, and informed decisions about keeping
  the scope of work manageable while achieving intended results.

  While M&E implementation allowed proactive monitoring to inform implementation and course
  corrections, M&E capacity to support deeper knowledge exchange, community strengthening, peer
  learning and evaluation activities was limited, with the subsequent impact in M&E utilization.

  Overall, the M&E quality is rated as Substantial with minor shortcomings. The initial shortcomings were
  addressed to a large extent during implementation. Also, in addition to the regular progress reports and
  surveys, both implementing agencies carried out third-party evaluations to provide independent
  assessments of outcomes.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Low Income Community Housing Support Pro (P130710)




a. Safeguards
  At appraisal, the project was assigned an E&S assessment “Category B”. It triggered environmental
  safeguard policies: (a) OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment); (b) OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats); and (c)
  OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources). Although no involuntary resettlement was planned, OP/BP 4.12
  (Involuntary Resettlement) under WB’s social safeguards policy was triggered as a precautionary measure.

  E&S compliance was consistently rated Moderately Satisfactory throughout implementation. Site-specific
  Environmental Management Plans and Social Management Plans were developed and implemented by
  NHA at the level of the settlement. PKSF oversaw E&S compliance to ensure housing investments were
  sustainable, environment-friendly, and cost-effective. In Kazipara Settlement under Comilla City
  Corporation, and in Kobdaspara, households agreed to the voluntary dispossession of small strips of
  encroached land to facilitate public infrastructure upgrades. In May 2020, 316 households inhabiting the
  Kobdaspara settlement voluntarily relocated at their own cost to enable land redevelopment, with a
  commitment from NHA to return the site to households within 12 months. However, construction and civil
  works were significantly delayed, which caused concern and was flagged in the project aid memoires. The
  project provided a developed house foundation and plinth for every plot to compensate for the delay.
  Households also received a government-registered lease safeguarding their land rights. GoB decided to
  make further investments in the community by providing a one-story house for each household. Although
  communities have complained about the two-year delay in receiving their plots back, they also recognize
  that added investments provide a valuable asset and reduce out-of-pocket costs towards house
  construction.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM)

  The fiduciary risk at appraisal was considered substantial. It was lowered to moderate during
  implementation with the mitigation measure of a dedicated FM specialist. Both implementing agencies
  maintained satisfactory FM systems with timely documentation and submission of expenditures, quarterly
  financial reports, and withdrawal applications. NHA’s audit report had seven audit observations at the time
  that the ICR was drafted. Of these, three have been resolved (Email exchange with TTL on April 11) .
  Three of them are in the final stages of receiving clearance, and one of them is still under deliberation.
  Issues raised relate to: i) a mismatch in expenses shown in bills against expenses reflected in bank
  statements; ii) a discrepancy in payments made on contracts against the payment structure outlined in
  signed contracts; iii) contracts signed not aligning with the project appraisal document; and iv) objections
  to the fact that some of the investments in social and physical infrastructure did not adhere to the list
  specified in the government’s development project proposal. FM was rated as Moderately Satisfactory at
  project closing.

  Procurement

  The procurement risk assessment during preparation recommended significant assistance to NHA to
  manage the large volume of local contracts. The capacity building provided by WB accelerated the
  procurement of contracts. Challenges in retaining a dedicated procurement specialist during the first four


                                                                                                  Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Low Income Community Housing Support Pro (P130710)



   years of implementation adversely affected the management of contracts. Time lags in obtaining approvals
   delayed vendor payments and affected the commitment of contractors to complete works. Contract
   management issues were also compounded by recurring COVID-19 lockdowns and inflationary pressures.
   Contract management improved towards the end of the project once a dedicated procurement specialist
   was in place and a new Project Director, committed to resolving issues with contractors, had taken charge.
   The contracts that had encountered long delays and were pending completion at project closure, were
   concluded with government resources four months after project closure. Procurement was rated as
   Moderately Satisfactory at project closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   Gender

          276 out of the 316 land titles in Kopdaspara settlement were transferred under the sole ownership of
           the female household head, which improved the tenure security for women.
          Each of the 11,987 HMF loans included a woman from the household as a co-borrower, improving
           financial access of women and their empowerment. The project facilitated the participation of women
           in building a permanent financial asset, raising their social standing in the family and community. It
           also helped women build credit history by repaying a long-term loan, thereby making their
           participation in banking system easier in the future.

   Institutional Strengthening. The project contributed to the upskilling and capacity building on housing
   microfinance. PSKF and partner organizations expanded their portfolios with a new financial product,
   diversifying their portfolios previously dominated by group lending to include individual lending. They also
   developed capacity to underwrite loans for low-income households and manage risks associated with large
   loans.

   The project developed the NHA's capacity on alternative models of housing and service delivery. NHA’s
   capacity was strengthened on community-based models of development (the agency revised its by-laws
   under the project to execute its first community lease for the provision of tenure security), which serves as a
   roadmap for replication in the future to address tenure insecurity in other low-income informal communities.
   The borrower’s comments in the ICR (from NHA) are grateful to the bank for introducing the best
   engineering, social and environmental safeguard compliance practices for Poverty reduction (ICR, Annex V,
   page 43).

   Poverty reduction. The ICR notes that the provision of public services and financing to improve shelter
   and living conditions may have yielded positive outcomes in health, education, economic opportunities, and
   social inclusion, contributing to poverty reduction and shared prosperity, The data is based on beneficiary
   survey or borrower evaluation, and not independently verified or triangulated with other data sources.



11. Ratings

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Low Income Community Housing Support Pro (P130710)



                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                             Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Bank Performance               Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory   Shortcoming in Quality at Entry
                                                                              The initial shortcomings were
                                                                              adequately addressed during
                                                                              implementation. Outcomes were
Quality of M&E                 Modest               Substantial               assessed based on regular
                                                                              progress reports, surveys, and
                                                                              independent third-party
                                                                              evaluations.
Quality of ICR                 ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons are extracted from the ICR (rephrased):

Community mobilization is more likely to succeed when facilitating expertise is made
available. The project contracted a single D&S firm to provide TA on social mobilization, community
development, engineering design and construction supervision. The lack of an effective skills mix
impacted the quality of social mobilization and community engagement in favor of infrastructure
development.

The institutionalization and sustainability of community organizations are more likely to be
successful if a multidimensional approach is in place. Although community organizations had
been created and supported by a previous government project, additional investments were needed
to build their capacity but were not adequately addressed during project implementation. This
affected the quality of community processes and sustainability of community organizations., which
would have benefitted from decentralizing funding and financial ownership.

If the constraints of land and tenure security are not addressed, this may jeopardize any
efforts at improving poor housing and living conditions for the urban poor. The scarcity of
land and the tenure insecurity was a critical urban development challenge in this project in
Bangladesh, conditioning project success on the improvement of land transfer procedures (they took
7 years in Kobdaspara). The modernizing and simplification of land administration and acquisition
systems seems to be a prior key constraint to be addressed to allow for housing improvement
interventions to be relevant and successful.

IEG draws the following lesson:

When a strong focus is placed on M&E capacity and systems, pilot initiatives will likely yield
the operational learning capital expected from them. In this project, the knowledge production
was not as expected due to the lack of expertise and capacity to manage the required M&E.



                                                                                                Page 19 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Low Income Community Housing Support Pro (P130710)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR presents clearly and richly the evidence of results, applying adequately the methodology (split rating).
It provides in-depth analysis systematically. The ICR is results-oriented and properly structured. The discussion
on achievements is adequately balanced between reporting on the achievement of outcome indicators and
what the project achieved on the ground. It analyzed thoroughly the additional evidence (2 independent
evaluations for the 2 implementation agencies) to present a complete picture on efficacy. It provides good
coverage of the implementation experience. The ICR seeks to triangulate data to reach conclusions (using the
independent evaluations). The lessons are clear and appropriately respond to the key issues presented in the
report. The report is consistent with the guidelines.

Overall, the efficacy is rated as substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 20 of 20
