     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR FIP Environmental Cadastre (P143334)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023934

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P143334                                   BR FIP Environmental Cadastre

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Brazil                                    Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-19211                                  28-Feb-2020                                           4,728,509.05

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Jul-2015                               31-Dec-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           32,480,000.00                                    32,480,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             4,728,509.05                                     4,728,509.05

 Actual                                         4,728,509.05                                     4,728,509.05




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Dennis Peter Bours         Fernando Manibog             Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   Original PDO:

   The objectives of the Environmental Regularization of Rural Lands in the Cerrado of Brazil Project were:

   (a) To enhance the capacity of the Federative Republic of Brazil’s Ministry of Environment (Ministério do Meio
   Ambiente – MMA) and nine State Environmental Agency (SEAs) to receive, analyze and approve rural


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR FIP Environmental Cadastre (P143334)



   environmental cadastre entries and link them to the national system (Sistema Nacional de Cadastro
   Ambiental Rural - SICAR); and,

   (b) To support, in selected municipalities, landholding registration in the Rural Environmental Cadastre
   (Cadastro Ambiental Rural - CAR). (SCF Loan Agreement, Schedule 1, page 5)

   Current PDO:

   The objectives of the Environmental Regularization of Rural Lands in the Cerrado of Brazil Project were:

   (a) To enhance the capacity of the Federative Republic of Brazil's Ministry of Agriculture, livestock and Food
   Supply (Ministério da Agricultura, Pecuária e Abastecimento - MAPA), through Brazilian Forest Service
   (Serviço Florestal Brasileiro - SFB) and nine SEAs to receive, analyze and approve rural environmental
   cadaster entries and link them to SICAR; and,

   (b) To support, in selected municipalities, landholding registration in the Rural Environmental Cadastre
   (Cadastro Ambiental Rural - CAR).

   Note that the ICR further disaggregates the PDO statement, (1) to enhance the capacity of the responsible
   Ministry (MMA, later MAPA) to “receive” CAR entries and link them to SICAR, and (2) to enhance the capacity
   of nine SEAs to “receive, analyze and approve” CAR entries and to link them to the national SICAR. However,
   a footnote states that at the federal level there are also instances where there is a need to analyze and
   approve/reject CAR entries. Therefore, the enhancement of the capacity to receive, analyze and approve
   CAR entries at the federal and state level is seen as one objective, not two separate objectives for this review.

   This is a Strategic Climate Fund (SCF) Loan under the Forest Investment Program (FIP). The FIP is a
   targeted program of the SCF, which is one of two funds under the framework of the Climate Investment Funds
   (CIF) managed by the World Bank. At appraisal, the PDO was aligned with the Brazil Investment Plan (BIP),
   which was approved by the FIP Subcommittee in May 2012, and which seeks to assist landholders in
   implementing the Forest Code (Law 12,651/2012) and promote low carbon emissions agriculture
   technologies; recovery of degraded pastureland and implementation of integrated crop-livestock-forestry
   systems under Low Carbon Emissions Agriculture Plan (ABC Plan) in selected municipalities. The BIP
   consists of four projects, including this one.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Strengthening the State Environmental Agencies’ (SEAs) capacity to implement the
   CAR. (Estimated total cost US$ 17.28 million, of which FIP 35.5 percent; actual US$ 6.31 million, of which

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BR FIP Environmental Cadastre (P143334)



  FIP 13.2 percent). Investments under Component 1 aimed to increase the capacity of the SFB to receive
  cadaster entries directly in SICAR or from integrated state systems, and to increase the capacity of SEAs to
  receive, analyze and approve CAR entries and link them to SICAR.

  Component 2: Registration of Landholdings in Selected Municipalities. (Estimated total cost US$
  31.09 million, of which FIP 81 percent; actual US$ 3.77 million, of which FIP 100 percent). Activities in
  Component 2 were to support landholding registration in selected municipalities, by (a) publicizing cadaster
  procedures and mobilizing landholders, by supplying required geographic material (originally to
  municipalities, and subsequently to service companies and SEAs); (b) installing service desks in selected
  municipalities to guide landholders in completing landholding registration, and to assist them with the
  documentation required to file the registration with SEAs; and (c) providing assistance to smallholders in
  preparing and submitting their CAR entries through service companies. The component also conducted
  environmental assessments in each of the selected municipalities, and when necessary, developed plans
  for the recovery of degraded areas of small landholdings.

  Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation. (Estimated total cost US$1.61 million,
  of which FIP 71.76 percent; actual US$ 0.12 million, of which FIP 100 percent). This financed the technical
  and administrative management of the Project, including monitoring and evaluation activities and the
  building of synergies between the Project and other projects under the BIP, as well as with other initiatives
  in the Cerrado Biome, with the aim of securing cost-effective solutions.

  Note that the reductions between appraisal and actual cost did not result in a reduction in the scope of
  activities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The total actual cost is about one-fifth of cost at appraisal. The total project cost at appraisal
  was estimated at US$ 49.98 million. The actual project cost at closing was US$ 10.21 million.

  Financing: The project was financed by a loan of US$ 32.48 million and counterpart funds of US$ 17.5
  million, of which US$ 4.73 million was disbursed World Bank funding and US$ 5.48 million in non-Bank
  funding.

  Borrower/Recipient contribution: At appraisal, the Borrower’s contribution was estimated at US$ 17.5
  million, with – after two partial loan cancellations (see below) - US$ 5.48 million disbursed at closure.

  Project Dates: The Project was approved on July 21, 2015, and became effective on August 18, 2017. The
  Mid Term Review (MTR) was conducted on April 9, 2021. The loan was to close originally on February 28,
  2020, but was extended by an additional 34 months to close on December 31, 2022.

  The Project was restructured three times:

  First restructuring, September 2019: The PDO was revised to reflect the change of the responsible federal
  ministry from MMA to MAPA, and to specify the new executing agency by adding “through Forest Service”.
  This change was reflected in an amendment to the Loan Agreement of September 2019. Part of the loan,
  US$ 8 million (a 25percent reduction), was cancelled due to the considerable devaluation of the Brazilian



                                                                                                      Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR FIP Environmental Cadastre (P143334)



   Real compared to US Dollar and the considerably lower actual average cost per registration of
   landholdings. Remaining funds were reallocated.

   Second restructuring, December 2019: The Project was restructured to reflect a change of 22 months in
   loan closing date from February 28, 2020, to December 31, 2021, due to a low disbursement rate.

   Third restructuring, December 2021: Part of the loan, US$ 16.2 million (a reduction of 66 percent), was
   cancelled due to the considerable devaluation of the Brazilian Real compared to US Dollar and the actual
   average cost per registration of landholdings being 29 percent of the cost estimated at appraisal. Remaining
   funds were reallocated. The Project was restructured to reflect a change of 12 months in loan closing date
   from December 31, 2021, to December 31, 2022, due to Covid-19 related cumulative delays.

   Each of the three Project restructurings were at level two and none involved substantive changes to the
   PDO, or outcomes. The restructurings did not affect the original Theory of Change.

   Split Rating: A split rating does not apply because the change in PDOs only reflected a change in the
   agency responsible for project implementation, and targets became more ambitious as the Project
   progressed.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context. The value of Brazil's agricultural exports, including processed products, has
grown an average of 9.4 percent a year from 2000 to 2021 and accounts for 37 percent of Brazil's total
exports. At the time of appraisal, Brazil ranked third among the world’s major agricultural exporters, fourth
for food products and second for bio-ethanol production. Much of this agricultural growth occurred over the
decade before appraisal, and much of it has taken place in the Brazilian savanna, the Cerrado Biome. The
Cerrado Biome, located in central Brazil, covers nearly one quarter, or 2.04 million km2, of the country, with
a mosaic of 23 types of vegetation, and is mostly occupied by private landholdings. The rapid expansion of
agriculture in the Cerrado Biome has caused natural vegetation to be converted to alternative land uses
and has also increased the use of slash-and-burn as an agricultural practice. The clearing and burning of
native vegetation, followed by cultivation of the soil in the process of conversion of the Cerrado’s
agricultural areas, results in a reduction of carbon stocks in the soil and an increase in greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions.

When the Project was appraised, Brazil went through a tumultuous political time. The president was
narrowly re-elected in 2014 and impeached in 2016. The vice-president took over, and after two years of
strikes, new elections took place in 2018. The US$ 32.48 million Forest Investment Program Loan was
approved by the Board on July 7, 2015, during a very complex political period, where all Senate approval
processes were put on hold. As a result, the agreement was only signed on May 22, 2017 and became
effective on August 18, 2017

Consistency with Government Strategies/Priorities. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with Brazil’s
National Plan on Climate Change, launched in December 2008, the National Policy on Climate Change
Law, enacted in December 2009, and the Brazilian Forest Code (Law 12.651 of 2012). The National Policy

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR FIP Environmental Cadastre (P143334)



on Climate Change, which includes the National Plan as one of its instruments, defines the objectives and
guidelines for domestic operations in Brazil that deal with climate change. It legally defines Brazil’s
voluntary commitment (Copenhagen UNFCCC COP15, 2009) to reduce emissions by 36.1 percent to 38.9
percent in projected emissions by 2020, and visible in Brazil’s Second National Communication to the
UNFCCC (2010). Brazil’s set of initiatives involving emissions mitigation includes combating deforestation
and initiating alternative processes in the agricultural sector, among others. The National Plan on Climate
Change states that Brazil aims to achieve a 40 percent reduction in deforestation in the Cerrado from the
1999–2008 average (15,700 km²). The National Policy also seeks to promote adaptation measures to
reduce the adverse effects of climate change and environmental, social and economic vulnerability. The
Brazilian Forest Code requires that all private rural landholdings maintain a percentage of native vegetation
as Legal Reserves, and it also obliges landholders to register their landholdings in the CAR.

At completion, the PDO continued to align with Brazil’s climate commitments. Brazil adopted the Paris
Agreement and submitted its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to the UNFCCC in 2016 and its
Updated NDC in 2020 to support its adaptation commitments and continued economic and social
development agendas. Brazil recommitted to its first NDC in 2023 and raised its ambitions to reduce its
GHG emissions by 48.4 percent below 2005 levels by 2025. Brazil has also committed to addressing
climate change impacts on the country’s sectors environment, forestry, agricultural and livestock, energy,
and health sectors. Brazil submitted its Fourth National Communication to the UNFCCC in 2020.

Consistency with Bank strategy. The Project’s objectives aligned well with the World Bank Group’s twin
global goals of shared prosperity and poverty reduction. At appraisal, the PDO was also aligned with the
Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy for Brazil (CPS, FY2012-FY2015); specifically Objective 4, Improving
sustainable natural resource management and climate resilience, and its sub-objectives (1) to expand
sustainable agriculture and (2) to improve environmental management, biodiversity, conservation and
climate change mitigation. These two sub-objectives were aligned with the Government of Brazil’s Low
Carbon Agriculture Program, its National Policy for Climate Change as well as with action plans to prevent
and control deforestation. (IEG, CLR FY12-15 Review) The CPS specifically mentions mainstreaming the
Amazon Framework approach to conservation with development and opportunities to the sensitive Cerrado
savannah region of Central Brazil. The Amazon Framework approach emphasizes conservation,
sustainable natural resource management, land tenure regulation, low-impact agriculture, and a strong
focus on public policies for improved environmental management, licensing, and access to basic services.

At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF,
FY2018-FY2023), which featured a development challenge for improved livelihoods and economic
opportunities through the smarter management of Brazil’s natural resources and the better mitigation of
environmental pollution and the risk of natural disasters. Three principal issues in natural resource
management stand out in the CPF and affect the bottom 40 percent of the income distribution directly and
indirectly through their effects on growth and incomes: (1) access to land and secure property rights, (2)
water management, and (3) more broadly, environmental management.

Level of ambition of the PDO. The PDO' was sufficiently ambitious. Its targets were consistently increased
during Project restructurings. The project aimed to strengthen the institutional capacity to receive, analyze,
and approve CAR entries of the nine SEAs and SFB, which would have contributed to high number of CAR
entries over time.

Summary of Relevance. The Project’s objectives aligned well with The Government of Brazil’s strategies
and priorities and the World Bank strategies and identified development challenges. The relevance of PDOs


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BR FIP Environmental Cadastre (P143334)



               remains high at the time of Project closing. It remains high in the context of the Bank’s Country Partnership
               Framework (FY18-23) as well as Brazil’s Nationally Designated Contributions (NDCs). The relevance of the
               objectives is rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Objective 1: To enhance the capacity of the Federative Republic of Brazil's Ministry of Agriculture, livestock
                             and Food Supply (Ministério da Agricultura, Pecuária e Abastecimento - MAPA), through Brazilian Forest
                             Service (Serviço Florestal Brasileiro - SFB) and nine SEAs to receive, analyze and approve rural
                             environmental cadaster entries and link them to SICAR.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC) for the Project:

                             PDO ToC: The Project financed the development of the SICAR computer system, the connection to and
                             integration of State systems with the SICAR, and the training of SEA teams to receive CAR entries, to
                             analyze and approve them, and to supervise communication and mobilization campaigns. Note that the PAD
                             did not include a ToC. Based on the results framework and project strategy discussed in the PAD, a
                             retrospective ToC could be developed, and the ICR did provide one (ICR, Page 11).

                             The ICR’s ToC demonstrates that SFB and SEA capacity increase are intermediate outcomes, feeding into
                             the registration of landholdings in the CAR. In the TOC, there were two paths to contribute to the achievement
                             of the Project’s intended impact. The first path was to enhance the capacity of SFB and nine SEAs to receive,
                             analyze, and approve rural environmental cadaster entries and link them to SICAR. The second path was to
                             support landholding registration in the CAR. Both paths eventually lead to the intended longer-term impact:
                             landholdings comply with the Forest Code and practice sustainable land and forest management, resulting in
                             a reduction in net GHG emissions and biodiversity losses.

                             The underlying PDO ToC assumptions included (i) Landholders are aware of their legal, financial, and
                             fiduciary obligations and interests in registering their CAR entry; (ii) once CAR entry is registered, landholders
                             will be more aware of the opportunities to enforce the Forest Code; (iii) while medium and large landholders
                             need little specific support to register, they need information on what to register for, why, and how to do this;
                             (iv) communication and mobilization campaigns will generate interest in registering the CAR entry among
                             landholders; (v) contracted professional technical services will prove effective and efficient in assisting small
                             farmers and traditional communities (particularly quilombos) to register; (vi) adequate digital geographic and
                             land use and/or tenure data will be available, enabling professional services operatives to carry out their work;


                                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR FIP Environmental Cadastre (P143334)



and (vi) state governments are willing to cooperate and will accept assistance to implement the Forest Code,
through the CAR entry. The ToC also applies to Objective 2.

Outputs:

The SICAR computer system was deployed with associated software modules and user interfaces for SEAs,
including the development of the dynamic analysis and environmental regularization modules. The project
supported the development and introduction of Landholder’s Central Access Window for all landholders to
access the SICAR from anywhere in the country and ensured state CAR data was synchronized with SICAR.
State CAR systems were synchronized with the national SICAR, and protocols and procedures were put in
place to deal with the demand for CAR entries.

Training activities raised the capacity of the SFB and SEAs working with CAR entries and analysis, and SFB
started to build institutional capacity by training other SICAR users in the system. The ICR notes that this
benefited all 26 states and the Federal District, as recorded under PDO indicator 1 (27 institutions plus
SFB). The project trained 451 SEA staff to use SICAR, and to analyze and validate data against the target of
200. Moreover, 200 women received this training, exceeding the target by almost seven times.

The Project had originally intended to support the preparation of rehabilitation plans in 500 smallholdings
where the land had been degraded. While this activity was not carried out, the Project did support the
development of an Environmental Regularization model in SICAR that helped state authorities enforce
compliance with the Environmental Regularization Program (PRA) and identify options and technological
solutions to address environmental liabilities.

Outcomes:

SFB and the SEAs increased their institutional capacities to manage the SICAR to receive, analyze and
approve CAR entries and to link them to the national SICAR. The evidence of increased capacity in the
Forest Service is in the number of CAR entries received and stored in the eleven Cerrado states and the
country as a whole (almost 7.0 million holdings over more than 650 million hectares). These numbers are not
indicators of this project and are not meant to be attributed solely to this Project but demonstrate the
substantial growth in SICAR’s capacity to receive CAR entries to which this project contributed.

The ICR notes that the long-term impact is that landholdings must comply with the Forest Code and practice
sustainable land and forest management (ICR, page 11). It is questionable whether a landholder who is
knowingly not in compliance (for example, by practicing slash-and-burn agriculture) would opt for landholding
registration in the CAR. The risk could be that SICAR becomes a registration for those in compliance. The
team clarified that environmental compliance, and the application of sustainable management practices were
not an outcome indicator within the project’s implementation period since "in June 2022, the status of CAR
analysis and validation showed a coverage of less than 3 percent of the total registered, and it would take
another 10 years to complete this step". The long-term impact also applies to Objective 2.

The PDO outcome level indicator (number of Government institutions provided with capacity-building to
improve management of forest resources) is inadequate to measure outcome-level achievements, given the
number of institutions reached or targeted does not capture the quality or level of increases of their
institutional capacities, and whether that increase is sufficient to support the institutions to manage the
SICAR, to receive, analyze and approve CAR entries and to link them to the national SICAR. The ICR notes
that evidence of "increased SEA capacity of SEAs is demonstrated by the provision of training to SEA staff,

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR FIP Environmental Cadastre (P143334)



the adoption of protocols and procedures for handling CAR entries and their analysis, and by providing digital
thematic maps and the software to use them". Even though these are important, they are output-oriented. The
analysis and processing of CAR entries are still underway, and evidence of enhanced capacity may only
materialize in the medium term. Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving Objective 1 is rated modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Objective 2: To support, in selected municipalities, landholding registration in the Rural Environmental
Cadastre (Cadastro Ambiental Rural - CAR).

Rationale
The TOC assessment discussed under Objective 1 also applies to Objective 2. In addition, the Project
financed the contracting of technical services to contact, survey and register smallholdings, and it financed
communication and mobilization campaigns to inform and mobilize landholders. The assumptions outlined
under Objective 1 also apply here.

Outputs:

Technical services were contracted to contact, survey and register small holders, providing assistance in
preparing and submitting their CAR entries, and campaigns were carried out to inform and mobilize
landholders. One of the intended outputs was to install service desks in selected municipalities to guide
landholders in completing landholding registration. The ICR does not provide information as to whether and
how many service desks were established.

Outcome:

The outcome of rural holdings in selected municipalities have been registered in CAR was substantially
achieved.

Direct Project beneficiaries, i.e., small landholders in a selected municipality registered in the state or national
cadaster system, in accordance with applicable federal and state legal norms (number and female
percentage). The actual beneficiaries at 321,583 was 200 percent of the revised target of 160,600. The
indicator was not gender disaggregated.

Land area where sustainable land management (SLM) practices were adopted as a result of the Project, i.e.,
land areas of small, medium and large landholdings in a selected municipality registered in the state or
national cadaster system, in accordance with applicable federal and state legal norms (ha). The actual
achieved was 26.3 million hectares which was 88 percent of the revised target of 30 million hectare.

Medium and larger landholdings in a selected municipality registered in the state or national cadaster system,
in accordance with applicable federal and state legal norms; (number and female percentage). The actual


                                                                                                      Page 8 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BR FIP Environmental Cadastre (P143334)



                            was 17.925 which was 90 percent of the revised target of 20,000. The indicator was not gender
                            disaggregated.

                            The ICR also attempted to assess the difference between land area registered in the Project target area
                            against other areas (applicable to both objectives) to demonstrate the attribution of the project in terms of
                            CAR registration. A analysis of the land area registered, prior and post-project compares the 199 targeted
                            municipalities with 50 randomly selected (non-Project) municipalities in the Cerrado. The increase in total land
                            registered in SICAR during the Project period relative to pre-project registration was 4.5 times in 195 target
                            municipalities versus 3.3 times in the 42 control municipalities, meaning roughly 75 percent of registrations
                            would have happened without the Project. However, the relatively small size of the control group in the
                            counterfactual analysis might lead to less precise estimates and greater variability in outcomes. Uneven
                            budget allocation ratios also affect generalizability; especially with a control group that is disproportionately
                            smaller, the findings may be less representative of the population compared to a more balanced
                            allocation. Two counterfactual analyses were completed and showed that the results presented by the Project
                            are robust to the risk of endogeneity. The ICR concludes that because of this, “the observed results and
                            impacts are consistently attributable to the Project.” (ICR, Annex 7, Paragraph 9) While a low risk of
                            endogeneity can strengthen the case for a causal relationship between two variables, it doesn't guarantee
                            causation on its own and other factors like omitted variable bias, or reverse causality could still influence
                            results.

                            Overall, the efficacy of the second objective is rated as Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project’s efficacy in achieving Objective 1 is rated Modest: while there were increased numbers of CAR
                            entries, project attribution was weakened by the inadequate outcome-level indicator of enhanced capacity
                            and the ICR’s insufficient evidence that most of the registrations would not have happened without the
                            project’s capacity-building efforts. Objective 2 exceeded or substantially achieved the targets

                            The overall efficacy is substantial with moderate shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency

                                                                                                                               Page 9 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BR FIP Environmental Cadastre (P143334)



Ex-ante:

      The PAD references a preparatory report, named “Economic/financial and co-benefits analysis, and
       mitigation potential analysis of the Project: Environmental Regularization of Rural Lands in the Cerrado
       of Brazil.” (Annex 6, Paragraph 15). That report does not provide any specific cost-benefit analysis but
       states: “When considering a project as rational, one has to consider the costs against the benefits or
       effectiveness of actions to reach a set of measures that maximize the expected results for a specific
       public policy. In this case, it means strengthening the main instrument for environmental restoration
       under the new Forest Code, the CAR. By choosing key municipalities in the Cerrado Biome, both in
       terms of deforestation status and importance of agricultural production, the Project shows a strong
       economic rationale both for providing the many socio-economic benefits arising from the CAR, as well as
       accelerating the implementation of this instrument at a crucial time to the implementation of the new
       forest code.”
      The report does not define co-benefits but provides a list of what it sees as environmental, socio-
       economic and institutional co-benefits. It does not quantify or monetize the benefits it lists as co-benefits.
      With a focus on the carbon removals efficiency of the Project, the report calculates the expected carbon
       removals due to CAR implementation and concludes that, when using the spatialized emission factors of
       the LCCS Brazil, total removals total between 1.54 and 1.76 billion tons of CO2. This is extremely high,
       since carbon emissions from deforestation in the Cerrado Biome in 2005 were no more than 275 million
       tCO2, less than 20 percent of the carbon removals to be achieved by this Project.
      The PAD’s assumptions and findings on the Project’s economic rationale are weak, and the referenced
       report is not a rigorous economic analysis.

Ex-post:

      The ICR notes (Annex 4) that “the economic analysis at appraisal did not establish the viability of the
       Project, but only to indicate priority areas with a higher benefit of intervention. Thus, the appraisal
       analysis cannot be repeated ex-post with estimated values of costs and benefits. It is, however, possible
       to assess the likelihood of economic viability under different assumptions of farmer behavior. Note that
       there are as yet no tests of the likely behavioral response of farmers in term of land use after CAR
       registration.” (ICR, Annex 4, Paragraph 3)
      The ICR explains (Annex 4, Paragraph 4) the ex-post cost–benefit analysis to be the reduction of GHG
       emissions relative to a scenario without the Project, and an increase in absorption (sequestration) of
       CO2 by regenerated vegetation. One of the Project’s outcomes was the registration of rural holdings in
       CAR. The Forest Code prohibits clearing legal reserve (RL) and permanent protection areas (APP), but
       not of a holding’s other areas. The desired impact of the CAR registration is farmers’ compliance with the
       law’s stipulations relative to a baseline scenario in which farmers feel less obliged or not obliged to
       maintain the native vegetation on RLs and APPs. Where vegetation cover in RLs and APPs has already
       been cleared, the law mandates restoration of that cover over a period of 20 years.
      The Project reached or surpassed most intended outcomes with around 20 percent of the appraisal cost
       estimate.

Results for avoided deforestation. The CAR registration has an extremely high net present value of
incremental benefits, even at very low rates of avoided land clearing. The net present value (NPV) of
incremental benefits (i.e., with project net benefits versus without project net benefits) is highly positive, at about
US$52 million over 20 years and at 10 percent discount rate, even under the most pessimistic assumption
regarding change in landholder behavior with the Project, namely that the clearing of RL and APP would be


                                                                                                         Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR FIP Environmental Cadastre (P143334)



avoided on only 1 percent of the relevant area. This is due in part to the high amount of emissions released by
one hectare cleared in the Cerrado (221 tons of CO2 equivalent per ha), and the high carbon prices
recommended by the World Bank for use in such analyses. Emissions of one hectare would be worth about
US$8,862 under the recommended price for the year 2022. Total costs, including the cost of analyses of CAR
entries and assumed costs of monitoring over 10 years, do not exceed US$8 per hectare of RL and APP
registered. The calculation included costs that were not counted as project cost, such as the cost of maps
acquired in 2015, the cost of analysis of CAR entries (between 2023 and 2026), and the cost of monitoring of
landholder behavior and law enforcement (taken as US$ 2 million per state and year after 2022). (ICR, Annex 4,
Paragraphs 5-11)

Administrative and institutional efficiency. The following aspects of design helped with efficiency: the
selection of a single, effective, and capable executing agency (SFB), the central procurement of all goods and
services to be used by the SEAs, the adoption of the “sweeping” methodology to cover large numbers of
holdings in a given municipality by topographic service companies. The active lead role played by the SFB,
effectively coordinating and supporting the participation of SEAs, was also essential for efficient implementation.
Efficiency in implementation was further enhanced by the relatively low turnover of Forest Service staff working
on the Project and their sustained commitment to the work.

Reduced Project costs stemmed from factors including a significant drop in land registration costs relative to
appraisal estimates. Over the project’s time the unit cost of landholding registration dropped significantly: The
actual average cost per registration of landholdings in the selected municipalities was R$201 per landholding,
against R$688 at appraisal, a reduction of 71 percent. The actual average cost of land area registered was
about R$2.60 per hectare, against an estimate of R$ 7.25 per hectare, a reduction of 64 percent. Actual costs
included expenses made with retroactive financing before May 2017, but not the substantial expense of R$23
million (US$7.1 million) for satellite images in 2015, as this occurred more than one year before loan signing. If
this expense had been included, total spending would have been US$17.3 million, or 34 percent of the appraisal
estimate. (ICR, Paragraphs 53-54)

Summary of efficiency assessment: Despite the absence of an ERR or FRR ex-ante or ex-post, an avoided
deforestation NPV calculation provides a highly positive picture. With the Project able to reach most intended
outcomes with around 20 percent of the appraisal cost estimate, the project's efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR FIP Environmental Cadastre (P143334)



* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives is rated High. Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial, with shortcomings noted on
capacity building aspects at the level of the SEAs. Efficiency is rated Substantial, while noting the lack of
comparability between the PAD and ICR economic analyses.

Based on the assigned ratings for the three outcome criteria, and with the capacity building and attribution
weaknesses taken into account, the outcome of the Project is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (Paragraph 86) states that there is a low risk to the outcomes. The Project’s achievements in
providing an improved, publicly accessible SICAR system is solid and not threatened. The systems
supported by the Project (CAR entries, geospecialized information, electronic tools, software) are in the
SICAR cloud servers now, and have little risk of being lost. The Project was successful in enhancing the
institutional capacity to analyze and formulate recovery plans through the Environmental Regularization
Module in SICAR, for those landholdings currently registered and validated.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  As highlighted in section 3, the Project was well aligned with Government Strategies and Priorities, the
  Bank’s Strategy, as well as the Brazil Investment Plan (BIP) under the Forest Investment Program (FIP)
  managed by the World Bank. At the time of Project preparation, the project was designed with a sound
  concept, a highly relevant PDO, and in line with national goals and policies that had just been revised,
  approved and started to be effective.

  According to the ICR (Paragraph 81), technical, financial, economic, and fiduciary aspects were
  adequately considered; environmental and social development aspects were thoroughly reviewed and
  considered; institutional aspects, and implementation arrangements were well designed; and risk
  assessment was done in a holistic and strategic manner. The Bank team facilitated preparation and
  appraised the Project to increase the likelihood of achieving planned development outcomes and was
  coherent in terms of the Bank’s fiduciary role.




                                                                                                      Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR FIP Environmental Cadastre (P143334)



  According to the PAD (pp.11-12), the Bank team identified capacity constraints on the side of the
  responsible federal ministry as high. Measures to mitigate capacity risk were put in place, which include
  qualified procurement staff, procurement packaging, and a dedicated Special Bidding Committee.

  The project overestimated the costs of the registration services to be performed by contracted firms, and
  the cost of environmental assessments in municipalities. As CAR entry gathered pace, experience, and
  scale, and as the services provided by contracted companies became more routine, the unit cost of CAR
  entry dropped significantly in the bidding processes and other reasons.

  There were also shortcomings in M&E design and data collection methods, particularly regarding
  indicators of capacity enhancement, indicator definitions, and comparability of measurement over time.

  Quality at Entry is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 During implementation, the Bank supported the Project closely, including through a Bank team based in
 Brasília, where the SFB is also located. (ICR, Paragraph 82) The ICR notes that the Bank team was
 responsive and proactive throughout supervision and during restructuring to facilitate needed changes to
 improve implementation pace and M&E performance. Missions and meetings were conducted regularly
 with adequate skills mix. Information to Bank management through Implementation Status & Results
 Reports (ISRs) was regular and transparent (14 ISRs recorded). Project ISRs provided consistent
 information and a holistic view of the implementation status of project components, and Bank management
 promptly and thoroughly reviewed and commented on all ISRs.

 The Bank performed a detailed Midterm Review (MTR) in 2019/2020 and discussed the MTR findings and
 recommendations with the SFB. As one outcome, the Bank spelled out the alternatives to government of
 either closing the Project in December 2021 or continuing through 2022. The Bank pointed out the
 importance of adequate budget allocations for continuation, to make good use of the large amount of loan
 funds available and supported the preparation of adequate transition arrangements for post-loan closing
 activities. (ICR, Paragraph 84).64. Effective implementation relies on timely federal budget allocations but
 unpredictable financial flows throughout project implementation complicated the disbursement flow and
 procurement pace.

 Even though some of the targets were revised during implementation, the shortcomings in M&E design
 were not addressed adequately. There were shortcomings in M&E implementation. The ICR notes that the
 scope (selection of municipalities) varied over time, and this was not always made clear in the
 reporting. Progress reports usually contained cumulative indicator values for the semester under review
 although they were not always disaggregated by municipality which affected decision making.

 Quality of Supervision is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR FIP Environmental Cadastre (P143334)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 M&E Design. An explicit Theory of Change (ToC) was not included in the PAD as it was not required at the
 time of project appraisal. Indicators were specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and time-bound. While
 the logic of the results framework was sound in the moving from activities to outputs and results, it did not
 provide sufficient information to guarantee proving a cause-and-effect relationship. There were
 shortcomings in the adequacy of indicators for measuring enhanced capacity.

 The M&E design consisted of the PDO, the mentioned indicators, and the assignment of monitoring and
 reporting functions to SFB and SEAs. SFB, responsible for Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), was to
 provide semi-annual progress reports to the Bank. SEAs were charged with carrying out monitoring and
 providing reports to their respective states. Given the specific jurisdictions of the SFB (federal) and the
 SEAs (state-level), their responsibilities make sense towards aggregated (federal-level) M&E reporting and
 state-level monitoring.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E Implementation. The M&E system was created mainly by using SICAR as the principal data
  source. Aspects of gender response to CAR registration were not included because data disaggregated
  by gender were not recorded in the SICAR system. Indicators were measured by the SFB directly from
  the SICAR entries and consistently reported in ISRs. Indicators on staff training were received from the
  SEAs and reported by the SFB in the ISRs.

  The ICR notes that the scope (selection of municipalities) varied over time, and this was not always made
  clear in the reporting. Progress reports usually contained cumulative indicator values for the semester
  under review although they were not always disaggregated by municipality which affected decision
  making.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR notes (Paragraph 72) that progress reports usually contained cumulative indicator values for
  the semester under review although they were not always disaggregated by municipality. For example,
  when progress reports stated that targets had already been exceeded, they failed to clarify that this no

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR FIP Environmental Cadastre (P143334)



  longer referred to the originally selected municipalities. According to the ICR, (Paragraph 74) M&E were
  integrated into the Project’s decision-making processes. SICAR’s available data were applied by SFB to
  monitor and report progress to the Bank. However, there were shortcomings in the access of SICAR’s
  data which ended up generating difficulties and delays in the collection of the information necessary to
  monitor the results. Difficulties in measuring certain indicators were discussed by the SFB with the Bank
  and led to adjustments in restructurings.

  Quality of M&E is rated as Modest. There were some shortcomings in the adequacy of outcome
  indicators for measuring enhanced capacity, as well as shortcomings in M&E data collection and
  reporting.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Three safeguards policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural
   Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), and Forests (OP/BP 4.36). The Project was classified as environmental Category B.
   The nature and scale of the proposed investments in environmental regularization were not expected to
   have significant adverse impacts. At appraisal, the Project was expected to positively impact the
   effectiveness and efficiency of federal- and state-level environmental management. Project activities should
   lead to positive impacts on natural habitats, such as their conservation and recovery. The Project aimed to
   contribute to the conservation of the Cerrado Biome, and as such was expected to have a positive impact
   by avoiding deforestation and by maintaining natural vegetation in parts of privately owned rural
   landholdings, thus protecting the environmental services and values of natural vegetation.

   During project preparation, the team carried out a detailed assessment of the potential impacts on private
   landholders from registering their landholdings in the CAR system. The assessment concluded that the
   legal framework gives special treatment to small landholdings or family agricultural landholdings,
   settlements, agrarian reform projects, and traditional communities that make collective use of their
   territories. The project provided technical assistance to landholders in their cadastral statements for these
   landholdings. Medium and large landholders will not receive direct assistance in preparing their entries in
   the CAR but could benefit from the service desks being set up in the States and Municipalities where they
   can receive guidance, ask questions, and request geographic information.

   Compliance with Environmental Safeguards. According to the ICR (Paragraph 76) the Forest Service
   prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework, and made it publicly available, including
   social and environmental assessments, to provide guidance on potential issues that might arise during
   Project implementation. No issues of negative environmental impacts of noncompliance were raised or
   detected, and the exit rating at closing was Satisfactory. The SICAR and landholdings enrollment in the
   system as a result of the Project delivered positive impacts on natural habitats. The data and system are
   being used to monitor natural forests and enhance the focus of public policies on Forest Code
   requirements.



                                                                                                    Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR FIP Environmental Cadastre (P143334)



   Compliance with Social Safeguards. According to the ICR (Paragraph 77), a Grievance Redress
   Mechanism was in place at the responsible federal ministry (MMA and MAPA) through its Ombudsman,
   which was part of the Federal Government Ombudsman-General since August 2019. Thus, it was not the
   Forest Service itself that was directly responsible for receiving complaints. Citizens could access the
   Integrated Ombudsman and Access to Information Platform to register complaints and grievances online.
   The Ombudsman's Office received no complaints but did receive technical and other queries regarding the
   functioning of SICAR. The Project responded appropriately.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. Financial management (FM) was rated Satisfactory at Project closure and the FM
   risk rating was consistently moderate throughout implementation. The Borrower (specifically the Forest
   Service) performed satisfactorily in terms of financial management and FM arrangements were deemed
   satisfactory in the most recent assessment (2022). The Project Management Unit had competent
   personnel; the budget process worked well; control systems and the flow of funds were adequate; and the
   accounting and financial reporting system and external auditing arrangements met World Bank standards.
   All Interim Financial Reports received during the life of the Project were considered acceptable and were
   generally submitted within the agreed deadlines. There were no cases of ineligible expenses in the project.
   All audit reports submitted so far were acceptable to the Bank. (ICR, Paragraph 78)

   Procurement. Project procurement was rated Satisfactory at closing. (ICR, Paragraph 79) The Project did
   not face any major procurement challenges. Procurement was undertaken in accordance with Bank
   regulations and procedures without significant difficulties, although sometimes affected by budget
   constraints, particularly in the early stages of implementation. The SFB, with support from the Bank,
   created a set of carefully designed measures and mechanisms to strengthen procurement capacity and
   accelerate Project implementation. The measures included the establishment of a Special Bidding
   Committee solely dedicated to meeting the Project's procurement needs. A technical cooperation
   agreement with the IICA Interamerican Institute for Agricultural Cooperation (IICA), signed in December
   2020, helped to speed up procurement processes during the last two years of the Project.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory


                                                                                                 Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BR FIP Environmental Cadastre (P143334)



                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included five lessons. Three lessons are emphasized with adaptation of language to
support broader applicability.

The collection of land ownership data disaggregated by gender and social group would
increase the accuracy and impact of policymaking and support targeted to vulnerable or
marginalized groups. CAR does not currently disaggregate land ownership data by gender or
social group. In the future, enriching the data with disaggregated information on gender and social
groups would help mainstream these considerations in policymaking and target initiatives intended
to support underrepresented or marginalized groups.

Effective land management and environmental regulation demand the integration of targeted
outreach, robust data integration, and accessibility. The success of increasing rural land
registration in the Cerrado biome highlights the importance of tailored outreach efforts to engage
diverse stakeholders, including small, family, and collective landholders. By leveraging targeted
communications, these harder-to-reach groups can better understand their responsibilities under
environmental regulations, such as the Forest Code.

Continuous updates of online rural cadaster systems are needed to continuously enhance
accessibility, usability, and thus relevance to stakeholders. For example, integrating and
aggregating land data in private land registration systems like SICAR would provide valuable
insights for coordinated land conservation efforts. This includes leveraging advanced technology to
analyze data comprehensively and propose optimal land-use strategies. Further integration of
cadaster systems offers insights into rural land characteristics, facilitating informed decision-making
on environmental regularization and sustainable land use. To ensure the effectiveness of
environmental regularization policies, it is imperative for governmental agencies to actively analyze
landholders' compliance with environmental regulations and provide necessary support for
rectification and restoration efforts.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR




                                                                                                    Page 17 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR FIP Environmental Cadastre (P143334)



Quality of Evidence. Overall, the ICR provided adequate information about the project, the restructurings and
changes made to targets, and sufficient evidence to support most achievements reported.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR reported the outputs and outcomes based on the project’s M&E and summarized
studies that had taken place. The ICR introduced longer-term impact in the reconstituted Theory of Change but
could have elaborated on the mechanisms of the relationship between intermediate results and the longer-term
impact envisioned. The ICR could have also better elaborated on the reasons for the ratings e.g. on Bank
performance.

Lessons. The lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Conciseness. The ICR provided comprehensive coverage of project activities.

Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated as Substantial, since shortcomings were minor.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 18 of 18
