     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Early Childhood Development Project (P151916)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023880

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P151916                                   Early Childhood Development Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Sri Lanka                                 Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-56780                                 30-Jun-2021                                         39,280,768.04

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Jun-2015                               15-Jun-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           50,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            45,000,000.09                                              0.00

 Actual                                        39,280,768.04                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Shahrzad Mobasher          Judyth L. Twigg              Susan Ann Caceres              IEGHC (Unit 2)
 Fard




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to p. 5 of the Financing Agreement, the project development objective (PDO) of the project was "to
   enhance equitable access to and improve the quality of early childhood development services." For this ICR
   Review, the PDO will be: (i) enhancing equitable access to early childhood development (ECD) services; and
   (ii) improving the quality of ECD services.




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Early Childhood Development Project (P151916)



   The targets for PDO level indicators 2 (ECD centers meeting national quality standards) and 3 (ECD centers
   conducting annual child development assessments) were revised upward. This would not trigger a split rating,
   as the project exceeded both the original and the revised targets.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Expanding and Strengthening the Delivery of Early Childhood Development Services
   (approved amount: US$45 million; estimated amount at 3rd restructuring: US$35.29 million; actual
   at project closing: US$35.29 million)

   Improving the quality of ECD services and expanding equitable access to ECD services through:

   Sub-component 1.1: Quality Improvements to the Provision of ECD Services

   Provision of support for improvement of ECD service quality, including:

          i. revision of the national curriculum framework and child development standards for ECD centers,
               development of teaching and learning materials, conducting annual child development assessments,
               establishment of a registration system in each province, and development of ECD resource centers;
         ii.   provision of grants to selected ECD centers for facility improvement, including minor civil works and
               upgrading of equipment and furniture;
        iii.   provision of teaching-learning materials to selected ECD centers;
        iv.    training of selected ECD teachers, including the preparation of a capacity development plan for ECD
               teachers, supporting participation of ECD teachers in one- to two-year ECD education programs and
               standardized, short-term training;
         v.    training of trainers on delivering short-term training to ECD teachers;
        vi.    organization of periodic interaction programs for selected ECD teachers and orientation programs on
               child development for primary school teachers; and
        vii.   promotion of health and nutritional awareness, including development and implementation of health
               sub-modules as part of the training for ECD teachers, and organization of Parental Awareness
               Program sessions focusing on health awareness for parents.

   Sub-component 1.2: Expansion of Equitable Access to ECD Services

   Provision of support for expanding access to ECD services, including:

          i. development of standardized modules for, and delivery of, Parental Awareness Programs;

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Early Childhood Development Project (P151916)



      ii. increasing access to ECD centers for poor and underprivileged children, including the provision of
           tuition fees to selected children and transportation to ECD centers from nearby orphanages; and
     iii. supporting the establishment and extension of ECD centers in unserved and underserved areas as
           identified through the mapping exercise carried out under Component 2 below.

  Sub-component 1.3: Quality Improvements of ECD Services in the Plantation Sector

  Provision of support for improvement of ECD services quality in the Plantation Sector, including:

       i. construction or rehabilitation of selected ECD centers;
      ii. training of selected ECD teachers, supporting participation of ECD teachers in one- to two-year ECD
          education programs, and standardized, short-term training;
     iii. organization of periodic interaction programs for selected ECD teachers; and
     iv. review and delivery of Parental Awareness Programs.

  Component 2: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (approved amount: US$5 million;
  estimated amount at 3rd restructuring: US$5 million; actual at project closing: US$5 million)

  Strengthening the capacity of the Recipient to carry out the project, including:

      1. carrying out a mapping exercise to identify the distribution of ECD centers and gaps in the provision
           of ECD services;
      2.   provision of technical advisory services and implementation support in the areas of project
           management, institutional analysis, preparation of guidelines, development of information systems,
           monitoring and evaluation, planning, communication, procurement, financial management, and
           environmental and social safeguards;
      3.   development and implementation of the comprehensive capacity development plan for ECD
           teachers prepared under Sub-component 1.1 (iv) above;
      4.   training of ECD administrators;
      5.   provision of technical assistance for assessment studies, surveys, and evaluations; and
      6.   financing of incremental operating costs.

  At the second restructuring, an activity under Component 1 was added to support the provision of the
  morning meals program (MMP) in the aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic, which led to a deterioration in
  the depth and incidence of poverty, to reduce the incidence of malnutrition among vulnerable young
  children and children's attendance in ECD centers, and to improve learning outcomes.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The project disbursed US$40.3 million by the project closing date, substantially less than the
  approved amount of US$50 million. This was explained by (i) cost savings related to the depreciation of the
  Sri Lankan Rupee (LKR) against the U.S. dollar (USD), which fell from LKR146.71 per USD in 2016 to
  LKR335.32 per USD in 2023, and (ii) the cancellation of US$5 million at the third restructuring due to project
  savings pertaining to the depreciation of the LKR against the USD.

  Financing. The project was financed through an International Development Assistance credit of US$50
  million. The actual amount of credit disbursed was US$40.3 million due to project savings related to the

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Early Childhood Development Project (P151916)



   depreciation of the LKR against the USD and the cancellation of US$5 million from Component 1 activities
   at the third restructuring.

   Dates. The project was approved on June 24, 2015, and became effective on December 4, 2015. The mid-
   term review was held on April 17, 2018. The project closed on June 15, 2023, almost two years later than
   envisaged, with the project closing date being initially extended from June 30, 2021, to December 31, 2022,
   at the first restructuring, and further extended from December 31, 2022, to June 15, 2023, at the second
   restructuring. The project underwent three restructurings on May 19, 2021, December 18, 2022, and March
   30, 2023:

         The first restructuring led to changes to results framework indicator targets to reflect inclusion of
          additional activities and scale-up of some activities, changes in components and costs, the
          extension in the loan closing date by 18 months, from June 30, 2021, to December 31, 2022,
          reallocation between disbursement categories, changes in institutional arrangements, and changes
          in implementation schedule. The change in institutional arrangements consisted of the National
          Secretariat for Early Childhood Development, the Department of Probation and Child Care Services,
          and the State Ministry of Samurdhi, Household Economy, Micro Finance, Self-Employment,
          Business Development and Underutilized State Resources Development being added as
          implementing agencies to the existing implementing agencies, i.e., the State Ministry of Child Affairs
          and the Plantation Human Development Trust, as these institutions were also responsible for child
          care services, including children with special needs.
         The second restructuring led to changes in the results framework by adding a new intermediate
          results indicator on the ECD morning meals program; increasing the target on the intermediate result
          indicator on the tuition fee waiver support activity by 37,500; and reducing the target on the
          intermediate results indicator on establishing new ECD centers in underserved regions from 191 to
          155 based on the Ministry of Women, Child Affairs and Social Empowerment’s (MWCASE)
          assessment of price escalations and available project implementation to complete civil works. This
          restructuring also extended the project closing date by 5.5 months from December 31, 2022, to June
          15, 2023, reallocated funds between disbursement categories, and changed the implementation
          schedule.
         The third restructuring led to the cancellation of financing of US$5 million as a result of cost
          savings pertaining the depreciation of the LKR against the USD, and further reallocation between
          disbursement categories.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The Sri Lankan economy has advanced at a robust pace since the turn of the century, allowing the
country to reach lower-middle income status and leading to a reduction in the poverty rate to only
8.9 percent in 2010 (measured at the national poverty line of Rs.3,028 per month). Yet challenges in
human development have constrained the country’s future potential economic growth. At the time of
project appraisal, a significant portion of the population remained vulnerable to falling into poverty, and the
poverty rate was much higher in estates and rural areas compared to urban areas. The incidence of
malnutrition was high, with 21.9 percent of children between the ages of 0-5 being moderately or severely

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Early Childhood Development Project (P151916)



underweight based on their weight-for-height ratio, and 15.1 percent being stunted based on their low
height-for-age ratio. The pre-school level participation rate among children between the ages of 3-5 was
only 65 percent. Participation in primary education was near universal, but the net enrollment rate
progressively declined with the grade level. Educational developmental gaps were more acute among
certain sub-populations and regions.

The provision of center-based ECD services for children between the ages of 3-5, to enhance
children’s readiness for primary school and provide underprivileged children with early support and
minimize disparities across households, was considered necessary to improve educational
outcomes in Sri Lanka and break the vicious cycle of intergenerational poverty. Further, the provision
of ECD allowed young mothers to participate in the labor market more actively, thereby supporting
household income. While the provision of home-based ECD services, which includes parental care for the
0-2 age group, was adequate in Sri Lanka, center-based ECD programs for children in the 3-5 age range
were less developed (World Bank’s Laying the Foundation for Early Childhood Education in Sri Lanka:
Investing Early, Investing Smartly, and Investing for All). Eighty-four percent of the 17,020 center-based
ECD facilities were not managed by the state. Investment in ECD was required, notably, to address: (i) low
quality of center-based ECD centers (in terms of poor quality of physical facilities and inputs, poor quality of
the ECD teaching force, inadequate national standards, and lack of a compliance monitoring system for
quality management and child under-nutrition); (ii) low access (in terms of low coverage and inequitable
access); and (iii) financing, with public expenditure on education being equivalent to only 1.75 percent of
gross domestic product (GDP) in 2013, representing the smallest share in South Asia and countries with
similar development characteristics, and public expenditure on ECD being equivalent to less than 0.0001
percent of GDP, which is significantly less than other middle-income and even low-income countries such
as South Africa (0.02 percent of GDP), Malaysia (0.1 percent of GDP), Kenya (0.1 percent of GDP),
Senegal (0.01 percent of GDP), and Nepal (0.1 percent of GDP).

The project was aligned with the government’s development priorities, as well as the World Bank’s
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY13-16, the 2014 CPS Progress Report and the Bank’s
Education Sector Strategy 2020. The government’s National Plan for Early Childhood Care and
Development 2015-2020 emphasized the need for increased investment in ECD service delivery, with the
government establishing the State Ministry of Child Affairs to promote the development and wellbeing of
children in the 0-5 age group. The PDO was also aligned with the Mahinda Chintana: Vision for a New Sri
Lanka (2006-2016). The PDO was aligned with the third focus area of the Bank's Sri Lanka CPS FY13-16
on improving living standards and social inclusion, with the 2014 CPS Progress Report pointing to the need
to mainstream reform in the area through an ECD project given the expected high returns from investment
in ECD and its potential to promote a more equitable society. Further, the PDO was aligned with the Bank’s
Education Strategy 2020 Learning for All: Investing in Peoples Knowledge and Skills to Promote
Development, which promoted early investment, smart investment, and investment for all. The strategy
recognized that: (i) the foundational skills acquired early in childhood allow a lifetime of learning; (ii) reaping
a return on every dollar invested in education requires smart investments that have provided strong
evidence of improved learning outcomes; and (iii) equitable access to learning opportunities should be
provided. The PDO remained aligned with the Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY17-FY20,
which featured an objective on strengthening education and training systems and placing a special focus on
increasing access to and quality of ECD for the most vulnerable segments of the population. The PDO was
also aligned with the CPF FY24-FY27, which features an objective on sustaining and strengthening health,
education, and social protection systems.




                                                                                                        Page 5 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Early Childhood Development Project (P151916)



               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Enhancing equitable access to ECD services

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change for this objective held that improvements on the demand side and supply side of ECD
                             services can enhance equitable access to ECD. On the demand side, the project supported (i) parental
                             awareness and interaction programs by developing standardized program modules and the regular delivery of
                             these programs across the country targeted to parents with children in the 0-5 age cohort, (ii) fee waivers in
                             state- and non-state-run ECD centers for poor households to increase enrollment of children in the 3-5 age
                             cohort, and (iii) the provision of the MMP to alleviate malnutrition. On the supply side, the project supported
                             the establishment and extension of facilities in unserved and underserved areas based on a comprehensive
                             mapping of ECD facilities and distribution of the population in the 3–5-age cohort.



                             Outputs and intermediate outcomes.

                             The number of ECD centers established in unserved/underserved areas rose from a baseline of zero on
                             January 1, 2015, to 156 on June 15, 2023, substantially achieving the original and revised targets of 185
                             (84 percent achievement) and 191 (82 percent achievement), respectively. The geographic prioritization
                             of construction of new ECD centers in unserved/underserved areas was determined by considering existing
                             ECD facilities, the distribution of the 0-5 age cohort, and the poverty map.

                             The number of parental awareness programs conducted by the State Ministry of Women and Child
                             Development, Provincial Councils (PCs), and ECD centers rose from a baseline of zero on January 1, 2015,
                             to 4,045 on June 15, 2023, surpassing the original and revised targets of 1,200 and 2,550,
                             respectively. These programs were aimed at enhancing parents’ understanding of holistic childhood
                             development, interaction programs for guided parental experience, and parent education programs to
                             enhance parenting practices and behaviors. In an email to IEG dated March 21, 2024, the Bank clarified that
                             while parental awareness programs existed prior to the implementation of this project, the previous programs
                             were conducted on a small scale and were more limited in their scope. The parental awareness program
                             delivered through the project included modules and manuals for trainers with a deeper and wider coverage of
                             ECD topics, notably, in health, nutrition, childcare, hygiene and sanitation, and education, and were
                             consistently delivered across all districts. The training also helped bring greater awareness among parents
                             and more children into ECD centers.



                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Early Childhood Development Project (P151916)



The number of children benefitting from the MMP rose from a baseline of zero on November 30, 2022, to
109,597 following the project closing date, surpassing the target of 100,000.

The cumulative number of children in the 3-5 years of age cohort receiving tuition fee waiver support through
the project for a period of one, two, or three years rose from a baseline of zero on January 1, 2015, to 57,773
on June 15, 2023, surpassing the original and revised targets of 25,000 and 53,475, respectively.

The number of project beneficiaries—defined as the cumulative number of children (0-5 years of age cohort),
parents, ECD teachers and teacher assistances, and administrators supported by project activities—rose
from a baseline of 520,000 on January 1, 2015, to 1,674,351 on June 15, 2023, substantially achieving the
target of 1,700,000 (98 percent achievement). The number of female project beneficiaries rose from a
baseline of 260,000 on January 1, 2015, to 926,870 on June 15, 2023, surpassing the target of 850,000.



Outcomes

The number of children enrolled in ECD centers established in unserved or underserved areas rose from a
baseline of 512,620 on January 1, 2015, to 657,520 on June 15, 2023, substantially achieving the target of
661,150 (98 percent achievement). The female enrollment in ECD centers rose from a baseline of 253,900
on January 1, 2015, to 328,760 on June 15, 2023, surpassing the target of 327,400.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improving the quality of ECD services

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective held that improvements in the learning environment would improve the
quality of ECD services being offered.



Outputs and intermediate outcomes

The number of ECD centers receiving facility improvement grants (FIGs) rose from a baseline of zero on
January 1, 2015, to 6,637 on June 15, 2023, surpassing the original target of 6,000, and substantially
achieving the revised target of 7,500 (88 percent achievement). FIGs were targeted to beneficiary centers
that do not meet the government’s minimum quality standards and consisted of minor civil works and the
upgrade of equipment and furniture, including the construction of toilets, water connections for sanitation, and
refurbishment of facilities, play area equipment, toys, water filters, safety equipment, equipment for children
with special needs, equipment for administrative support, consumable classroom materials, and basic
furniture for students and teachers. The results of the national ECD census survey conducted in 2016-17

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Early Childhood Development Project (P151916)



were used to identify ECD centers that would become eligible for FIGs, which was further validated by the
ECD officers and Divisional Secretariats. Bill of Quantities for the selected centers were prepared by technical
officers, and FIGs were distributed to ECD centers through parent-teacher committees.

The FIGs were intended to be used toward the physical upgrade of existing facilities such that those
facilities meet the ten prioritized minimum national quality standards, consisting of: (i) safe building, (ii) safe
environment, (iii) toilets, (iv) clean drinking water supply, (v) desks and chairs specially built for children, (vi)
display space (wall/board), (vii) age-appropriate indoor play materials, (viii) resting area with primary first aid
facilities, (ix) adequate outdoor play equipment, and (x) one teacher for every 20 children. The number of
ECD centers aligned with national quality standards—defined as the cumulative number of ECD centers
meeting at least seven of the ten prioritized minimum quality standards for ECD centers in Plantations and in
the rest of the country—consequently rose from a baseline of 1,000 on January 1, 2015, to 7,961 on June 15,
2023, surpassing the original and the revised targets of 3,500 and 6,000, respectively.

ECD curriculum guidelines for teacher trainers and for producing teaching-learning materials, along with the
monitoring framework for the implementation of the ECD guidelines, were approved by the National ECD
Committee, and the teacher training was completed by June 15, 2023.

The number of ECD teachers and teacher assistants completing standardized short-term training rose from a
baseline of zero on January 1, 2015, to 21,492 on June 15, 2023, surpassing the original and revised
targets of 6,000 and 20,000, respectively. While the ICR did not provide figures on training through one- to
two-year long ECD certification and diploma programs, the Bank clarified in an email to IEG dated March 21,
2024, that a total of 2,004 teachers and childcare givers received such training under the project. Of this
number, 1,234 teachers were provided with scholarships that allowed them to receive their ECD
diplomas/certificates from the Open University of Sri Lanka, the National Institute of Education, or the
University of Peradeniya for the non-plantation regions, and National Qualification Vocational Framework
level 4 certification for child caregivers from the Vocational Training Authority and National Apprentice and
Industrial Training Authority of Sri Lanka. In the plantation regions, 770 child development officers were
trained and provided with ECD diplomas.

The number of students benefitting from direct interventions to enhance learning rose from a baseline of zero
on December 31, 2015, to 191,305 on June 15, 2023, surpassing the target of 156,615. The number of
female beneficiaries rose from a baseline of zero on December 31, 2015, to 95,491 on June 15, 2023,
surpassing the target of 78,300.

The number of ECD centers conducting annual child assessments rose from a baseline of zero on January 1,
2015, to 11,043 on June 15, 2023, surpassing the original and revised targets of 5,000 and 7,500,
respectively. In an email to IEG dated March 21, 2024, the Bank clarified that annual child development
assessments were introduced in Sri Lanka by this project. These assessments were intended to gain a better
understanding of child development outcomes to inform and improve the implementation of the ECD
curriculum and teacher training. The project supported the delivery of on-the-job training to ECD officers and
teachers and teacher assistants on how to conduct these assessments. While child development assessment
kits were developed during the early stages of project implementation, the implementation of this activity was
delayed due to the closure of ECD centers during the pandemic and only conducted six months after the
reopening of the centers. The Bank also clarified that while data from the centers could not be compiled and
analyzed before project closing, ECD teachers reported relying on the results of child development
assessment kits to improve teaching practices and interaction with children.


                                                                                                       Page 8 of 17
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Early Childhood Development Project (P151916)



                            The project also supported the development and roll-out of an integrated ECD Management Information
                            System (MIS) to ensure compliance with quality assurance standards and provide constructive feedback to
                            ECD centers. The MIS captured data on centers aligned with national quality standards and the FIGs.



                            Outcomes

                            There are no outcomes measuring progress toward the achievement of Objective 2 on improving the quality
                            of ECD services, with the indicators in the results framework consisting of output/process indicators rather
                            than outcome indicators. Examples of indicators that could have measured progress toward the achievement
                            of Objective 2 include improved teaching quality following teacher training or the application of the training in
                            the classroom, and/or any kind of measure of improved student learning that could be attributed to
                            improvements through the FIGs.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is rated Substantial, but with moderate shortcomings, with the efficacy of Objective 1
                            (Enhancing equitable access to ECD services) rated Substantial and the efficacy of Objective 2 (Improving
                            the quality of ECD services) rated Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency. An economic analysis was not carried at appraisal or at project closing. The Project
   Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 14) states that “considering the difficulty associated with monetizing all benefits, a
   cost-effectiveness analysis for the project was carried out. Of three alternatives considered, the proposed
   project is the least cost alternative, with the Net Present Value (NPV) of the associated cost being US$56.3
   million.” With regard to the two alternatives, p. 63 of the PAD states that “in the first alternative, an integrated
   approach combining both education and nutrition aspects through the provision of a nutritious day meal was
   considered. This is in line with the Government of Sri Lanka's commitment to providing comprehensive early
   childhood care. The NPV of the implementation cost associated with the integrated project is US$ 67.5 million in
   2015 real terms. The second alternative included the cost of private investment in construction and renovation of
   facilities for enhancing accessibility to the ECD centers. The NPV of the associated implementation cost for this

                                                                                                                                Page 9 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Early Childhood Development Project (P151916)



model was estimated at US$74.7 million." The PAD estimates the increase in future wages to be between
US$11 and US$29 per dollar invested (in 2022 US$), with the project expected to lead to an increase in school
completion rates and enrollment rates at the secondary level, and improved equity in learning and earning
outcomes.

The ICR revised estimates of the NPV of the associated cost to US$51.49 million based on the actual number of
children benefiting from the project. In an email to IEG dated March 21, 2024, the Bank clarified that the NPV of
the project implementation cost surpassed the amount disbursed by the project, as the cost-effectiveness
analysis took into account the estimated repayment interest and service charge and increased public spending
due to additional years spent in school. The Bank also clarified that the reason for the estimated increase in
future wages being significantly lower at project completion relative to project appraisal is explained by the (i) the
lower number of children enrolled in ECD centers than expected at closing than estimated at appraisal, and (ii)
the inclusion of labor market parameters separated by gender at completion to better reflect the labor conditions
in Sri Lanka; these had not been used at appraisal.

The ICR estimated the increase in future wages to range between US$3 and US$10 per dollar invested.

Implementation efficiency. The completion of the first ECD census was delayed by the preparation and
development of questionnaires, templates, and protocols for data gathering and reporting, and the report was
only published in 2017 (ICR, p. 15). This led to delays in initiating key activities, such as the FIGs, tuition waiver
support, and teacher training, given that ECD centers in unserved and underserved areas had to be identified
through the ECD census (ICR, p. 15). The ICR also states that the transmission of information from the field to
the project management unit (PMU) was delayed in this particular project, leading to delays in identifying real-
time solutions to ongoing challenges faced by the ECD centers, teachers, and communities (ICR, p. 20). Project
implementation delays were also incurred because of the project’s funds flow mechanisms, with Divisional
Secretariat Offices (DSOs) having to verify physical progress, bills for the FIGs, the list of children provided with
tuition fee waiver support, and later the morning meals program, as well as delays in counterpart funds
allocation to the PMU for reimbursement and payments, particularly in the last 18 months of project
implementation (ICR, p. 15). The PMU’s lack of familiarity with the Bank’s procurement system also delayed the
procurement of goods and services in the initial stages of project implementation, with this shortcoming being
addressed by the provision of capacity building by the Bank (ICR, p. 16).

Notwithstanding this, implementation efficiency remained adequate, given that most of the PDO level indicators
and intermediate results indicators were achieved before project closing. The ICR attributes this to (i) the
government’s prompt decision to address the COVID-19 pandemic challenges, (ii) the timely implementation
adjustments due to the negative effects of the triple crisis of fiscal, fuel, and food prices, and (iii) the required
implementation adjustments due to the significant depreciation of the LKR against the USD (ICR, p.13). The ICR
also noted the important role played by the PMU in ensuring implementation continuity within the context of
frequent changes in MWCASE’s structure and senior leadership, the regular updates it provided to the Project
Steering Committee during quarterly meetings, the management and monitoring support it provided to the State
Ministry of Child Affairs (SMCA), and the guidance it eventually provided on the Bank’s procurement guidelines
(ICR, p. 15).


Efficiency Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                        Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Early Childhood Development Project (P151916)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                              Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   0
Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO is rated High given that it was well aligned with the development priorities of Sri
Lanka as stated in the National Plan for Early Childhood Care and Development 2015-2020, the Mahinda
Chintana: Vision for a New Sri Lanka (2006-2016), the Bank’s Education Strategy 2020 Learning for All:
Investing in Peoples Knowledge and Skills to Promote Development, the WBG’s Sri Lanka CPS FY13-16, the
WBG’s CPF FY17-FY20, and the WBG’s CPF FY24-FY27.

Efficacy is rated Substantial, but with moderate shortcomings, with project results suggesting substantial
progress toward the achievement of Objective 1 (enhancing equitable access to ECD services). However, lack
of outcome indicators limited the assessment of progress toward the achievement of Objective 2 (improving the
quality of ECD services).

Efficiency is rated Substantial, with economic efficiency considered substantial given the wage premium
expected to be reaped through the improved access and quality to education (including ECD), and
implementation efficiency being also substantial.

Taken together, these ratings indicate that there were moderate shortcomings in the project's preparation,
implementation, and achievement, resulting in an Outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The key risks to sustaining development outcomes consist of:

    1. Fiscal austerity measures may limit the amount of funding allocated to ECD service delivery. Indeed,
       fiscal austerity measures would lead to a reprioritization of public services, which may
       disproportionately impact ECD services, particularly among marginalized populations.
    2. Improvements in the quality of ECD service delivery may be undermined if appropriate measures are
       not undertaken following annual child assessments. While the project supported annual child

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Early Childhood Development Project (P151916)



       assessments, such assessments can only lead to an improvement in the quality of ECD service if
       they are used for evidence-based policymaking.
    3. High turnover in senior leadership, combined with insufficient capacity building during the project
       implementation period, may undermine client ownership and capacity and ultimately limit the
       sustainability of development outcomes. This risk is expected to have been mitigated in this project by
       the impressive institutional strengthening, which included training of ECD teachers, ECD teacher
       assistants, and trainers through the comprehensive training plan developed and executed by the
       SMCA, as well as the Bank’s support for the development and the implementation of a
       comprehensive capacity development plan for government units and staff, including relevant staff
       from the Provincial Councils involved in implementing ECD activities.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  While the results chain was not presented in the PAD, the ICR reconstructed the results chain as
  presented in the ICR's Annex 7. The project design was guided by the findings of the Bank's 2014 report
  entitled Laying the Foundation for Early Childhood Education in Sri Lanka: Investing Early, Investing
  Smartly, and Investing for All, as well as the CPS for FY13-16 and the 2014 CPS Progress Report. Given
  that community-based and owned ECD centers comprised 84 percent of ECD centers in Sri Lanka, the
  project design took an innovative approach to finance ECD services through public-private partnerships
  (ICR, p. 5). The environmental and social assessments were transparent, leading to the development of a
  Social Impact Framework and an Environmental Engagement Plan to support compliance with the
  policies that had been triggered. The M&E implementation arrangements were adequate. The risks were
  adequately assessed and mitigated. Notwithstanding this, fiduciary risks remained high given the
  Borrower's limited capacity, with MWCASE having been only recently established. This resulted in
  significant reliance on the PMU’s financial management specialist.

  There were moderate shortcomings in quality-at-entry. The results framework did not include outcome
  indicators measuring the achievement of Objective 2 (improving the quality of ECD services). Further,
  quality-at-entry was undermined by the engagement of only senior government officials from the SMCA,
  given that the ministry had limited staff at the provincial and DSO levels (ICR, p. 14).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Implementation support missions were held at six-month intervals, except between October 2020 to
 September 2021 when they were held virtually due to the COVID-19 pandemic-induced lockdowns, as
 travel was restricted due to the ongoing global health crisis. The Implementation Status and Results
 Reports identified challenges and the necessary actions required to address bottlenecks. The change in
 the Project Director in July 2021 induced the Bank to conduct weekly meetings during the transition phase,

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Early Childhood Development Project (P151916)



 as well as during the first six months of tenure of the new Project Director. Meetings were subsequently
 held once a month to review the project's implementation progress until the closing date and into the grace
 period. The Bank relied on two trust-funded grants amounting to US$100,000 and US$40,000, which were
 used to finance the development of child development assessments and resulted in two knowledge
 products that informed implementation: (i) An Overview of the Integration of Care and Education in Early
 Childhood Services, and (ii) The Impact of the Covid-19 Pandemic on Children's Development Outcomes
 and Early Childhood Development Services in Sri Lanka.

 The Project Steering Committee (PSC) formed under the leadership and guidance of the MWCASE
 Secretary met regularly to monitor progress toward the achievement of objectives and adopt appropriate
 actions to address implementation challenges. The PSC comprised representatives from the External
 Resource Department, the Department of External Resources, the Department of Management and
 Monitoring, the Department of National Budget, and the Department of National Planning.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Children's Secretariat was charged with the project's monitoring and evaluation (M&E), with the PMU
 and the Plantation Human Development Trust for the Plantation sector providing support. The project also
 supported the development of a management information system for the ECD sector, collecting timely and
 systematic data for all ECD centers in the country. The project, in partnership with UNICEF, also led to the
 development of a common ECD center registration framework, which was piloted in one province and
 which is expected to be implemented by the MWCASE nationwide. There were shortcomings in the quality
 and the adequacy of results framework indicators, with no outcome indicators measuring progress toward
 the achievement of Objective 2 (improving the quality of ECD services).



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR states that the transmission of information from the field to the PMU was delayed in this
  particular project, leading to delays in identifying real-time solutions to ongoing challenges faced by the
  ECD centers, teachers, and communities (ICR, p. 20). The PMU, which was responsible for collecting
  data pertaining to the results framework indicators, shared a monitoring report with the PSC and the
  Bank. MWCASE reported quarterly progress and implementation issues to the Department of Project
  Management and Monitoring, with the latter reporting the project's performance to the Cabinet of
  Ministers on a quarterly basis. The M&E officer appointed at the PMU reported on the project's progress
  and on results framework indicators in meetings led by the PSC. Data collected through the island-wide


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Early Childhood Development Project (P151916)



  2016 census published in 2017, the 2021-22 mini-census, and the social audit report 2022-23 also
  supported project supervision and decision-making.



c. M&E Utilization
  The progress reports submitted to the PSC were used to implement course corrections. The 2016
  census was relied upon to allocate the new ECD centers in underserved areas and for establishing the
  ECD centers. The ECD management information system was used to monitor the disbursement of funds
  to facility improvement grants, tuition waiver support, and the MMP. The mini-census conducted during
  the COVID-19 pandemic was used to identify beneficiaries of the MMP.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was categorized as environmental assessment category B at appraisal and project closing. The
   environmental safeguard policy on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) was triggered, resulting in the
   client preparing an Environmental Management Framework to guide the project’s interventions related to
   facilities, which was disclosed to the SMCA on April 6, 2015, and published on the Bank’s website on April
   16, 2015. The social safeguard policies on Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) and Indigenous People
   (OP/BP 4.10) were triggered, resulting in a Social Impact Management Framework being prepared to
   address site-specific issues. The project’s interventions did not lead to significant resettlement or private
   land acquisition. Compliance with environmental and social safeguards policies was considered
   satisfactory.

   The project complied with citizen engagement and grievance redress mechanism requirements. Details are
   in the ICR’s Annex 11.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Ten out of the 16 implementation support review (ISR) missions carried for this project rated performance
   on financial management (FM) as Satisfactory, and the last six ISRs rated it as Moderately Satisfactory.
   The Moderately Satisfactory ratings were due to factors such as: (i) weak FM capacity, (ii) delays in
   external audit report submissions, (iii) inadequate budget provision, (iv) an indication of questionable
   expenditures incurred, and (v) issues in funds flow to the project. However, these issues arose during
   different missions at various times and were resolved without significantly impacting FM and accountability.
   The project established satisfactory FM staffing arrangements in the PMU. This contributed to smooth
   management of FM requirements. Additionally, the project generally submitted accurate Interim Unaudited

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Early Childhood Development Project (P151916)



   Financial Reports without significant delays beyond the due dates. The submission of annual external audit
   reports was also satisfactory, albeit with a few delays. However, the delays were within four months after
   the due date. Therefore, it was determined that the project had complied with the two main FM covenants
   in the project Financing Agreement without significant issues. Audit opinions were unqualified. Finally,
   there were delays in the funds flow mechanisms established in the project and in procurement procedures
   to meet Bank guidelines, as described under Section 5 of this Review.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None noted.



d. Other
   None noted.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               Shortcomings in measuring
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   progress toward the
                                                                               achievement of Objective 2.
                                                                               Moderate shortcomings in
                                                                               quality-at-entry pertaining to the
                                                                               results framework, which did not
                                                                               include outcome indicators
                                                                               measuring progress toward the
                                                                               achievement of Objective 2
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               (improving the quality of ECD
                                                                               services) and the engagement of
                                                                               only senior government officials
                                                                               from the SMCA given that the
                                                                               ministry had limited staff at the
                                                                               provincial and DSO levels.
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG concurs with the ICR's lessons, notably:



                                                                                                 Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Early Childhood Development Project (P151916)



     1. Substantial capacity building throughout implementation is required for first-time
        clients to promote client ownership, address high staff turnover, and sustain
        development outcomes. In this case, trust-funded activities allowed the Bank to organize
        study tours to Japan and China for senior SMCA leadership to enhance technical capacity
        and identify possible solutions contextualized to the Sri Lankan context.
     2. Instituting beneficiary feedback mechanisms and regular follow-up throughout
        a project's lifecycle allows for course corrections to be implemented on a timely basis.
        The transmission of information from the field to the PMU was delayed in this particular
        project, leading to delays in identifying real-time solutions to ongoing challenges faced by the
        ECD centers, teachers, and communities. This was further exacerbated by the COVID-19-
        induced lockdowns, resulting in significant delays with gathering beneficiary feedback. The
        PMU found that while regular meeting between the PMU and PSC were beneficial, a similar
        downstream effort with the divisional and provincial officers would also have worked to
        provide in-time support to address the challenges.
     3. The identification of indicators measuring improvements in ECD quality can support
        progress toward the provision of quality ECD services. There is a growing body of
        evidence published in the last decade suggesting that structural quality in the absence of
        procedural quality will have limited and superficial impact on ECD quality. The project would
        have benefited from incorporating this nuanced understanding in its implementation efforts,
        especially during restructuring, when the indicators were revised and added, to track
        progress in procedural indicators of quality.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The quality of the ICR is rated Substantial. The quality of evidence was strong, with data coming from credible
sources and generally presented in a parsimonious manner. The quality of analysis could have been
strengthened if the ICR had noted the lack of adequacy of the results framework, which did not encompass
indicators measuring progress toward the achievement of Objective 2, which in turn affected the ICR’s results
orientation quality. Lessons were based on evidence and analysis, appropriately responding to the specific
experiences and findings of the project. One exception, however, is with regard to the lesson on the
transmission of information from the field to the PMU, which is not featured in the M&E section or in factors
affecting implementation. The internal consistency of the ICR was adequate, with the results across the
various dimensions of the project being mutually reinforcing.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 17
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Early Childhood Development Project (P151916)




                                                                             Page 17 of 17
