     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PIMELAN (P164509)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023966

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P164509                                   PIMELAN

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Niger                                     Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-64580,IDA-69580                      22-Dec-2025                                         58,296,795.14

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Jun-2019                              24-May-2023

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          100,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                            65,820,371.94                                             0.00

 Actual                                        58,296,795.14                                             0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Shashidhara Laxman         J. W. van Holst             Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Kolavalli                  Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project Development Objective (PDO) is “to increase agricultural productivity and access to market for
   small and medium farmers and agri-food small and medium enterprises in the participating Project regions.”

   For the purpose of this ICRR, the PDO is parsed into two subobjectives:




                                                                                                Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PIMELAN (P164509)



   Objective 1: to increase agricultural productivity for small and medium farmers and agri-food small and
   medium enterprises in the Participating Project Regions; and

   Objective 2: to increase access to market for small and medium farmers and agri-food small and medium
   enterprises in the Participating Project Regions.

   Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) was triggered, but it’s delivery was not included in the
   PDO. As the ICR (para 32) claims that some of the CERC outputs contributed to achieving objective one, by
   forestalling losses in agricultural productivity, the efficacy in implementing it will be included in assessing the
   efficacy of achieving Objective 1 in section 4 of this review.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Improving the quality of agriculture support services and policies (Appraised: US$42
   million; Actual US$8.1 million)

   Increase crop and sedentary livestock systems’ productivity and improve the safety of products through:

   1.1: Strengthening crop and livestock extension services

   Build capacity of the national extension and advisory services to more effectively play its role in increasing
   producers’ knowledge and capacities through:

        a. Supporting the implementation of the strategy for the National System for Extension and Advisory
             Services in Agriculture (SNCA);
        b. Supporting the operationalization of Promotion Agency for Agricultural Extension (APCA); and
        c. Training on the use of climate smart agriculture varieties and practices, including, inter alia,
             introducing drought and heat tolerant seeds, agroforestry options, drip irrigation, and solar-pump
             irrigation schemes.

   1.2: Support to veterinary and phytosanitary services

   Increase availability of, and access to, specialized high-quality public and private veterinary and
   phytosanitary services to producers, and other value chain actors, through:

        a.   Enhancing surveillance systems for emerging and re-emerging priority crop diseases;
        b.   Controlling priority crop diseases and pests;
        c.   Controlling priority productivity-impacting livestock diseases;
        d.   Preventing major fish disease through targeted surveillance and awareness campaigns with respect
             to live fish imports; and


                                                                                                       Page 2 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  PIMELAN (P164509)



    e. Promotion of food safety through enhanced quality control of inputs, feed, and food products.

1.3: Strengthening the policy, legal, and regulatory framework, and developing mechanisms for preventing
and responding to severe crisis and emergencies in the agriculture sector.

Support the strengthening of the capacity and operation of the Agricultural Policy Support Unit (“APCU”)
through:

    a. Undertaking studies to review sector polices;
    b. Development of gender policy, gender-sensitive planning and budgeting tools;
    c. Undertaking policy analysis and making recommendations for removing policy, regulatory, and
       institutional constraints that negatively affect investments and entrepreneurship in the sector; and
    d. Supporting the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock’s (MAGEL’s) capacity to prevent and/or respond
       to sector crises.

Component 2: Increasing investments in agricultural production, processing, and market access
(US$45 million; Actual US$10.3 million)

Increase private investments in agricultural production, processing and market access for the various actors
in the agri-food sector through:

2.1: Developing Productive Partnerships:

Improve market access for producers and small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in agri-food value chains
selected in accordance with criteria set out in the PIM, through

    a. Establishing a Productive Partnership Program through: (i) the identification of off-takers for
       agriculture, livestock, and aquaculture production at the national, regional and potentially
       interventional level; (ii) supporting Participating Producers and SMEs in entering into commercial
       agreement with the off-takers; (iii) building the capacity of the Participating Producers and SMEs to
       improve the quality of their production and to respond to the demand of the Off-takers, (iv)
       developing sustainable business models and Business Plans that could allow sustainable growth of
       the Participating Producers and SMEs for commercial farming, processing and commercialization;
       and (iv) provision of technical support and services to implement the Business Plans; and
    b. Financing: (i) communication campaigns; (ii) financial literacy programs; and (iii) training of trainers
       in financial management/literacy in the Participating Project Regions.

2.2: Increasing access to finance

Support the establishment of a Cost-Sharing Financing Program for the financing of working capital and
viable medium term investments (“subprojects”) through the provision of Matching (??) Grants and ensuring
the systematic involvement of financial institutions, accompanied by technical assistance to improve the
Eligible Beneficiaries’’ management and technical skills through:

    a. Structuring and organizing the Cost-Sharing Financing Program;
    b. Financing of Matching Grants for Working Capital and Investments in Productive Agricultural Assets;
       and


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PIMELAN (P164509)



      c. Financing of Matching Grants Backed by Participating Financial Institution (PFI) Loans.

  2.3: Providing Support to Participating Financial Institutions

  Catalyzing the supply of lending from PFIs to recipients of Matching Grants Backed by PFI loans through:

      a. Establishing a Risk-Sharing Facility for purposes of providing partial credit guarantees to PFIs,
         through (i) the IFC Risk-Sharing Facility; and (ii) the Local Risk Sharing Facility;
      b. Establishing a First Loss Account for the provision of Partial Credit Guarantees (PCGs) out of the
         IFC Risk-Sharing Facility
      c. (i) funding the Local Risk-Sharing Facility for the provision of PCGs through SAHFI, and (ii) provision
         of management support and technical assistance to Société Sahélienne de Financement (SAHFI);
         and

  Providing technical assistance to: (i) the Fund for Food and Nutritional Security (FISAN) to enhance its
  capacity for policymaking in agricultural credit; and (ii) PFIs for : (1) the establishment of agricultural finance
  units within PFIs; (2) the establishment of a gender-sensitive agents network in the Participating Project
  Regions; (3) capacity building for the development of more suitable financial products, including, inter alia,
  financing of leasing and warehouse receipts, and agriculture finance through digital technology; (4)
  improving risk capacities and development of credit assessment techniques based on analysis of financial
  and no-financial information; (5) farm credit risk management; and (6) support to better understand and
  apply the principles of environmental safeguarding.

  Component 3: Project coordination (Appraised: US$13 million; Actual: US$7.1 million)

  Support the NCU in carrying out the management, monitoring and evaluation, procurement, financial
  management, environmental and social safeguards monitoring, and capacity development activities under
  the Project.

  Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) (Appraised: US$0; Actual:
  US$39.54 million)

  Provision of immediate response to an Eligible Crisis or Emergency, as needed.

  Changes to Components

  July 2020: Reallocation of US$39.4 million from Component one to CERC (component four). The funds
  were replenished through additional financing.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project costs

  Appraised: US$100.2 million; Revised US$139.54; and Actual: US$64.90 million

  Financing



                                                                                                        Page 4 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PIMELAN (P164509)



   The project was financed through an International Development agency (IDA) credit of US$100 million.

   Borrower contribution

   At appraisal: US$28.9 million (Borrowing country financial institutions: US$23 million; local beneficiaries:
   US$5.9 million); Actual at closure: no information in the ICR

   Dates

   The project was approved in June 2019 and became effective in July 2020. The MTR was conducted in
   October 2022. The project was scheduled to close in December 2025, but it was closed earlier in May 2023.

   Restructurings

   June 2021: Additional financing to replenish US$39.54 million reallocated from activity one to CERC

   May 2023: Change in closing dates, cancellation of financing (US$67.2 million) and reallocation between
   disbursement categories.

   Changes to Results Framework (RF)

   To capture the results from triggering CERC,

         A new PDO indicator was introduced: “percentage of people harmed by floods protected and served
           by water management infrastructure.”
         Three new intermediate indicators were introduced: number of emergency kits distributed, length of
           dike and riverbank rehabilitation (km), and number of drinking water wells rehabilitated.

   Split rating

   The PDO remained the same. The project received additional financing but it only replenished the funds
   that were transferred to CERC. The project was closed soon after the mid-term term as it was assessed that
   the PDOs would not be met because of the delays in the early stages. This review concluded that a split
   rating of outcomes is not warranted.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context

At Appraisal, Niger’s economic growth was volatile although it averaged 6.4 percent between 2012 and
2017 compared to 1.6 percent in the previous decade (ICR, para 1). It was one of the poorest countries in
the world. With an estimated average per capita GDP of US$365 (PPP) in 2017, Niger was well below the
average GDP for Sub-Saharan Africa of US$1,600. Niger was also exposed to multiple fragility, conflict,
and violence risk factors: high population growth rates, institutional deficiencies related to corruption, and

                                                                                                       Page 5 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PIMELAN (P164509)



spilling over of regional conflicts that required considerable spending (ICR, para 2). Under International
Development Association Eighteen (IDA18), Niger benefited from a special Risk Mitigation Regime (RMR)
allocation to mitigate the escalation of existing crises and contribute to the reduction of key fragility and
conflict risks.

Agriculture contributed about 40 percent of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 2017 and engaged nearly
90 percent of the active population (ICR, para 3). The sector was constrained by low productivity, a weak
policy and regulatory framework, and limited access to finance. Weak and poorly funded public and private
extension and advisory services, lack of access to and poor adoption of improved technologies, limited
expansion of affordable small-scale irrigation, domestic and transboundary animal diseases and zoonoses,
limited access to finance and weak policy and regulatory frameworks constrained the development of
agriculture sector.

Country Strategy

The PDO aligned with the Government’s priority of modernizing agriculture and livestock sectors to create
decent jobs in rural areas as laid out in the objectives of the Second Economic and Social Development
Plan 2017-2021, a five-year plan for the operationalization of the Sustainable Development and Inclusive
Growth Strategy (SDDCI, in French) (ICR para 5). The strategies it articulated included the creation of a
national system for the agriculture advisory services (Système National de Conseil Agricole, SNCA) and
Promotion of Agency for Agricultural extension (APCA), and the establishment of the Investment Fund for
Food and Nutritional Security (Fonds d’Investisment pour la Securité Alimentaire et Nutritionel, FISAN). The
objectives of the project are aligned with the 14th program of Government’s third National Plan for
Economic and Social Development for 2022–2026 “Modernizing the Rural Economy”, and the 2021-2026
action plan for the 3N initiative, the government’s food security initiative.

Bank Strategy

The PDO was and has remained relevant to Niger CPF (FY18-22) objectives. The CPF sought to support
Niger to safeguard and accelerate economic and social development by tackling growth constraints,
unsustainable population growth, and other fundamental (and emerging) drivers of fragility. The PDO was
to contribute to the first CPF focus area on Increased Rural Productivity and Incomes, specifically to the
outcome of increased rural production with diversified output in the agriculture and livestock sectors.
Specifically, it is relevant to CPF Focus Area I, “Increased Rural Productivity and Incomes,” and its
objective, “Increased rural production with diversified output in the agriculture and livestock sectors. At
closure, the project remained relevant to the 2022 Performance Learning Review (PLR), which confirmed
that increased productivity continued to be highly relevant and revised Focus Area I to “Increased rural
productivity, resilience and incomes,” including climate resilience.

The level at which PDO is pitched

Achieving the objective of increasing productivity and commercialization would contribute directly to
increased rural production and diversified outputs. Even though the PDO was pitched at the right level, it
was ambitious in terms of the scope of a large number of value chains (rice, potatoes, moringa, onions,
tomato, sesame, pepper, cattle meat, hides and skins, dairy, eggs, poultry, fish, and others). Moreover, the
complex and ambitious design required a high level of coordination to implement which was ambitious
given the implementation capacity in the country,



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      PIMELAN (P164509)



               Summary: The PDO to increase productivity and commercialization is substantially relevant to the country’s
               strategy of modernizing agriculture and livestock sectors and the World Bank’s strategy to support the
               country in increasing rural productivity, resilience, and incomes. Even though the PDO was pitched at the
               right level, it was ambitious in scope. Overall, the relevance of the PDO is rated as Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase agricultural productivity for small and medium farmers and agri-food small and medium
                             enterprises in the Participating Project Regions.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change

                             The theory of change articulated in the PAD and repeated in the ICR (para 7 and figure 1) postulated that
                             project inputs/outputs, such as establishing a national system for extension, strengthening veterinary services
                             and strengthening of policy and regulatory framework, with measured outputs such as number of farmers
                             reached with assets and services, would lead to the achievement of the objective of improving crop yields in
                             selected value chains.

                             Outputs

                                          166,147 farmers reached with agricultural assets and services, exceeding the target of 10,000
                                          Of them, 77,429 were women, exceeding the target of 3,000
                                          Of them, 4,984 were youth, exceeding the target of 3,000
                                          Zero sector policies developed, falling short of the target of 6

                             CERC outputs relevant to Objective 1

                                        Rehabilitation of 7,493 ha of irrigated land primarily used for producing rice
                                        Rehabilitation of 560 ha of degraded land
                                        Distribution of 1,521 metric tons of improve varieties of seeds

                             Other CERC outputs

                                        40 percent of people harmed by floods protected and served by water management infrastructure and
                                           emergency support, exceeding the target of 30 percent

                                                                                                                                    Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PIMELAN (P164509)




      30,099 emergency kits distributed, exceeding the target of 25,460
      429 drinking wells rehabilitated, exceeding the target of 400
      30,322 meters of dike and riverbank rehabilitated, exceeding the target of 29,180 meters

Outcomes

      25% increase in the yields of peppers produced by targeted beneficiaries, falling short of the target of
         30%
        14% increase in the yields of cowpeas produced by targeted beneficiaries, falling short of the target of
         30%
        15.10% increase in the yields of onions produced by targeted beneficiaries, falling short of the target
         of 30%
        11.4% increase in the yields of cattle meat produced by targeted beneficiaries, falling short of the
         target of 30%
        0% increase in the yields of eggs produced by targeted beneficiaries, falling short of the target of 30%

The achievement of this objective is measured by percentage increase in the yields of five crops. As the
project struggled to establish M&E by the midterm, the ICR notes that the outcomes reported are based on
reports shared by the client after the project was cancelled. (para 27).

Although the project was closed earlier than planned, the “number of farmers reached with the assets or
services” exceeded the target by sixteen-fold. According to the Bank project team (from an exchange with
IEG on April 19, 2024), because activities such as training could be implemented easily, there was a rush to
complete them in the early stages of the project. The number also included those who benefited from the
vaccination of their animals.

The early efforts in the project focused on delivering capacity development related outputs, which were not
captured by intermediate indicators:

      Strengthening of technical coordination and logistical capacity of the agriculture extension promotion
         agency through purchase of vehicles, furniture, and equipment
        Some regional technical committees trained on planning, programming, and monitoring and
         evaluation, and 167 lead farmers and 107 extension service providers trained on targeted value
         chains
        109 agents managing phytosanitary issued trained on phytosanitary management
        38 private veterinarians trained on livestock diseases
        Acquisition of 14 million doses of contagious bovine pleuropneumonia (CBPP) vaccine, 44 million
         doses of vaccine for peste des petits ruminants (PPR), and 11.5 million doses of Newcastle disease
         vaccine and a cold chain.
        12 vaccination parks developed

The project met the targets set for delivering CERC. The ICR notes that some of the CERC outputs – such as
rehabilitation of irrigated and degraded lands and distribution of improved seeds – contributed to sustaining
productivity.



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PIMELAN (P164509)



The ICR reports a 15.6 percent increase in productivity of the five crops (para 33) but the ICR does not
mention whether or not the project assessed increases in productivity that might have occurred among
farmers without the project. In other words, it appears that a “control” group was not
established. Nevertheless, productivity increases in all the crops fell short of the targeted 30 percent.

The activities that contributed to the achievement of this objective were terminated earlier than planned. The
theory of change employed postulated that improved extension services and delivery of veterinary services,
along with the introduction of a conducive policy framework, would lead to an increase in the yields of
selected crops. Project outputs fell short of the targets, but some capacity development activities were carried
out, and vaccines needed to improve veterinary services were acquired. Some of the CERC activities
implemented to meet the targets had the potential to contribute to protecting and increasing yields. However,
productivity increases were short of the targets. The efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated
Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase access to market for small and medium farmers and agri-food small and medium enterprise in
the Participating Project Regions.

Rationale
Theory of Change

The theory of change postulated that helping farmers establish productive relationships with market agents,
improving their access to credit through matching grants, and supporting local financial institutions through
risk-sharing would lead to intermediate outcomes such as credit mobilized from local financial institutions, and
enable farmers to increase the share of commodities they market.

Outputs

      759 matching grants accounts opened as a result of the project grants, falling short of the target of
       3,500
            o Of them 239 were by women, falling short of the target of 1,575
            o Of them 268 were by youth, falling short of the target of 1,575
      115 loans given for starting or expanding an agriculture business, falling short of the target of 500
            o Of them, 5 went to women, falling short of the target of 150
            o Of them 4 went to youth, falling short of the target of 150
      US$3,132,115 of credit accessed for starting or expanding an agriculture business, falling short of the
       target of US$23,000,000 (mobilized from commercial sources)
            o Of it, US$266,753 was accessed by females, falling short of the target of US$6,900,000
            o Of it US$60,286 was accessed by youth, falling short of the target of US$6,900,000


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                PIMELAN (P164509)




                                  79% of the financed business plans that have met their loan repayment schedule, falling short of the
                                   target of 90%
                                  889 farmers/entrepreneurs who have benefited from the productive partnership program, falling short
                                   of the target of 4,500

                            Outcomes

                            No increase in the value of marketed agricultural commodities by project beneficiaries, falling short of the
                            target of 40 percent.

                            The targets for establishing partnerships, giving matching grants and mobilizing resources from commercial
                            sources were not met. Some activities necessary for establishing partnerships were completed: a national
                            database of agriculture produce off takers was developed and potential beneficiaries were trained in
                            commercial contracting arrangements.

                            Two planned mechanisms to share the risks of local financial institutions were not put in place.

                            The theory of change employed postulated that helping farmers establish productive relationships, increasing
                            their access to finance through matching grants and helping local financial institutions by risk sharing would
                            enable farmers to market a larger share of the commodities they produce. The project fell short of the target
                            of supporting the partnerships and extending matching grants. Local financial institutions were not supported
                            with risk sharing. No evidence is available on whether outcomes were achieved because of the delay in
                            establishing the M&E system. The efficacy with which this objective was achieved is, therefore, rated
                            Negligible.



                            Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The PDO aimed to increase productivity of selected crops and the share marketed by the project
                            beneficiaries. The efficacy in increasing productivity was modest. The ToC postulated that improving
                            extension and veterinary services along introduction of an appropriate policy framework would increase
                            productivity. Some capacity development activities were implemented along with the acquisition of vaccines.
                            Some of the CERC activities undertaken had the potential to stabilize yields. Yield improvements fell short of
                            the targets. The efficacy of increasing the share marketed of commodities produced by beneficiaries was
                            negligible. The ToC postulated that helping farmers get into partnerships with market agents, improving their
                            access to credit through matching grants and helping local financial institutions through risk sharing would
                            enable farmers to commercialize farming. The targets for supporting partnerships were not met, and the
                            mechanisms for risk sharing were not put in place. In the absence of a fully developed M&E, there was no
                            evidence that the outcomes were achieved. The overall efficacy in achieving the objectives is rated modest.


                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PIMELAN (P164509)




  Overall Efficacy Rating                                      Primary Reason
  Modest                                                       Low achievement


 5. Efficiency
At appraisal, the economic and financial analysis considered only the benefits generated by productive
investments at the level of the farms and enterprises through subprojects. Average models for subprojects were
identified based on the different types of productive partnerships expected to be supported by the project. The
financial analysis showed that all the models were viable. The economic analysis showed an economic rate of
return (ERR) of 15 percent and a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$22.7 million. The sensitivity analysis was
conducted regarding potential risks that the project may encounter, resulting in increased project costs, a
decrease in incremental project gross margins, a delay in benefits, and a total absence of benefits every three
years due to the exceptional effects of climate change. The analysis showed that the project economic viability
was robust under all scenarios (PAD, para 86).

When the project was prematurely canceled, US$64.4 million had been disbursed, which was 46 percent of
appraised costs plus the additional financing (ICR para 27). Of this disbursed amount, US$39.54 million went
into implementing CERC, and the remaining US$24.86 million went into non-CERC activities. Excluding project
coordination costs of US$7.1 million, US$17.76 million were expended on activities 1 and 2.

The activities implemented before closure related largely to improving institutional capacity through training,
logistical support and the purchase of vaccines. Because the benefits from institutional capacity strengthening
are difficult to quantify, the analysis in the ICR considers the benefits from vaccination (paras 32 and 33),
although its delivery is not reported in the efficacy section.

Without an analysis of the impact of vaccination interventions, the benefit estimation assumes that if the
vaccination reduced mortality even by five percent per year [against typical mortality during disease outbreaks in
the range 30-80 percent from Contagious Bovine Pleuropneumonia, up to 70 percent from Goat Plague (peste
des petits ruminants or PPR), and 50-90 percent from New Castle Disease in poultry], the vaccination of
33,000,000 livestock in Niger (cattle, sheep/goats, and chickens) would yield estimated net benefits of US$125.6
million, assuming costs of US$10.9 million (ICR, Table 4). Similarly, the ICR notes that high returns could be
expected from 7,493 hectares of irrigated land but without any quantitative support (para 37).

Several factors influenced the efficiency of implementation.

There were delays leading up to project effectiveness:

      The project was approved by the Board in June 2019 but the signing of financial agreement was delayed
       till January 2020 because the Government of Niger had exceeded their borrowing threshold for the fiscal
       year 2019 set by the IMF program (ICR, para 49).
      Meeting the requirements for project effectiveness, such as project implementation manuals and
       recruitment of the project staff, further delayed project effectiveness to July 2020.

Natural calamities, political changes, and security situation came in the way of effective implementation:



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PIMELAN (P164509)



      Severe flooding led the government to request activation of CERC and its implementation through a PIU
       hosted in the Prime Minister’s office. Working out the modalities of collaboration between the two PIUs in
       charge of implementation of the CERC further delayed non-CERC activities (ICR, para 50).
      Project became effective at the peak of the COVID 19 pandemic which compromised the quality of
       supervision of project activities.
      After the national election in 2021, the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAGEL) was split into the
       Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Livestock. According to the ICR the Ministry of Livestock, in
       which the project was housed, did not coordinate adequately with the Ministry of Agriculture relating to
       the role of Agency of the Promotion of Agricultural Advisory Services (APCA), whose strengthening was
       a critical activity of the project (para 51).
      Some targeted regions became inaccessible due to security threats, limiting the ability to monitor and
       launch activities targeting smallholder farmers, such as demonstrating different technologies to farmers.

IFC withdrew from the project, dropping “first loss” risk sharing facility it was to implement.

Weak implementation capacity and governance issues affected implementation. In addition to the delays in
recruitment of the PIU staff, the PIU team lacked expertise in areas such as irrigation and marketing. The PIU
didn’t replace some key staff, such as the internal auditor and members of the procurement team, which delayed
compliance with a dated covenant requiring execution of a Local Risk Sharing Facility Management Agreement.
The disbursement conditions for funds related to the matching grants were lifted only in December 2022. There
were allegations of corruption in procurement and in the issuing of matching grants, which were reported in the
local media and pushed the Government to request project closure. Disagreements among different government
departments delayed decision. They could not agree on a site to construct the quarantine station, and the role
the Agricultural Council Agency (APCA) would play in the project was not clarified even at the closing of the
project.

The pace of implementation of non-CERC activities began to pick up only at mid-term. The World Bank Country
Management Unit and the Government, who were at the time trying to consolidate the portfolio including by
retiring nonperforming projects, decided to close the project and reallocate the used funds to a new project.

With unsubstantiated returns from the funds expended before the project’s closure, numerous avoidable delays,
and poor governance leading to its premature closure, the efficiency with which this project was implemented is
rated modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                   15.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PIMELAN (P164509)



                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project aimed to increase productivity and encourage commercialization of selected value chains. The
objective was substantially relevant as its achievement could have contributed directly to increased rural
production and diversified outputs, central to strategies of both the government and the World Bank. The ToC
employed hypothesized that strengthening national extension and veterinary services and improving the policy
and regulatory framework would lead to productivity improvements; and helping farmer groups partner with
market agents and extending them matching grants to leverage credit from local financial institutions while
assuming some of the risks of local financial institutions would assist farmers to commercialize their operations.
The efficacy in achieving the first objective was modest. Productivity increases fell short of the targets. The
achievement of the second objective was negligible because there was no information to assess whether the
targets had been achieved. The overall efficacy of achieving the PDO was only modest. There were significant
inefficiencies in implementation warranting a rating of Modest. Given the significant shortcomings in the
achievement of the project’s objectives and its efficiency, the project’s overall outcome was Moderately
Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to development outcomes is Substantial (ICR, paras 70 and 71).

Unfinished project

The project was closed before the development objectives were achieved. The loss was mitigated, to some
extent, by committing the unspent funds to another World Bank-assisted project with the same objectives.
The risk of deriving benefits from the spent resources depends on whether the follow-up project is able to
overcome the limitations faced by this project and build on the investments already made.

Government capacity/commitment

The country’s circumstances have changed significantly following the July 2023 military coup. Growing fiscal
constraints, with increasing security challenges, make it unlikely that the government will be able to
contribute to some activities which were canceled and not taken up by the new project.




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PIMELAN (P164509)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was designed to achieve the objectives that were relevant to strategies of both the country
  and the World Bank to modernize agriculture. The design included activities that could help in achieving
  the objectives. They were based on the lessons that highlighted the need for an integrated approach, the
  role of matching grants in enabling access to finance, and partnerships with market agents as a way to
  access markets.

  But the design had significant flaws; it was ambitious and, therefore, unsuitable for the context (ICR, para
  47):

        It was too broad as it sought to achieve changes in all the aspects that appeared in national
         strategies from animal health and production, plant protection, and irrigation to access to finance
         – over a large geographical area with poor infrastructure.
        The changes in the above were to be achieved while strengthening the institutions that would
         engender them: financial institutions, national extension service, the ministries of agriculture,
         environment, and livestock, and small, medium and nascent large agribusinesses.
        The project planned to develop a large number of value chains, 13 in all (rice, potatoes, moringa,
         onions, tomato, sesame, pepper, cattle-meat, hides and skins, dairy, eggs, poultry, fish, and
         others).

  Some critical activities were included without adequate consultation with clients. The design included two
  risk-sharing mechanisms: a local guarantee scheme to be managed by an independent fund manager
  under the Société Sahélienne de Financement (SAHFI) and an IFC’s first-loss facility. SAHFI had not
  agreed to have a separate fund manager as required by the design, and the local financial institutions
  found the IFC facility costs too high.

  The activities to support crop and livestock extension and advisory services relied too much on the
  Promotion Agency for Agricultural Extension (APCA), which delayed implementation as its role vis-à-vis
  other agencies involved in advisory services was not clarified at appraisal nor when the project closed.

  The results framework had shortcomings. It focused initially on five value chains (peppers, cowpeas,
  onions, cattle meat, and eggs) but most of the proposals for sub-projects received were for other value
  chains.

  Political and governance risks were assessed to be high. All the others except for environmental and
  social risks were considered substantial. However, the mitigation measures for political and governance
  risks were inadequate; for example, to implement a complex project with the involvement of a large
  number of dispersed entities, the design suggested that the Project Implementation Manual and the
  procedure manuals will stipulate the respective responsibilities of players in the project before project
  effectiveness (PAD, Annex 1, Table 1.2) whereas it would have been more appropriate to define risk
  mitigation measures in the PAD.

  The project addressed the priorities of the GoN, but a complex and ambitious design that would require
  high level of coordination to implement, inadequate measures to mitigate the identified risks, and a weak



                                                                                                   Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PIMELAN (P164509)



  design of critical components such as risk sharing mechanisms were significant shortcomings. The
  quality at entry is, therefore, rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR, the project team did not provide adequate supervision (para 68). Implementation
 support missions, seven in all, were not regular. None of the Task Team Leaders (TTLs), agriculture,
 finance and later urban (to manage the CERC), were based in Niamey for most of the time of project
 implementation. The remote supervision did not allow the task team to closely monitor, proactively identify
 the bottlenecks, and swiftly take remedial actions.

 The Bank’s task team interacted virtually in biweekly progress monitoring meetings to assess bottlenecks
 in the implementation, but the minutes of the meetings were not recorded to follow through the decision of
 these meetings and to inform the management about the implementation issues faced by the project.

 Communication with the government was poor. Though IFC decided to not pursue the “first loss” risk
 sharing facility, this information was not communicated officially, until the midterm review, and even then,
 the reasons for the withdrawal of IFC were not communicated to the client.

 According to the Niger project team, there were significant delays in the delivery of the Bank's No
 Objections, thus leading to delays in procurement (ICR, para 68).

 The supervision was understandably handicapped by COVID-19 related travel restrictions, but it had
 significant shortcomings because it failed to proactively identify the threats and resolve them; and
 importantly communicate effectively with the client. The quality of supervision is therefore rated
 Unsatisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The design included a Theory of Change but the M&E was not designed to fully capture the links between
 outputs and the outcome of increased yields, relating largely to capacity development and effectiveness of


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PIMELAN (P164509)



 extension and veterinary services included in activity 1 (ICR, para 59). On the other hand, the PDO
 indicators were clear and measurable.

 There were eight intermediate indicators, four of which were related to project outputs. Two of them tracked
 intermediate outcomes related to matching grants and the other two, measured the number of participants
 and their perceptions of the services offered by the project

 A baseline survey was to be conducted during the first year to establish treatment and control groups and
 to set the targets (PAD, para 77). It was to be followed with surveys at the middle and end of the project.
 The plan also included yearly crop surveys of a representative sample of project beneficiaries.

 The client's midterm review report noted that the allocated funds were inadequate to undertake the crop
 surveys, given the project's large geographical area (ICR, para 59).



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR notes that the PIU was adequately staffed with M&E specialists both at the national project
  coordination level and at decentralized levels (para 60).

  There were delays in initiating the system. At the Mid Term Review (MTR) in October 2022, the PIU team
  was still debating which year should be the baseline for the project, whether 2019 when the project was
  approved or 2022 when the activities earnestly started. Definition of some indicators such as the increase
  in yields were also not clear by then. Nonetheless, collection of some data at the output level began
  which permitted its use for monitoring of implementation. But the M&E manual wasn’t clear on how data
  should be collected for constructing indicators.



c. M&E Utilization
  Because the project began collecting data for M&E only after the midterm review in 2022 there was little
  opportunity to use the information. Whatever data was collected was used in drafting the Borrowers’
  ICR.

  Overall, the design had appropriate and measurable PDO indicators. It could have benefited from more
  intermediate indicators to attribute outcomes to project activities. Its implementation had significant
  shortcomings. Even by midterm, data collection had not begun in earnest, hampered by lack of clear
  guidance from the manuals. The delay in undertaking crop surveys and the early closure of the project
  resulted in little use being made of the system. The quality of M&E is therefore rated modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues



                                                                                                  Page 16 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PIMELAN (P164509)



a. Safeguards
  Environment

  The project triggered the following safeguard policies: Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01, Pest
  Management OP 4.09, and Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11. According to the ICR all requisite
  frameworks were prepared, and disclosures made. During project implementation, all sub-projects were
  screened for environmental compliance a priori, and continuously monitored during implementation (para
  63).

  At project closure, environmental compliance was rated satisfactory.

  Social

  The project triggered the Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 safeguard policy. No involuntary
  economic displacement took place during project implementation.

  At project closure, social safeguard compliance was rated Satisfactory.

  At project closure, the Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) of the project was operational, GRM
  committees were trained, and the GRM was receiving and processing complaints. The project also had an
  action plan for the prevention of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment risks, which was
  carried out (ICR, para 64).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement

  Shortcomings, such as discrepancies in documents, unjustified delays in procurements and prolonged
  absence of procurement staff, ineffective use of the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement
  (STEP) and lack of an archival system for procurement records, were identified in the procurement
  processes. There were allegations of corruption in procurement. As the ICR was being finalized, the WB
  integrity team informed the Bank task team of Government of Niger’s investigation of procurement of
  animal vaccines in 2022 (ICR, para 66).

  At project closure, overall performance of procurement was rated moderately unsatisfactory.

  Financial Management

  Financial management risk was rated substantial at appraisal. Nevertheless, throughout project
  implementation, the PIU complied with most of its financial reporting requirements, including the
  submission of IFRs and audit reports for the annual accounts deemed acceptable by the World Bank,
  although the reports were often submitted with delays.

  By project closure, overall financial management performance was rated moderately satisfactory.



                                                                                                Page 17 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PIMELAN (P164509)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                                 Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
Bank Performance                 Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR identified several lessons. This review restates with editing two that are likely to be widely
applicable below:

Prior adequate consultations with counterparts to assess whether various aspects of project
design are feasible can help avoid significant failures (ICR, para 72). To support local financial
institutions, the project proposed two risk-sharing facilities. The design required the local risk-sharing
facility, Société Sahélienne de Financement (SAHFI), to appoint an independent manager, but the
organization had not agreed. The local financial institutions found the alternative facility suggested at
appraisal, International Finance Corporation’s first loss, too expensive (ICR, para 47)

Where capacity is limited, in the sense of organizations expected to deliver the services are
weak, the probability of achieving desired outcomes can be enhanced by adopting a phased
approach in which organizational capabilities are built before expecting them to implement
complex activities (ICR, para 74). The project expected to build the capacity of implementing
organizations, implement a wide range of interventions, and support partnerships between producer
organizations and agricultural enterprises. All this turned out to be challenging in a single project. A
phased approach for the sector, beginning with the basics, such as improving the extension services
and building the capacity of producers before embarking on guarantees and matching grants
activities (as suggested in the PAD in Annex 1, Table 1.2), could have led to better outcomes.

This review adds two lessons IEG has drawn from the project:

It is futile to base a project's implementation on institutions not formally established at
appraisal. Implementation of the project activities relied on two institutions that weren’t operational
at the beginning of the project. The Agency for Promotion of Agricultural Extension (APCA) had just


                                                                                                      Page 18 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PIMELAN (P164509)



been created but was still figuring out its mandate. Its team was not in place even when the project
was closed. The other, Agricultural Policy Support Unit (APSU) did not exist (ICR, para 72).

Bank management must ensure that reports on all supervision missions are filed and
reviewed for necessary action. This review has noted that, based on the ICR and discussions with
the Bank's project team, no records were prepared of many virtual supervision missions during
COVID (ICR, para 68). Bank management was not alert to this lapse in accountability leading
arguably to missed opportunities to take timely actions on shortcomings in the project's
implementation.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is comprehensive, complies with the guidelines in terms of structure, and includes the necessary
information on project design, its implementation, and the outcomes. It also offers information on the
circumstances that led to the premature closure of the project. Handicapped by an M&E that wasn’t
implemented until the midterm, the evidence available for analysis was inevitably limited. The report is clear,
succinct, and results-oriented,

Given that this was a failed project closed prematurely, the report could have elaborated further on the
circumstances that led to its failure, particularly to draw appropriate lessons from them. Overall, the ICR quality
is rated as Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 19 of 19
