     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PNG Road Maintenance & Rehab Project II (P119471)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023925

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P119471                                    PNG Road Maintenance & Rehab Project II

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Papua New Guinea                           Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-49310,IDA-54040                        31-Jul-2016                                          141,750,452.15

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 03-May-2011                                28-Apr-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            43,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            162,838,912.55                                                0.00

 Actual                                        141,875,255.74                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Azada Hussaini              Ihsan Kaler Hurcan           Avjeet Singh                     IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project objectives as written in the International Development Association (IDA) Financing Agreement
   (p.4) dated June 9, 2011, and the Project Appraisal Document (p.3) were “to (i) improve road transport to
   project areas through providing satisfactory physical condition and safety in selected roads; and (ii) strengthen
   institutional arrangements for road maintenance, including the participation of the private sector and
   communities.”



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PNG Road Maintenance & Rehab Project II (P119471)



   At the time of the additional financing, a third objective was added to the project formulation: "to enhance
   road-related economic opportunities for women," as reflected in the Financing Agreement (p.5) dated April 10,
   2014 and the project paper (Report No: 78410-PG, p.4).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  09-Jan-2014

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project initially had two components:

   1. Rehabilitation, Upgrade and/or Maintenance of Roads and Bridges. (Cost at appraisal: US$46
   million; revised cost at additional financing: US$184.65 million; revised cost at the second project
   restructuring: US$161.15 million; actual cost at closing: US$121.7 million)

   This component was to finance the rehabilitation, upgrade, and maintenance of roads and bridges. Key
   activities included the following: rehabilitation, upgrade, and initial routine maintenance of selected sections
   along the Hiritano Highway from the capital Port Moresby to Kerema; and selected national and district
   roads and bridges in ten coastal or island provinces. This involved detailed planning by the Department of
   Works and Highways (DoWH), using the Roads and Bridge Asset Management Systems for economic
   analysis, planning, and prioritization.

   2. Technical Assistance for Project Management, Design and Supervision Services, and Capacity
   Building (Cost at appraisal: US$ 7 million; revised cost at additional financing: US$25.35 million; actual
   cost at closing: US$19.8 million)

   This component was to finance support for project management, design, and supervision services, along
   with capacity building to the National Roads Agency (NRA) to improve its capacity for long-term routine
   maintenance, as well as technical support to the contracts for preparing bidding documents and
   implementing the contracts.

   Revised Components

   During the 2014 restructuring a third component on Contingency for Disaster Risk Response was added
   to the project scope to respond to a disaster that could have occurred. Such a disaster risk response was
   not triggered during project implementation.



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PNG Road Maintenance & Rehab Project II (P119471)



  The additional financing also expanded the scope of Component 1 activities and included new geographic
  areas beyond the Gulf and Central provinces as well as new indicators for women’s involvement in
  maintenance contracts. Component 2 was restructured to include pilots on integrated road maintenance
  and performance-based road contracting, capacity building for DoWH, NRA and small contractors for road
  management and maintenance, awareness raising on gender in DoWH, development of ex-ante and ex-
  post socio-economic surveys; and resources for a second Employer’s Project Manager consultancy to
  support project implementation. The costs of Components 1 and 2 revised at the time of additional financing
  are given in the entries above.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: At appraisal, the project cost was estimated at US$53 million including US$10.6 million for
  physical and price contingencies. At the time of additional financing, the estimated project cost was revised
  up to US$210.00 million. In the 2016 restructuring, the estimated project cost was revised down to
  US$186.50 million due to reduction in borrower’s funding that resulted in a reduction in the length of the
  roads to be rehabilitated from 220 km to 185 km. The actual project cost at project closing was US$141.5
  million.

  Bank Financing: At appraisal, the IDA credit amount was estimated at US$43.0 million. At the time of
  additional financing in 2014, an IDA credit of US$126.5 million was approved increasing the total IDA credit
  commitment to US$169.5 million. By project closing, the project had fully disbursed the original credit
  amount of US$43 million, and US$98.5 million of the additional financing totaling US$141.5 million.
  Approximately US$ 6.65 million was cancelled in the 2023 restructuring, and a further US$ 4.93 million was
  cancelled following the grace period, and around US$16.4 million was lost in exchange rate fluctuations.

  Borrower’s Contribution: The Government of Papua New Guinea (PNG) committed a total of US$40.5
  million in funding, which included an initial commitment of US$10 million and an additional financing of
  US$30.5 million in 2014. However, because of macro-economic and budgetary pressures, the borrower’s
  estimated contribution was reduced from US$40.5 million to US$17.0 million at the second project
  restructuring. The total borrower contribution was US$17 million.

  Dates: The project was approved on May 3, 2011, and became effective three months later on August 30,
  2011. An additional financing was approved in June 2014. A mid-term review was carried out in July 2017.
  The closing date of the original financing agreement was July 31, 2016, which was extended by 20 months
  at the second project restructuring. The original financing agreement closed on March 31, 2018. The closing
  date of the additional financing agreement was April 30, 2021, which was extended by about two years at
  the third project restructuring. The additional financing agreement and the project closed on April 28, 2023.

  Project Restructuring and Additional Financing: The project was restructured four times, including one
  additional financing.

        First Restructuring and Additional Financing (Jan 9, 2014): An additional financing of
         USD126.50 million and Level 1 restructuring was approved to expand the project scope. It was to
         finance road rehabilitation and construction in two additional provinces and introduced a focus on
         enhancing economic opportunities for women through routine road maintenance. Because of this,
         the project objective was revised to include "to enhance road-related economic opportunities for
         women." Additional indicators were added to the results framework to capture the project results

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PNG Road Maintenance & Rehab Project II (P119471)



          related to the new objective. The target values of the indicator measuring the length of the
          roads rehabilitated or upgraded under the project was revised up from 150 km to 200 km while the
          indicator number of road users on project roads was deleted because it was difficult to obtain data
          on non-motorized users. A new indicator number of person days worked by women in project-related
          routine road maintenance activities was introduced to track progress on the activities introduced to
          support for economic opportunities for women through maintenance contracts. The additional
          financing also introduced pilots on integrated maintenance and Performance Based Contract (PBC)
          to improve road maintenance systems.
         Second Restructuring (May 5, 2016): A Level 2 restructuring was carried out to adjust targets
          because of the reduction in borrower’s contribution (see Borrower’s Contribution section above). The
          restructuring reduced the target on km of roads rehabilitated from the previous target of 220 km to a
          revised target of 185 km. Additionally, due to procurement delays, it extended the IDA loan closing
          date by 20 months to allow the completion of activities. Other changes included revising the
          calculation methodology for the indicator percentage of national project roads being maintained by
          private contractors and introducing an indicator to capture progress on jobs for women beyond
          maintenance works.
         Third Restructuring (April 15, 2021): This Level 2 restructuring was carried out in response to
          delays caused by procurement challenges, lack of qualified technical staff, and Covid-19 impacts.
          The restructuring extended the closing date of the additional financing by about two years to April
          28, 2023, reallocated the balance of proceeds of IDA credit, updated project implementation and
          disbursement schedules, as well as key risk and mitigation measures. The restructuring also
          introduced a Citizen Engagement indicator following corporate requirement and revised up the target
          for km of road rehabilitated from 185 km to 224 km to include the Bogia-Awar (27 km) and Epo-
          Kerema (10 km) road lengths. At the time of this restructuring, the project had already completed the
          rehabilitation of 174 km of roads and the Vanapa-Brown River road section (14 km) was under
          construction.
         Fourth Restructuring (May 2, 2023): A Level 1 restructuring was completed to cancel US$6.65
          million of unutilized credit financing.

   Reasons not to undertake a split assessment of the project outcome: The additional financing
   expanded the project scope in road rehabilitation while introducing a new objective on economic
   opportunities for women. Since this increased the project’s ambition and a new objective was added at the
   same time, this review will assess the project’s performance based on the revised objectives and targets
   without undertaking a split assessment in accordance with the Bank guidance.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context: At appraisal, PNG’s economy had benefitted from strong growth since the mid-2000s,
but development continued to be hindered by systemic challenges. Public revenue depended heavily on
resource exports, and the country had been classified as fragile. Poverty was high, especially in rural areas,
and lack of reliable road access was a critical constraint to economic development, service delivery, and
raising living standards. Challenging terrain and climate risks, low maintenance levels, and limited public
and private capacity hindered road network development. Only about 35% of the limited road network was

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 21
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       PNG Road Maintenance & Rehab Project II (P119471)



in good or fair condition, and many communities relied on air or maritime transport. This infrastructure gap
was exacerbated by a challenging physical environment, long periods of underfunding, weak institutional
capacity, and limited private sector involvement in road maintenance.

Previous Bank experience in the sector/country: The World Bank had been supporting PNG's transport
sector strategy since the 1990s. The Road Maintenance and Rehabilitation Project (RMRP), which was the
predecessor to this project, had similar objectives focused on rehabilitating physical and safety conditions of
roads, improving strategic planning and management of road sector assets, strengthening institutional
arrangements, and improving private sector contracting of maintenance works. It improved 640 km of
roads, supported the NRA, and trained 79 domestic contractors between 2002 and 2012. The follow-on
project’s development objective was slightly more ambitious as it aimed to also improve economic
opportunities for women.

PDO alignment to World Bank Strategies: The PDO was aligned with the World Bank's Country
Assistance Strategy (CAS FY08-FY11), which prioritized support for the country's road sector. Pillar II of the
strategy aimed to improve livelihoods and service delivery by developing well-managed national and local
transport services. The PDO remained relevant to the latest World Bank Group Country Partnership
Framework (CPF FY19- FY23), particularly objective 2.1: “Improve Management and Maintenance of
PNG’s Road Infrastructure”. The CPF highlighted transport infrastructure and management of related
infrastructure as key to better connectivity and access to services. Lack of climate-resilient transport
infrastructure was highlighted as one of the drivers of fragility in PNG. Additionally, reducing the gender gap
in employment through addressing structural barriers was considered an important pathway to increase
household income. The project was responsive to these CPF priorities.

PDO alignment to Country priorities: The Government of PNG’s strategic plans, including Vision 2050,
the 2010-2030 Development Strategic Plan, and the 2011-2015 Medium Term Development Plan, called for
investments to rehabilitate and maintain the roads infrastructure to maximize economic returns. The plans
prioritized concentrating resources on a network of economic corridors and priority roads that offered the
greatest potential to support economic development and improve nationwide connectivity. The National
Transport Strategy Plan aimed to continue developing an integrated road network connecting provinces and
regions. The government had increased road spending over the prior decade with support from
development partners, halting the decline in overall road network conditions. However, establishing reliable
road connectivity remained a high priority to address physical isolation and improve rural livelihoods and
services.

Level of the Project Development Objective (PDO): Given the FCV context and project scope focusing
on road rehabilitation and upgrading works and establishment of maintenance systems, the level of the
PDOs were, relevant to the country context and appropriately pitched for the development status.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)



                                                                                                         Page 5 of 21
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  PNG Road Maintenance & Rehab Project II (P119471)


EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To improve road transport to project areas through providing satisfactory physical condition and safety in
               selected roads.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change for Objective 1
               The project inputs were to be used to finance road rehabilitation and upgrading activities and technical
               assistance support to domestic companies to facilitate their participation in the project’s bidding process.
               These activities were to result in the project outputs of upgraded and rehabilitated roads along selected
               sections of the Hiritano highway, upgraded bridges, decks, and river channels for selected areas, and routine
               maintenance contracts put in place. These outputs were expected to lead to the project outcomes of
               improved and safer movement of goods and people and better access to health services, schools, and
               markets because of reduced travel time and improved transport comfort due to improved road surface
               conditions and strengthening of the bridges. In the long run, these should be expected to result in improved
               health, increased schooling, and increased economic activity and development, while addressing the main
               drivers of fragility in the country caused by poor road access. The increased contract management capacity of
               the domestic companies that were to be involved in the execution of the project’s road rehabilitation,
               upgrading, and maintenance works were expected to result in successful completion of the project’s civil
               works.

               The theory of change assumed that the national transport agencies would have the capacity to rehabilitate
               and upgrade infrastructure across 10 provinces, that adequate staffing and expertise for employer’s project
               manager could be recruited during project implementation, and that large procurements could be processed
               in a timely manner. These aspects proved to be challenging during implementation.

               Overall, the causal links from the project activities and outputs to the project outcomes were direct and valid,
               and the achievement of the project objectives could be attributed to the project’s intervention, but the critical
               assumptions were overly optimistic.

               Outputs

                     Roads rehabilitated, Rural: The ICR reports that 224 km of roads were rehabilitated, achieving the
                      revised target of 224 km. The original target was 150 km. However, according to the data provided in
                      Annex 1.B Key Outputs by Component and on page 13 of the ICR, the total length of roads
                      rehabilitated or upgraded under the project was 227.4 km. The breakdown of the works completed is
                      as follows:
                           o Hiritano Highway (112 km): From Inawabui to Bereina (22 km); from Brown River to Veimauri
                              (24 km); from Malalaua to Epo (56.5 km); and from Epo to Kerema (9.5 km).
                           o Coastal Highway (26 km): From Bogia to Awar in Madang Province (26 km).
                           o Hula Road (37.4 km): From Gabone to Geno Junction in Central Province (37.4 km).
                           o East Cape Road (52 km): From Yalua to Kehelala in Milne Bay Province (52 km).




                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PNG Road Maintenance & Rehab Project II (P119471)



In addition, the project financed the construction of bridges, drainage, a 400-meter sea wall in Milne Bay
Province, and other ancillary structures, and the installation of road safety features. The project’s results
framework did not include indicators to capture the project outputs given below.

      The project financed the maintenance activities on unsealed and some sealed roads as follows:
            o The Hiritano Highway (102 km of the 295 km of the total road length).
            o The road from Malalaua to Kerema in the Gulf Province (65 km).
            o A part of the road from Gabone to Geno Junction in the Central Province (11.75 km).
      As a result of the sealing and maintenance of the project roads, the roads’ conditions, as measured in
       accordance with the International Road Index, improved as shown below (ICR, p.41):
            o Hula Road from 15.11 before project to 4 after project.
            o East Cape Road from 13.26 to 4.
            o Hiritano Highway (Brown River-Veimarui section) from 12.8 to 4.
            o Hiritano Highway (Bogia-Awar section) from 13.50 to 4.
            o Coastal Highway from 15.69 to 4.
      The number of domestic companies trained in bidding and contract management: The project
       provided training to ten domestic companies in bidding and contract management including
       performance-based contract, meeting the revised target of ten. The original was target of 30. The
       target was revised down because of the limited market size in PNG. The original target of training 30
       companies was overly ambitious.

Outcomes

The project’s results framework did not include any indicator to capture the achievement of the project
outcome in improving road transport. Originally, the results framework included an indicator measuring the
“increase in the number of road users on project roads,” but this indicator was dropped at the time of
additional financing because it was assessed to be “not a good measure of progress in meeting the PDO, and
data difficult to gather for nonmotorized users” (Project Paper, Report No: 78410-PG, p.11). The project was
to conduct a total of eight social and economic surveys (SESs) before and after the project, but the post-
project surveys could not be conducted because “the protracted delays left insufficient time to complete ex
post SESs” (ICR, p.18). For a project that was implemented for 12 years, the shortcomings in the M&E
system and the conducting of the SESs to capture the project’s outcome in improving the road transport
were significant.

While the results framework did not include indicators on road safety. The ICR notes that safety features were
included in the road and bridge rehabilitation including guardrails, pavement markings, signage, speed
humps, widened shoulders, and limited lengths of footpaths. In high-risk market locations along the Hiritano
Highway, markets were relocated further from the road and improved with additional safety facilities and solar
powered lighting.

The indicators in the results framework are all output indicators and do not capture the project outcomes such
as increased road traffic, reduction in travel time, reduction in vehicle costs (in terms of repairs and regular
maintenance), and reduction in the number of accidents. The ICR reports some anecdotal information
gathered through site visits and stakeholder consultations such as lowered transport costs, reduced travel
time, improved supply and quality of transport services, increased economic activity. For example, while the
project did not carry out ex post traffic surveys, stakeholders in beneficiary communities reported that the
frequency of public motor vehicle services increased along all project corridors. However, the evidence base


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PNG Road Maintenance & Rehab Project II (P119471)



is insufficient to validate these assertions and adequately assess the project’s impact on improving road
transport in project areas.

Overall, while the project was successful in improving the surface quality of the project roads and
implementing some limited maintenance activities, the evidence is insufficient to assess the improvement in
road safety and the achievement of the project outcome of improved road transport. Therefore, the project’s
efficacy in achieving the project objective “to improve road transport to project areas through providing
satisfactory physical condition and safety in selected roads” is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen institutional arrangements for road maintenance, including the participation of the private sector
and local communities.

Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 2:

Based on the information in the PAD, project activities included establishing a project implementation unit
called Employer’s Project Manager (EPM) to lead project implementation and oversee design and supervision
of road and bridge works, providing training and assistance to contractors in preparing bidding documents
and on contract administration, providing technical support and training to the National Roads Authority (NRA)
for undertaking effective road maintenance, carrying out data collection and socio-economic surveys. The
2014 Additional Financing introduced the following activities to pilot community-based maintenance
approaches: i) direct contracting with communities; ii) communities carrying out routine maintenance under
guidance of the contractors; and iii) communities serving as sub-contractors to primary contractors to
maintain roads.

Expected outputs from these activities included consultants hired to support day-to-day project supervision,
EPM established, contractors trained on bidding and contract management, NRA trained on effective road
maintenance procedures and use of Road Asset Management System (RAMS) and Bridge Asset
Management System (BAMS) for data collection, community sub-contracts signed, and the staff of
Department of Works and Highways (DoWH) trained on environmental and social safeguards.

In the medium to long term, the activities were expected to result in an improvement of the NRA’s capacity for
managing routine road maintenance, DoWH’s capacity to consider and respond to environmental and social
risks arising from project activities, enhanced government capacity in using RAMS, and improved capacity of
private sector companies to bid and manage performance-based contracts (PBC) for road rehabilitation and
maintenance, including through community engagement.

The theory of change assumed that trainings would be sufficient to improve the NRA’s capacity on routine
maintenance and the private sector contractors’ capacity to implement contracts efficiently. Other factors and
underlying drivers of low institutional capacity such as low level of technical staff, inadequate systems and

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PNG Road Maintenance & Rehab Project II (P119471)



procedures in the national agencies, and low financing and physical capital capacity among the contractors to
undertake large contracts were not addressed by the project’s theory of change. There was also an
assumption that community-based maintenance could be arranged through the private sector sub-contracting
without direct engagement, capacity building, and social mobilization of communities at the grassroots level.
The theory of change also assumed that the NRA would have the capacity and resources to make payments
to private sector on time and allocate adequate resources for long-term maintenance through the PBC.
Several factors that contribute to sustainability of maintenance systems were not explicitly discussed or
addressed.

Overall, the theory of change demonstrated a logical causal link on improved national capacity to manage
PBC and enhanced participation of the private sector. However, the causal link on community participation
and sustainability of maintenance arrangements was weak in the absence of explicit activities and attributable
results.

Outputs

      The number of domestic companies trained in bidding and contract management: The project
         provided training to 10 domestic companies in bidding and contract management including PBC
         contracting, meeting the revised target of 10. The original was target of 30. The target was revised
         down because of the limited market size in PNG. The original target of training 30 companies was
         overly ambitious.

The project achieved the following outputs that were not captured by the results framework:

      Prepared an Options Analysis paper assessing market capacity for performance risk sharing.
      Provided DoWH with sample hybrid PBC contracts and bidding documents including cost estimates
         for sustainable maintenance of roads.
        Developed PBC policy statement and organogram for PBC monitoring and management unit.
        Prepared assessment for the DoWH on requirements to scale up PBC.
        Contractors assumed responsibility for all stages of routine maintenance.
        The contractors demonstrated improved response time.
        Community-based approaches through sub-contracting and wage employment improved quality of
         maintenance. A pilot initiative introduced in 2014 showed that community-based maintenance
         approaches using wage labor and sub-contracting models were more practical than contracting with
         communities directly.

Outcomes

      Percentage of Hiritano Highway maintained to good condition under PBC: Out of 295 km of the
       Hiritano Highway, the project increased the part of the highway adequately maintained from the
       baseline of about 89 km (30%) to 124 km of (42%) under a PBC. The original target was 50% but was
       revised down to 42% because of the reduction in the borrower’s contribution at the second
       restructuring in 2016. The indicator definition was clarified in the 2014 restructuring and revised again
       in the 2016 restructuring to increase the standard from an International Roughness Index of 5 to 4.
      Percentage of project roads being maintained by private contractors under PBC: 39% of project
       roads were maintained by private contractors under performance-based contracts (PBC). This was an
       increase from the baseline of 20% and exceeded the original target of 25% while meeting the revised

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PNG Road Maintenance & Rehab Project II (P119471)



       target of 39%. The ICR reports (page 27) that this indicator measures the same result as the previous
       indicator. The project team mentioned to IEG (on Feb 7, 2024) that the remaining 61% of the roads
       were covered by the traditional government maintenance model.

The project achieved its target of improving the road quality and introducing PBC as new institutional
arrangements for road maintenance. The project also achieved its planned outputs in terms of training
provided to the DoWH and private sector companies. While there are risks regarding the sustainability of the
road maintenance arrangements, the project facilitated the participation of private sector in road maintenance
under a PBC that was introduced by the project. Overall, the efficacy of the project in achieving the project
objective to strengthen institutional arrangements for road maintenance, including the participation of the
private sector and local communities is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To enhance road-related economic opportunities for women.

Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 3:

Activities included facilitation of routine roadside maintenance activities through wage labor for women and
other project related works such as directing traffic along sections of road under rehabilitation, serving as
cooks or cleaners in work camps, and working as day laborers. This was expected to lead to employment and
income generation for women contributing their socio-economic development.

The theory of change assumed that a pool of ready-to-work women with technical skills and tools required to
conduct maintenance activities would be available. It also did not explicitly discuss whether social norms
could pose as a constraint to women’s participation in maintenance works. Based on the PDO indicator,
economic opportunities were defined as working as daily laborer in both maintenance works and non-
maintenance project works.

Outputs

      Number of person days worked (by women) as a result of project activities on highways
       rehabilitation: 37,842 person days were worked by women as a result of project activities, exceeding
       the original target of 2,100 and the revised target of 40,000. Works included under this indicator were
       traffic directing, serving as cooks or cleaners, and other non-maintenance related daily works. The
       target was revised up significantly at the third restructuring in 2021 based on actual results and
       recalculation.
      Number of person days worked (by women) in project-related routine road maintenance
       activities: This indicator is applicable to works created for women under the PBC only. 8,372 person
       days were worked by women under routine road maintenance activities, exceeding the original target


                                                                                                Page 10 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                PNG Road Maintenance & Rehab Project II (P119471)



                                    of 1,122 and slightly below the revised target of 8,500. The target was revised up significantly at the
                                    third project restructuring in 2021 based on actual results and recalculation.

                            The ICR reports that women were employed systematically under seven road rehabilitation contracts and two
                            road maintenance contracts (ICR, p.34). The project prepared a financial literacy training program prepared,
                            including terms of references and printed learning materials, but could not implement it because of insufficient
                            time left for implementation (ICR, p.18).

                            The project achieved its target on number of days of labor created for women, and nearly achieved its target
                            on non-maintenance related employment generated for women. Additionally, the project team commented
                            that the PBC contractors were required to hire a specific number of women to carry out the works. Overall,
                            the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective to enhance road-related economic opportunities for
                            women is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project’s efficacy in achieving the first objective “to improve road transport to project areas” is rated
                            Modest because of insufficient evidence related to road transport improvement. The project’s efficacy in
                            achieving the second objective “to strengthen institutional arrangements for road maintenance, including the
                            participation of the private sector and communities” is rated Substantial because the project was successful in
                            introducing private sector in road maintenance through Performance-Based Contracts, but there are risks to
                            the sustainability of these maintenance arrangements developed under the project mostly related to its
                            funding. The project’s efficacy in achieving the third objective “to enhance road-related economic
                            opportunities for women” is rated Substantial because the project activities resulted in job opportunities for
                            women as planned. The overall efficacy is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis

   A “with project” and “without project” economic analysis was conducted at appraisal, additional financing, and
   project closing. The economic analyses conducted at appraisal and additional financing used the Highways
   Design and Maintenance Model, 4th Edition (HDM-4). The ICR (p.38) notes that “for all the projects, the HDM-4

                                                                                                                               Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PNG Road Maintenance & Rehab Project II (P119471)



object files used at appraisal stage could not be obtained, and key assumptions are not available.” The
economic analysis conducted at project closing used the Roads Economic Decision (RED) model. While the
methodological approaches varied, the core parameters focused on comparing the costs of road rehabilitation
and maintenance against the benefits of reduced road agency and road user costs based on a predicted
International Road Index value over the analysis period. The analysis period of 20 years was consistent across
the three analyses. However, the scope of the analyses varied. At appraisal, it was limited to selected road
sections (two road sections on the Hiritano Highway and the ECR in the Milne Bay Province) before board
approval and expanded to include two additional provinces at the time of additional financing. The post-project
analysis considered costs and benefits associated with 115 km of roads rehabilitated out of 224 km under the
project because of data limitations.

The models included various factors incorporating sensitivity analysis based on maintenance strategy, level of
investment, traffic patterns, and road deterioration overtime to measure overall costs and benefits. For this
project, the analysis assumed an increasing road traffic and decreasing vehicle operating costs over time. The
assessment assumed minimal maintenance costs at a constant rate over 20 years, which is not realistic as
maintenance costs tend to increase overtime, but according to the historical data in PNG, routine maintenance
is regularly deferred in project areas (ICR, p.39). The costs of accidents and impacts of environmental incidents
were excluded from the analysis, which could result in an underestimation of the true costs associated with road
maintenance.

The appraisal analysis estimated an Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 17% for road works that were
selected at the time (approximately 78 kms of road) and estimated an EIRR of 12% for roads that were going to
be identified during implementation. The analysis conducted at the additional financing estimated an EIRR of
13% and 11% for the two additional provinces proposed at the time. The post-project economic analysis
estimated EIRRs ranging from 15% to 49% for different sections of the 115 km roads rehabilitated under six
contracts. The simple average of the EIRRs is 25.92 percent. While these EIRRs calculated based on estimates
show the economic viability of the project’s intervention, the exclusion of the costlier rehabilitation works along
Malalaua and Epo (109 km) from the post-project analysis because of lack of data was a significant shortcoming
in the economic analysis of the project. Furthermore, a comparison of the results of the economic analyses
before and after the project is not possible because of the assumptions used for the economic analysis at
appraisal are unknown.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency

The project’s efficiency was adversely affected by protracted procurement process, lack of staff (i.e., a seven-
month vacancy in the project director position in the DoWH), lack of expertise in DoWH’s Environmental and
Social Safeguards Branch, delays in implementing resettlement compensation requirements, and delays in
commencing the Bogia-to-Awar and Epo-to-Kerema road upgrading works that led to a two-year extension of
the additional financing. The decision to prefer the road rehabilitation designs and hire the Employer’s Project
Manager (EPM) during project implementation resulted in slow progress adversely affecting project efficiency.
The project was restructured multiple times and implemented over a 12-year period. There was a significant
increase in project implementation costs from US$7 million initially allocated to US$20 million spent on project
implementation and capacity building at completion time.

GoPNG’s commitment to fund 22% of the works did not materialize during implementation due to an increase in
construction costs, declining public revenues, and other competing priorities. The project was then restructured
to compensate for this gap through additional financing.



                                                                                                     Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PNG Road Maintenance & Rehab Project II (P119471)



Overall, the project's efficiency in achieving the project objectives is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)             *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         100.00
 Appraisal                                                   12.00
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         51.00
 ICR Estimate                                                15.00
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project objectives were highly relevant to the country's development priorities and aligned with the World
Bank strategy both at appraisal and project closing. The project’s efficacy in improving road transport was
modest because of insufficient evidence. The project’s efficacy in introducing private sector in road maintenance
and creating road-related economic opportunities for women was substantial. Overall efficacy of the project in
achieving the project objectives in an FCV context is rated Substantial. There were significant administrative
and operational inefficiencies that affected the overall efficiency of the project in achieving the project objectives,
which was implemented for about 12 years. The efficiency of the project in achieving the project objectives is
rated Modest. Overall, the project outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial Risk: The ICR notes on page 28 that DoWH has stated its intention to expand the use of PBC
through both its own resources and financing from development partners. Since the project closing, DoWH
has continued with the implementation of maintenance under the Hiritano hybrid OPBRC with its own
financing but has not implemented the project’s technical assistance recommendations for establishing a
PBC Monitoring and Management Unit. There is a high risk that GoPNG could not pay the PBC companies
for maintenance services due to lack of public funds and competing priorities.

Technical Risk: The PAD noted that both government agencies and the private sector struggle with limited
resources, skills, and expertise necessary for the efficient implementation of road infrastructure projects and

                                                                                                       Page 13 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PNG Road Maintenance & Rehab Project II (P119471)



maintenance activities. Efforts to strengthen these capacities were part of the project's objectives, aiming to
improve road maintenance. The project also included maintenance periods within the contracts. While the
project delivered some trainings to NRA and DoWH, a majority of the technical aspects were outsourced to
consultants rather than being led by the public service. There is still a substantial risk of inadequate technical
capacity in terms of systems, policies, regulatory framework, and management capacity to ensure continued
rehabilitation and maintenance of the roads.

Environmental Risk: The risks of natural disasters and climate incidents in PNG and project areas are
substantial, primarily due to the country's challenging physical environment, including steep mountainous
terrain, warm climate, and heavy rainfall concentrated in short periods leading to floods and landslides.
These conditions can compromise roads and drainage, resulting in rapid surface deterioration.

Social Risks: While the ICR discusses improved socio-economic outcomes based on anecdotal information,
transport studies have shown that access to improved infrastructure for the poor population requires further
investments and policy reform such as affordable public transport options, flexible routes and frequencies,
safety, and security along the route. There is a substantial risk that the poor, particularly women and
children, are unable to use the road infrastructure due to factors such as gender-based violence or sexual
harassment on the road and lack of safety and security.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Leveraging the experience of its predecessor (RMRP), the project design built on the existing
  assessments in many areas, including the use of social assessments and consultations to establish a
  baseline and assessments of national capacity with regard to financial management, procurement, and
  environmental and social risk management to prepare capacity building plans. The project maintained the
  same implementing bodies, NRA and DoWH, and largely overlapped geographically with its predecessor.
  This facilitated a smoother preparation, yet with only six months in the preparation timeline, the project
  deferred necessary actions such as hiring the EPM and addressing the lack of technical E&S specialists
  in the DoWH.

  Activities in the first component activities were relatively clearly defined with around 78 km of road initially
  identified for rehabilitation and the remaining sections to be identified during implementation. The second
  component’s institutional development activities lacked clarity. Despite having a PDO on institutional
  strengthening, the project lacked specific activities in this area, allocating US$1 million to capacity
  building of the DoWH without a clear execution plan. On lessons learned, one of the lessons from RMRP
  was that community-based maintenance was often ineffective. The PAD (p.35) discusses that community
  contracting was often minimally effective, while works undertaken by the National Capital District Council
  were considered more effective. Yet the project went on to include activities around community-based
  maintenance without reconciling this discrepancy.

  Safeguards and fiduciary implementation arrangements were in place. The project met most
  environmental and social safeguards requirements at the appraisal stage as it developed a new Land
  Acquisition and Resettlement Framework (LARF) to tackle involuntary resettlement risks and
  incorporated an Indigenous Peoples Plan, including a grievance mechanism. The main concerns were

                                                                                                       Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PNG Road Maintenance & Rehab Project II (P119471)



  potential cost overruns and procurement delays due to institutional capacity challenges. The
  implementation plan included activities to bolster the NRA and DoWH capacity in contract management
  and procurement, with added contingency costs to cushion against overruns.

  As discussed in section 9, M&E design was weak. The appraisal-stage results framework included only
  five indicators and lacked M&E tools to track outcomes of improving road transport. Overall, the project
  design was informed by the experience from its predecessor. At the same time, there were missed
  opportunities in strengthening the M&E design, conducting baseline socio-economic surveys to capture
  broader impacts, defining outcome-oriented benchmark to track progress, and setting up robust M&E
  arrangements.

  The quality at entry is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Four task team leaders (TTLs) oversaw the project, conducting 35 missions over 12 years which allowed
 for consistency of supervision support. The Bank team demonstrated adaptive management by making
 course-corrections throughout implementation. The 2014 restructuring introduced a focus on women’s
 economic empowerment, expanded the road rehabilitation work to two additional provinces that had high
 poverty rates, and introduced pilots to improve maintenance arrangements. Project ratings and intensified
 supervision missions were used to address delays in completion of contracts and lack of capacity for timely
 management of environmental and social issues.

 Despite these efforts, there were shortcomings in terms of enhancing project's focus on development
 impacts. For example, although initially planned, the project did not carry out socio-economic surveys to
 determine the effect of the road and bridge improvements on the population served by the roads involved.
 This could have addressed the shortcomings in M&E design. Additionally, capacity building activities
 remained limited in scope which hindered the project's ability to achieve its full potential in strengthening
 institutional capacities.

 On safeguards and fiduciary issues, the Bank team maintained due diligence throughout implementation
 and put in place measures in response to emerging issues. The Bank team conducted trainings for relevant
 client staff, although the specifics of these activities remain vague. Most issues were resolved during
 implementation although a few lingered at project closure as discussed in section 10. External challenges
 like contractor capacity, remote site locations, Covid-19, and insecurity adversely affected project
 implementation and supervision.

 The quality of supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

 Overall, there were significant shortcomings at entry and in focus on development impact during
 supervision. While some critical gaps remained in Bank performance, the project team proactively took
 actions through project restructurings to address these weaknesses to ensure the completion of project


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PNG Road Maintenance & Rehab Project II (P119471)



 activities and the achievement of the project objectives in an FCV country. In accordance with the Bank
 guidance, the Bank performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project objectives were formulated at the output level in the results chain rather than outcome level.
 The project objectives required diverse quantifiable indicators for tracking progress, yet this was not
 adequately established. The first objective lacked road safety indicators, such as user traffic, user types,
 user satisfaction, and accident rates. The second objective's metrics—number of PBCs signed, training
 conducted, and road condition—did not measure the extent and quality of community engagement. The
 third objective, aimed at boosting women's economic opportunities through roads was ambitiously stated
 but supported by limited activities.

 Some indicators posed attribution challenges; for example, there was no project-level baseline for the
 percentage of roads in good or fair condition in the project area. As the ICR (p.24) reports, the core sector
 indicators for transport, the Rural Access Index, and ‘population with enhanced access to transport
 services’ could have been adopted and monitored based on the best available population estimates. The
 sampling methods and calculation methodology lacked clarity for two indicators tracking number of road
 users and number of private sector companies engaged on project roads. With only five output indicators,
 the project’s theory of change was not reflected in the results framework adequately. A socio-economic
 survey to assess effects of road and bridge improvement on the population was planned but the baseline
 work was deferred to implementation stage. While the project aimed to help the NRA develop a long-term
 PBC management mechanism and monitor initial contracts in the final years for sustainable maintenance,
 M&E efforts only measured the tendering and establishment of PBC contracts. The results framework did
 not capture some outputs (such as the construction or upgrading of bridges, decks, protection works, and
 river channels, and installation of safety features) or the improvement of the road quality.

 On institutional arrangements, the project relied on existing entities within NRA to collect data, update the
 results framework, and report implementation progress with regard to procurement, expenditures under
 contracts, and financing projections. Arrangements to use and reflect national data, impact assessments,
 or triangulation of evidence with other sources were not discussed.



b. M&E Implementation
  During implementation, indicators and targets were revised primarily to address challenges of data
  collection. Several M&E design weaknesses discussed above remained unaddressed, thus the project

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PNG Road Maintenance & Rehab Project II (P119471)



  could not provide evidence of outcomes beyond immediate outputs such as the length of roads
  rehabilitated, and contracts signed.

  The socio-economic surveys were to provide data about the project’s impact on beneficiaries (which
  would also have been useful in addressing the weaknesses in the M&E design), but these surveys could
  not be conducted because of insufficient time for implementation. Two indicators that were useful in
  determining the road condition and usability did not have updates in the initial Implementation Status and
  Results Reports and were later dropped. Rather than finding a solution to improve calculation
  methodology, the project team dropped the only indicator that tracked outcomes and use of roads.

  The project involved stakeholders, particularly through community consultations. Yet, the extent of
  stakeholder engagement in the M&E process itself is not elaborated.



c. M&E Utilization
  The project prepared and disclosed implementation progress reports regularly and carried out
  community consultations during preparation and as part of the 2014 additional financing. The ICR does
  not explicitly outline how M&E data was communicated to and used by various stakeholders.

  The project made some adaptations in response to emerging challenges, such as adjusting procurement
  processes and addressing safeguard compliance issues. However, the extent of systematic learning and
  adjustment based on M&E findings is not fully detailed.

  M&E data contributed to evidence of outcomes but there were limitations in its comprehensiveness and
  execution. The project was not able to rely on national data, external assessments, or proxy information
  to triangulate evidence towards showcasing outcomes.Some elements of M&E systems are likely to
  continue beyond the project cycle. Technical assistance on RAMS should have been expected to
  improve DoWH’s capacity to collect data and monitor the implementation of PBCs. The project’s
  grievance mechanism and stakeholder consultations are also likely to be used in operations beyond this
  project, as the project team informed IEG in February 2024, which, although limited. implies some
  influence of the project's M&E on future interventions in similar contexts.

  The project's M&E quality is rated Modest due to deficiencies in design and implementation. Indicators
  were insufficient to track progress effectively and monitor the achievement of some of the project
  outcomes especially related to the improved road transport. The absence of safety and community
  engagement metrics, alongside lack of socio-economic data hindered precise outcome measurement.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards



                                                                                                  Page 17 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PNG Road Maintenance & Rehab Project II (P119471)



  The project was classified as Category B under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and triggered the
  Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) safeguard policies both at
  appraisal and at the time of additional financing.

  Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): The project was classified as Category B because it
  anticipated a moderate level of environmental and social risks, project sites did not include any critical
  habitats, and the scale of resettlement actions was moderate. An Environmental and Social Management
  Plan (ESMP) was prepared and disclosed in country and on the World Bank’s InfoShop in February 2011.
  For project areas that were not identified at the time of appraisal, an Environmental Social Management
  Framework (ESMF) was prepared outlining the requirements for each sub-project, including further
  community consultations. There were issues of non-compliance, particularly in mid-2016; for example,
  households were resettled before the preparation of a Resettlement Action Plan; sites were cleared before
  inventory of roadside assets was prepared; fuel and bitumen did not have adequate storage; workers faced
  safety risks; and required permits were not obtained in time. These issues were addressed by preparing ex-
  post documentation for households and resorting to community compensation in lieu of an inventory.
  Intensive missions followed to ensure compliance and hire E&S specialists.

  Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10): The project triggered this safeguard policy because most communities
  in the targeted provinces fulfilled the characteristics of indigenous peoples. Free, prior and informed
  consultation leading to broad community support was conducted during project preparation. Consultations
  were also done during the 2014 AF on the additional activities, and minutes were disclosed.

  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): At appraisal, the project triggered this safeguard policy because
  of the potential for small land acquisition or land impacts during the rehabilitation of the Hiritano Highway. A
  Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework (LARF) was prepared based on the one prepared for the
  previous RMRP. The ICR discusses a few non-compliance issues including non-implementation of the
  LARF in one of the work sites, which was later addressed through a community approach. The ICR did not
  discuss the number of households affected by the project.

  Grievance Mechanism: The project established a grievance mechanism at the time of approval. By
  completion stage, all grievances received through the mechanism had been responded to although the
  number and nature of grievances received were not discussed.

  Gender-based Violence and HIV: Initially, the project did not assess risks related to sexual harassment
  and abuse or HIV. The 2014 restructuring later introduced mitigation measures to prevent the spread of HIV
  and incidence of gender-based violence (GBV). Throughout implementation, a total of 75 awareness
  workshops were delivered to contractors and communities, a code of conduct was prepared, and a mapping
  of GBV services was carried out. Information on number of cases reported through GRM or resolved
  through the GBV services were not available in the ICR.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement: Procurement for the project was carried out in accordance with World Bank procurement
  guidelines. The project faced significant procurement delays and management challenges, including low
  clearance thresholds and unpredictable timelines in PNG, resulted in project implementation inefficiencies.
  The DoWH extended the ECR contract's closing date without World Bank's prior approval and encountered

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PNG Road Maintenance & Rehab Project II (P119471)



   issues with bid securities not being refunded due to procedural missteps. Despite these hurdles, measures
   were put in place to prevent further delays, and procurement was rated Moderately Unsatisfactory in the
   last two years, partly due to delays in extending the hybrid OPBRC contract. The Bank continues to
   address the bid security refund issue. The project team explained to IEG (on Feb 7, 2024) that
   procurement was a recurring challenge throughout project implementation driven by government
   bureaucracy, lack of communication, and lengthy decision-making processes.

   Financial Management: The Bank carried out financial management trainings to support the DoWH and
   EPM following Bank standards. Quarterly financial reports and annual interim financial statements were
   submitted according to schedule and acceptable to the Bank. External audits were unqualified for all years
   except for 2021 because of misallocated funds, which was refunded to the World Bank during the grace
   period. Financial Management was rated as Moderately Satisfactory at project closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

This review has drawn three lessons based on the information in the ICR.

Systematic data collection on road connectivity and building capacity for the implementation
of Roads Assets Management System (RAMS) is critical in providing a sufficient evidence
base of the achievement of desired outcomes. The project highlighted the value of systematic
data collection on road connectivity outcomes to guide future investments and policy reforms. Data
collection throughout project implementation was insufficient. Initially planned socio-economic
surveys were not conducted, missing a crucial chance to understand the project's impact on various
populations and to refine the M&E design. Utilizing additional data sources could have enriched the
evidence base, offering clearer insights into the specific needs of diverse beneficiary groups, such
as women, children, the disabled, and the elderly. Building capacity for the implementation of RAMS


                                                                                                 Page 19 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PNG Road Maintenance & Rehab Project II (P119471)



could provide a sufficient evidence base to assess the development impact of road rehabilitation
projects especially so in an FCV context.

In an FCV context, regular technical assistance in financial management, procurement, and
safeguards can prevent lengthy project implementation delays. The project's experience
reaffirms the necessity of ongoing capacity building in fiduciary and safeguards areas in an FCV
context, beyond delivering sporadic training sessions and issuing communication when faced with
non-compliance. Encountered delays due to procurement issues and capacity gaps highlight the
need for consistent and strategic support for addressing implementation challenges and achieving
project objectives effectively and for building long-term capacity as envisaged in the World Bank
Environmental and Social Framework, and World Bank guidelines for procurement and financial
management.

Insufficient preparation of civil works designs and employer’s project manager (EPM) bidding
documents at appraisal can adversely affect project implementation and cause significant
delays in an FCV context. The preparation of the civil works designs and EPM bidding documents
were deferred to the implementation stage, which resulted in no support from the EPM at the initial
phases of the project implementation and resulted in a two-year delay. In an FCV context, project
preparation should take into account high-capacity risks. As the ICR (p.24) notes, additional
preparation support and longer lead times for engineering studies and work designs could improve
the effective and efficient implementation of road projects in FCV countries. Such support may
include initiating the procurement process of an EPM and preparing civil works and bidding
documents under an ongoing project and including flexible terms in EPM contracts to extend EPM
support to other projects during their preparation phase.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  This is an important example of where PBC has been applied and rolled out in a fragile environment. Better
  understanding the ramifications for this would be extremely useful for the global practice.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is comprehensive and well-written. It follows the Bank guidance and is concise. It presents a clear
picture of the project implementation experience. Figure 2 on project implementation timeline clarifies the
sequence of activities and external events that had an impact on implementation. The reconstructed theory of
change in Figure 1 provides a comprehensive picture of the activities and expected results.

While there were significant shortcomings in the project’s M&E design and implementation, the ICR uses, to the
extent possible, evidence from the project’s M&E framework, client reports, and RAMS to demonstrate results.


                                                                                                   Page 20 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PNG Road Maintenance & Rehab Project II (P119471)



The report covers outputs beyond the results framework such as construction or upgrading of bridges, decks,
protection works, and river channels, and installation of safety features and improvement of road quality. There
is an attempt to support the achievements through anecdotal information gathered during the completion
mission through interviews with select project beneficiaries. However, it lacked national or sub-national data
and external assessments to triangulate the evidence provided.

The report detailed environmental and fiduciary issues, along with the responses during implementation. While
it elaborated on GBV awareness training and service mapping, it lacked specifics on the number of GBV cases
reported or resolved via GRM and GBV services. Additionally, details on the number of households affected
and assisted by the resettlement action plan were not provided.

The report was largely consistent, though discrepancies were noted in the borrower contribution figures across
different sections, including the main text, Annexes 3 and 4, and the data sheet.

Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 21 of 21
