     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS Education Quality for Equality (P156001)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023864

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P156001                                      LS Education Quality for Equality

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Lesotho                                      Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-58200                                   30-Jun-2021                                         25,206,490.44

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 26-May-2016                                 30-Apr-2023

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               25,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                                25,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                            25,206,490.44                                            0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Shahrzad Mobasher            Denise A. Vaillancourt       Susan Ann Caceres              IEGHC (Unit 2)
 Fard




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was "… to improve basic education service delivery and student
   retention in targeted schools" (Financing Agreement, p. 4). This same statement is reflected in the Project
   Appraisal Document (PAD) (pp. iii, 15, and 36). Basic education in Lesotho comprises seven years of primary
   schooling (Grades 1-7) and three years of junior secondary schooling (Grades 8-10).

   The 2021 restructuring altered the results framework. Two PDO level indicators, measuring improvements in
   teacher content knowledge in targeted primary and junior secondary schools, respectively, were deleted; and

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS Education Quality for Equality (P156001)



   the target for another PDO level indicator, measuring dropout rates in targeted junior secondary schools, was
   reduced to a less ambitious level. Because the efficacy ratings are the same under both the original and
   revised indicators and outcome targets, the application of a split rating methodology is not warranted.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Improving the teaching and learning environment in targeted primary and junior
   secondary schools (amount at approval: $15.1 million; revised allocation at 2019 restructuring:
   $11.4 million; revised allocation at 2021 restructuring: $7.8 million; actual cost at project closing:
   $7.8 million)

   Raising the quality of classroom service delivery at both the primary and junior secondary school levels to
   help youth develop a strong foundation in literacy, numeracy, cognitive skills, mathematics and science, in
   particular:

         1.a. Strengthening primary and preprimary school teaching and learning, including: (a)
          provision of training to Grade 1-4 teachers on content and pedagogical skills for teaching numeracy
          and literacy, core classroom teaching skills, and subject competency test; (b) provision of training to
          District Resource Teachers and other staff; and (c) provision of training to Grade 5-7 teachers in
          subject (mathematics and science) and pedagogical content based on the new curriculum. Project
          activities included: the provision of teaching and learning resources, acquisition of learning materials
          and other goods.
         1.b. Implementing a new math and science curriculum and assessment support for
          junior secondary schools, including: (a) implementing the new curriculum in 45 targeted junior
          secondary schools; (b) training Grade 8-10 teachers; (c) developing the new curriculum related
          assessment packages for junior secondary math and science; (d) strengthening the in-service
          support to teachers; and (e) training support officers. Project support to this end included: technical
          advisory services, acquisition of textbooks, other learning materials, supervision kits, and other
          goods.
         1.c. Demonstrating the progressive mathematics initiative, developed by the New Jersey
          Center for Teaching and Learning (NJCTL) and progressive science initiative (PMI-PSI) in
          about 20 junior secondary schools, and development of the new Lesotho model for teaching
          math and science at junior secondary school level, with a view to improving the quality of math
          and science teaching in targeted junior secondary schools, including: (a) provision of training
          to science and math teachers and subject advisors; (b) installing solar panels in three selected
          schools; (c) strengthening in-service support to teachers; and (d) implementing the new Lesotho
          model of teaching math and science in all 65 targeted junior secondary schools for Grade 8, based


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  LS Education Quality for Equality (P156001)



       on lessons learned. Project activities included: technical advisory services, and acquisition of
       learning materials, interactive projectors, student polling devices, and other equipment and goods.

Component 2: Strengthening school accountability for student learning and retention in targeted
schools (amount at approval: US$4.8 million; revised allocation at 2019 restructuring: $4.8 million;
revised allocation at 2021 restructuring: $4.2 million; actual cost at project closing: $4.1 million)

Facilitating the development and implementation of School Improvement Plans (SIPs) by targeted primary
and junior secondary schools, in particular:

      2.a. School improvement planning capacity building and the development of a SIP Manual
       with the support of consultants' services and goods.
      2.b. Provision of SIP grants ranging between $3,500 and $4,500 per school to a targeted group
       of 312 primary schools and 65 junior secondary schools to support the implementation of
       SIPs. Project activities included: (a) the purchase of goods and services; (b) short-term training and
       support to school boards and school principals; and (c) employment of an independent third-party
       verification agent. Fifty percent of SIP grant amounts were to be provided upon the inspectorate’s
       approval of the SIP, and the remaining 50 percent was to be provided after the first year of SIP
       implementation and enhanced oversight by the District Education Officers, District Resource
       Teachers and inspectors.
      2.c. Strengthening the capacity for reporting, monitoring of results, and
       oversight mechanisms for SIP implementation to promote transparency, timely collection and
       use of information to facilitate school management, including: (a) developing school report card
       (SRC) format; (b) strengthening mechanisms at the school level to monitor school performance and
       SIP implementation; (c) training school boards, school principals, and other relevant staff on the use
       of the school report card; and (d) implementing school report cards at school level, all through the
       provision of technical advisory services and training.

Component 3: Strengthening institutional capacity and project management (amount at approval:
$5.1 million; revised allocation at 2019 restructuring: $4.5 million; revised allocation at 2021
restructuring: $4.4 million; actual cost at project closing: $4.7 million)

Strengthening and developing the capacity of the Ministry of Education and Training (MoET) to deliver their
agenda and supporting project implementation and management, in particular:

      Studies/assessments on teacher supply, demand, and management, math and science teacher
       skills, dropouts in primary school, baseline study for Grade 9 assessments in lower secondary,
       review of the national assessment and curriculum audit in primary school, and studies on technical
       and vocational education and training (TVET).
      Consensus building by MOET on a national TVET policy linked to a national qualifications
       framework.
      The formulation of education policies and the monitoring of their implementation by the Department
       of Planning, including the strengthening of the education management information system (EMIS).
      Stepped up efforts to combat HIV/AIDS, including: (i) facilitating the finalization and dissemination of
       a school health and nutrition policy; (ii) establishing an information, education and communication
       campaign to improve HIV/AIDS awareness at the school level; and (iii) provision of training to
       teachers on effective strategies to deliver the curriculum on life skills and HIV/AIDS.


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  LS Education Quality for Equality (P156001)



      Strengthening the capacity of the relevant MOET staff to implement the project, through training,
       technical advisory services, study tours, and acquisition of learning materials, equipment and other
       goods.

Revisions to Components

Project restructuring led to changes to project components as detailed below.

First, allocations to Component 1 and Component 3 activities were reduced from $15.1 million to $11.4
million and from $5.11 million to $4.5 million, respectively, at the May 21, 2019 restructuring to fund
Component 4 activities (School construction) introduced during the same restructuring. Component 1
activities and allocation were further reduced at the June 28, 2021 restructuring, with the teacher strikes and
the COVID-19 pandemic limiting teacher and staff training in the PMI-PSI to only one round of in-service
training with the unused portion of the allocation for the in-service training activities being reallocated to
Component 5 activities (Accelerated Teaching and Learning (ATL) Recovery Strategy) introduced during
the same restructuring. The ICR indicates that the teacher training-related activities under Component 1,
which were dropped at the 2021 restructuring, were reintroduced under the Lesotho Basic Education
Strengthening Project (P175065) through a modified approach employing innovative, technology-based
solutions to overcome the challenges that had risen due to the pandemic (e.g., using online teacher
training).

Second, Component 4 (School construction -- amount at approval: n.a.; revised allocation at 2019
restructuring: $4.3 million; revised allocation at 2021 restructuring: $4.3 million; actual cost at
project closing: $5.8 million) was introduced at the May 21, 2019 restructuring. This new component
aimed to address urgent education access issues through construction of minimum infrastructure including
furnished classrooms, separate latrines, and low-cost multipurpose playgrounds to improve learning
conditions in the most deprived, poorest and lowest performing schools targeted by the project. The
restructuring project paper stated that the lack of adequate classroom facilities leads to increased
absenteeism and dropout of students and teachers, particularly in schools located in the higher altitude
mountainous areas of Lesotho. A total of 63 disability-friendly classrooms and 57 gender- and disability-
friendly latrine blocks were to be constructed as additional project activities for some of the 312 primary
schools targeted under the project. Twenty schools were identified as part of the first group of schools to
benefit from additional classrooms and latrines. In addition, five combined schools (i.e., combining primary
and secondary schools within the same premises) (i.e., Mosiroe, Mokhoro, Masaleng, Makintane, and
Amohelang) were to be provided with low-cost multipurpose playgrounds. The classrooms were to be built
using a new community-based approach, with a view to informing and supporting a more sustainable school
construction strategy for Lesotho.

Third, Component 5 (Accelerated Teaching and Learning (ATL) Recovery Strategy -- amount at
approval: n.a.; revised allocation at 2019 restructuring: n.a.; revised allocation at 2021 restructuring:
$4.3 million; actual cost at project closing: $2.9 million) was introduced at the June 28, 2021,
restructuring. This component sought to support the government’s ATL COVID Recovery Strategy through
the deployment and training of 276 qualified yet unplaced graduate teachers (220 primary and 56 junior
secondary teachers) to serve as assistant teachers in schools with high learner to teacher ratios and poor
learning outcomes for a period of six months. These teachers were to serve as additional teaching staff
and/or subject tutors based on the needs of the school. The MOET had extended the school day with
rotational attendance of learners allowing for physical distancing measures at schools. The addition of
focused assistant teaching staff was to provide relief to overstretched teachers, while also being available to

                                                                                                  Page 4 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS Education Quality for Equality (P156001)



   work with smaller, individualized groups of learners to help them catch up. Furthermore, funding from the
   new fifth component would support the development of learner workbooks and revision booklets for all
   Grades in the country. Additionally, compressed curriculum teacher guides were also to be developed on
   the ATL strategy and distributed to all primary schools for Grades 1 to 4 and secondary schools for Grades
   8 to 11 in the country.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. The total project cost was $25.2 million, almost exactly the cost estimated at
   appraisal. However, because of substantial restructuring of the project (detailed Section 2.d), the
   distribution of the actual costs across components changed significantly from original estimates. At project
   completion: the cost of Component 1 was 52 percent of the original estimate, the cost of Component 2 was
   85 percent of the original estimate, and the cost of Component 3 was close to the original estimate at 92
   percent. Reallocations largely from Component 1 financed two new Components, one introduced in 2019
   to support school construction, and one introduced in 2021 to support teaching and learning approaches to
   address learning losses accrued during COVID-19.

   Financing. The project was financed by an International Development Assistance (IDA) credit in the
   amount of 18.1 million SDRs ($25 million equivalent). The IDA credit was essentially fully disbursed (an
   amount of 18.02 million SDRs was disbursed and the balance of 80,000 SDRs was cancelled). No
   Government counterpart financing was planned nor provided.

   Dates. The project was approved on May 26, 2016, and became effective on July 8, 2016. The mid-term
   review was held on November 28, 2018. The project closed on April 30, 2023, almost two years after the
   original closing date of June 30, 2021. The project underwent four restructurings on May 21, 2019, October
   9, 2019, June 28, 2021, and December 7, 2022. The first restructuring resulted in changes in the results
   framework, changes in components and cost, a reallocation between disbursement categories, the
   triggering of safeguard policies, a change in the Environmental Assessment category, a change in
   institutional arrangements, a change in procurement arrangements, and a change in the implementation
   schedule. The second restructuring resulted in a reallocation between disbursement categories. The third
   restructuring resulted in changes in the results framework, changes in components and cost, an extension
   of the closing date, a reallocation between disbursement categories, and changes in the implementation
   schedule. The fourth restructuring further extended the closing date.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The PDO is highly relevant to current country conditions. Lesotho aims to transition from an economic
model driven by debt-financed public investment to private sector-led growth. This transition is limited by
numerous factors, however, including the lack of efficient, effective, and equitable delivery of education and
health services, among others. Indeed, the Human Capital Index of 40 percent measured in 2020 suggests
that a child born in Lesotho today will only be 40 percent as productive in adulthood as s/he could be if s/he
had enjoyed complete education and full health by the age of 18. Human capital deficiencies in Lesotho are


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS Education Quality for Equality (P156001)



indeed calling for substantial and significant improvements in the delivery of education, health and social
protection services to support higher and more inclusive growth.

While basic education in Lesotho remains free, children from poorer households are less likely to stay and
complete basic education due to the high indirect cost of schooling, including transportation and school
uniforms. Moreover, the financial burden of school fees to attend junior secondary education
disproportionately affects poorer households. Mountainous regions and regions with higher poverty rates
tend to have higher dropout rates for secondary education compared to non-mountainous and more affluent
regions. Further, the learning outcomes of children who remain enrolled in the schooling system are
inadequate, with poverty constituting a key determinant of lower learning outcomes. Poor retention rates
result in only 42 percent of the student cohort entering Grade 1 completing junior secondary school and
only 30 percent completing senior secondary school. The enrollment rate in higher levels of education also
remains low among students who complete secondary education despite the strong correlation between the
completion of higher education and labor market outcomes. Part of the problem is explained by the fact that
Lesotho’s social protection system is not adequately targeted to the most vulnerable segments of the
population and benefit levels remain low.

The quality of basic education in Lesotho remains weak, with the country scoring third lowest among 14
countries in Southern Africa on the average score for Grade 6 student on the 2007 Southern and Eastern
Africa Consortium for Monitoring Educational Quality III. Students are found to have low English reading
and mathematics skills, with the country ranking third and fourth lowest amount Southern African countries.
Only 65 percent of students passed the Primary School Leaving Examination in rural schools. The low
quality of primary education results in a significant portion of students lacking mathematics and science
knowledge when entering junior secondary schools.

The PDO is highly relevant to current development priorities in the country. Lesotho’s National
Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) I for the period 2012/13-2016/17 included a sub-pillar to enhance the
foundation for skills development by improving access and instituting appropriate curriculum and best
practices in teaching from early childhood to high school. The NSDP II for the period 2018/19-2022/23
included a strategic objective to improve access and quality of early childhood care and development, and
of primary, and secondary education. The mission statement of Lesotho’s Education Sector Plan 2016-
2026 is to enhance the system that will deliver relevant and inclusive quality education to all Basotho
effectively, efficiently and equitably and its overall goals consist of: (i) improving access to quality and
relevant education and training at all levels, (ii) ensuring that curricula and materials are relevant to the
needs of Lesotho, (iii) strengthening leadership, accountability and governance at all levels of the education
sector, (iv) promoting gender equality and ensure empowerment to disadvantaged groups, and (v) ensuring
equivalence, harmonization and standardization of the Lesotho education and training system with
international education goals.

The PDO is highly relevant to the priority constraints identified in the World Bank’s Lesotho
Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) Update published in 2021 and the Lesotho Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) for the 2024-2028 period. The SCD emphasized the need to support
children’s access and retention in the school system, as well as improved learning outcomes to equip
children with skills that can meet the requirements of the labor market. It also focuses on the need to
address vulnerabilities largely stemming from poverty, such as gender-based violence, sexual and
reproductive health and substance abuse. The Lesotho CPF for the 2024-2028 period included a high-level




                                                                                                    Page 6 of 24
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      LS Education Quality for Equality (P156001)



               goal of improved human capital outcomes and the objectives of improved quality of primary and junior
               secondary education, enhanced retention of students, and improved quality of early childhood education.

               The World Bank has a comparative advantage in supporting a project of this nature given its
               significant experience in developing countries, including Lesotho, in delivering projects which support
               equitable improvements education quality and access. The project draws on a number of diagnostic
               studies of the education system, a study on non-formal education, the Skills for Competitiveness study, a
               pilot assessment of early grade literacy and numeracy, a 2014 Education Service Delivery Survey, a study
               on Teacher Qualifications Framework, and the 2015 Lesotho Systematic Country Diagnostic. The project
               builds on two previous World Bank-financed operations: the Second Education Sector Development Project
               (P056416) and the Second Education Sector Development Project Phase 2 (P081269).

               The PDO statement was somewhat ambiguous, which might have undermined the project’s theory
               of change and the measurement of its success. The first objective – to improve basic education service
               delivery in targeted schools – could have expressed more explicitly the goals of quality improvements and
               equitable access, which are well captured in the component descriptions, as well as in the project’s title,
               “Education Quality for Equality.” In the absence of these specifics, the first objective does not convey
               clearly the project’s intent. This became especially apparent when the two PDO indicators chosen to
               assess Objective 1 (teacher competencies) were dropped and not replaced. The second objective – to
               improve student retention in targeted schools – also had an underlying goal of improved equity, which might
               also have been made more explicit and tracked. While somewhat linked to the project’s supply-side
               interventions, this outcome is also very dependent on changes in a number of critical demand-side factors
               not addressed by the project, especially unaffordability of basic education – both direct and indirect costs
               coupled with an inadequate social protection system.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve basic education service delivery.

                             Rationale
                             Three intermediate outcomes supported progress toward the achievement of Objective 1. The first
                             intermediate outcome – improved quality of the teaching and learning environment in targeted
                             schools – focused on quality improvements to classroom service delivery at the primary and junior
                             secondary school levels to develop a strong foundation in literacy, numeracy, cognitive skills, science and
                             mathematics. Outputs included: primary school teachers trained and supported, junior secondary math and
                             science teachers trained and supported, improved curriculum and teaching methods for junior secondary
                             math and science, and schools with readers and other supplementary learning materials. Additional outputs

                                                                                                                            Page 7 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS Education Quality for Equality (P156001)



under 2019 and 2021 restructurings included: classrooms built and furnished, toilet blocks constructed (under
the 2019 restructuring) and primary and junior secondary schools, which benefited from the ATL teacher
training and deployment and supplementary ATL learning materials, designed to address learning losses
accrued from COVID-19 school closures.

The second intermediate outcome – strengthened school management and accountability in targeted
schools – focused on the empowerment of schools and local-level actors to identify and address local level
priorities for enhancing student learning and retention in targeted schools. It involved the building of school
capacity to undertake school improvement planning, the provision of school grants, and the strengthening of
results monitoring, oversight and transparent reporting of school performance through school report
cards. Outputs included: school boards trained, schools with approved SIPs, schools submitting report cards
(including data on dropouts, teacher and student absenteeism, and improvements to the learning
environment), and schools spending 50 percent or more of the total school grant.

The third intermediate outcome – strengthened capacity of MOET – focused on the enhancement of
evidence-based sector stewardship, with a particular emphasis on policy refinement, supported by studies
and student assessments, and the strengthening of the EMIS. Outputs included: studies to better understand
and address challenges (teacher supply, demand, management; math and science teacher skills, dropouts in
primary schools), Grade 9 student learning assessment, strengthened EMIS network and strengthened
capacities at central, regional and district levels.

Outputs and intermediate outcomes.

In all, a total of 91,450 individuals were estimated to have directly benefitted from the project, surpassing the
target of 86,500. Of this number, 52 percent consisted of female beneficiaries as targeted (100 percent
achievement).

Intermediate Outcome #1: Improved quality of teaching and learning environment

A total of 1,683 primary teachers were trained, surpassing the target of 1,400. This was achieved through
the first round of training conducted by the project, with subsequent rounds of training cancelled as discussed
under Section 2.d above.

A total of 202 mathematics and science teachers were trained in the new mathematics and science
curriculum, achieving the target of 200.

The PMI-PSI—designed to increase student engagement in K-12 science and mathematics, by including
relevant course materials, as well as innovative and effective recommendations for curriculum, teacher
methods, environment, scheduling, policies, and practices—was piloted along with the new mathematics and
science curriculum. The pilot consisted of an online, asynchronous teacher training program in 24 schools.
The ICR (p. 10) stated that project support included subject advisor visits to schools where possible and
specific subject teacher cluster meetings. It also indicates that the NJCTL was to accompany MOET on visits
to schools to ensure that the PMI-PSI courses would be implemented by the teachers in full compliance with
the program. The results of an assessment revealed that trained teachers in the PMI-PSI performed as well
as trained teachers in classroom settings. The PMI-PSI was expanded under the Global Partnership for
Education (GPE)-supported Lesotho Basic Education Strengthening Project (P175065) approved on February
17, 2022. While the ICR states that the pilot, along with the exploration of other models, would ultimately lead
the MOET to develop the new Lesotho model for teaching mathematics and science at junior secondary for

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS Education Quality for Equality (P156001)



implementation in 2021 and that the project would support the implementation of the new model for Grade 8
in the targeted 65 junior schools, the ICR does not provide details as to whether this was
effectively implemented.

As part of the ATL COVID Recovery Strategy, a total of 220 qualified primary teachers and 56 junior
secondary teachers were recruited by the MOET to serve as assistant teachers in targeted schools. These
teachers were trained on: the narrowed ATL curriculum, their roles as supporters of teachers and learners,
and the basics of classroom management under the ATL program. The teachers were dispatched to targeted
schools upon completion of their training.

A total of 377 readers—i.e., learners’ literature books to promote their reading—and supplementary reading
materials were distributed to primary school students through the project, as targeted (100 percent
achievement).

More than 60,000 copies of mathematics and science textbooks were distributed to Grade 9 and 10 students.

A total of 1,479 targeted primary schools benefited from ATL supplementary materials, surpassing the
target of 376.

A total of 350 targeted secondary schools benefited from ATL supplementary materials as targeted (100
percent achievement). The ICR indicates that the teaching materials included: (i) learner packs for Grades
1-4 for Sesotho, English, numeracy/mathematics and science; (ii) revised booklets for Grades 5-7 for six
subjects (Sesotho; English; mathematics; personal, spiritual and social; science and technology; and
creativity/entrepreneurship); and (iii) supplementary learning materials for Grades 8-11 in 16 subjects.

A total of 73 additional classrooms were built and equipped by the project as targeted (100 percent
achievement). A total of 72 toilet blocks were constructed as targeted (100 percent achievement). These
activities were in response to a growing body of evidence indicating that student retention and teacher
attendance may be affected if schools: (i) have access to basic services, such as water and sanitation, (ii)
provide a good indoor environment, (iii) have sound infrastructure able to withstand natural disasters; and (iv)
properly maintain their infrastructure (Barnett et al., The Impact of School Infrastructure on Learning: A
Synthesis of the Evidence).

Intermediate Outcome #2: Strengthened School Management and Accountability

A total of 377 school boards were trained on SIP preparation, grant management, procurement and financial
management, and reporting required by the SIP operations manual as targeted (100 percent achievement).
The training and support to school boards (comprised of the school principal, the local counselor or his/her
designate, as well as nominees of school owners, teachers and parents) targeted their weak capacity,
inability to understand roles and responsibilities, and lack of leadership and accountability. The evaluation of
the SIP found that school boards and school principals were knowledgeable on these key functions, with SIP
facilitators considered to have been crucial to developing this knowledge and to supporting the
implementation of SIP activities.

A total of 377 schools had approved SIPs, consisting of a three-year action plan on the priority actions
needed to address key problems constraining school performance based on the problems identified through a
participatory approach led by the school principal and an SIP facilitator as targeted (100 percent
achievement). The overall criteria for developing the SIPs were to improve school performance in terms of

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS Education Quality for Equality (P156001)



quality, retention, and equity of access, and its preparation was guided by the SIP operations manual and
supported by SIP facilitators. SIPs were subject to the MOET’s approval, and schools were required
to publicly disclose their SIPs and to report to the Inspectorate on an annual basis on their implementation
progress through a school report card, providing data on absenteeism, repetition, dropout rates in targeted
schools. The results of the 2022 SIP evaluation reveal that this improved the sense of community ownership
of schools, leading communities to take greater care of school assets, which was confirmed at the district and
school level by SIP facilitators, teachers, and community representatives.

A total of 377 schools submitted report cards as targeted (100 percent achievement). The 2022 SIP
evaluation confirmed that the school report cards tracked schools’ performance by reporting data on dropout
rates, student and teacher absenteeism, and the overall learning environment, allowing school principals to
monitor teachers’ attendance, identify problems in real time and make needed adjustments. Further, the
evaluation found that school report cards were submitted to the MOET to be included in their data gathering
and reporting system, but that data utilization by the MOET for evidence-based policymaking is in early
stages and would benefit from continuous training from SIP facilitators. The SIP evaluation also noted that
school report card data was incomplete, thus undermining its use at local and aggregate levels.

A total of 377 schools spent 50 percent or more of the total school SIP grant for the provision of consultants’
services and goods as targeted (100 percent achievement). The SIP evaluation revealed that items
purchased through the SIP grants were consistent with the criteria established in the operations manual. Still,
the evaluation indicated finance committees had difficulties understanding the procedures and reporting
requirements for the procurement of goods and services, and could have benefited from additional support
and training from SIP facilitators.

Intermediate Outcome #3: Strengthened Capacity of MOET

The project supported the development of assessment strategies for Grades 1-4 to inform project activities
related to the introduction of the new science and mathematics curriculum.

The national assessment in Grade 9 was developed and administered in 2018 to assess student knowledge
in science and mathematics as planned. The results pointed to achievement rates in mathematics and
science of 25 percent and 32 percent, respectively. Results were lower among schools targeted by the
project, with achievement ratings in mathematics and science standing at 23 percent and 25 percent,
respectively.

In addition, the project strengthened the capacity of the MOET by: (i) completing a baseline study to
benchmark assessment of project impacts; (ii) developed an English and Sesotho SIP manual and school
report cards; (iii) deployed SIP facilitators to participating schools; (iv) refined and finalized the Non-Formal
Education Policy; (v) deployed staff to the Project Facilitation Unit; (vi) developed the Education Language
Policy; (vii) completed a Curriculum and Assessment Audit, and (viii) developed the Communication Platform
on Assessment for teachers. The ICR (p. 61) stated that, while studies were completed, the implementation of
policies was challenging due to resource constraints. The ICR (p. 57) also stated that the project supported
analytical work and technical assistance supporting the development of a school construction strategy, the
dissemination of a TVET policy, the development of an implementation plan for the School Health and
Nutrition Program, HIV/AIDS, the training of school boards on IEC material, IPDET training, information and
outreach. Also, while the project supported the transition to a new open EMIS, the EMIS was not tested or



                                                                                                  Page 10 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS Education Quality for Equality (P156001)



piloted prior to its utilization, hampering data processing and analysis, which, combined with capacity
constraints, has undermined reliance on data for evidence-based policymaking.

Outcomes.

While the ICR reported on outputs and intermediate results indicating contributions to the goal of improved
basic education service delivery, the evidence that service delivery has indeed improved is somewhat weak,
because there are no outcome data to this effect. The ICR noted the decision taken during the 2021
restructuring to drop the two outcome indicators initially meant to measure achievement of this objective – a
five percent improvement in teacher content knowledge in targeted primary and junior secondary schools,
respectively. This decision was taken when it was understood that the majority of activities under Component
1, especially teacher training, could not be carried out under the project because of the prolonged teacher
strike as well as extended school closures and other restrictions due to COVID. No other outcome indicators
to assess the achievement of Objective 1 were added.

The ICR also noted the decision taken during the 2021 restructuring that the remaining two outcome
indicators (declines in dropout rates in primary and junior secondary schools) would serve as an adequate
measure of Objective 1 (improved service delivery) as well as Objective 2 (increased student retention). For
the purposes of this ICRR, IEG uses dropout indicators as an appropriate measure of Objective 2 only. While
IEG recognizes that supply-side investments in improved service delivery may have an impact on dropout
rates, as the ICR points out based on selected literature, it is important first to assess whether service
delivery was indeed improved, before attributing changes in dropout rates to improved service delivery. This
ICRR thus seeks evidence that the three above-cited intermediate results (and contributing outputs) did
indeed culminate in improved service delivery in the classroom. The following is the evidence IEG found to
this effect. (Under Objective 2 the same logic is followed, exploring the extent to which these same three
intermediate results (and relevant contributing outputs) culminated in a decline in dropout rates.)

      Drawing on an analysis of quantitative data mainly from the EMIS, interactions with respondents who
       participated in project implementation, and further reliance on secondary data, the 2022 endline
       Evaluation of the SIP reported the following findings:
            o The SIP program has been perceived by respondents (a sample of actors and stakeholders) to
               have improved the learning environment, noting positive changes such as: acquisition of
               learning materials, the acquisition of heating facilities in classrooms, which were reported by
               respondents to have reduced teachers’ and learners’ absenteeism during cold weather, and
               fencing of schoolyards. However, the desired outcomes of reduced teachers’ and learners’
               absenteeism could not be adequately assessed due to the unavailability of the data in
               electronic form (i.e., uncaptured data from SRC cards, indicative of challenges of program
               monitoring, and other data issues, noted below). Specifically, the 2022 SIP evaluation
               indicated that 92.7 percent of those surveyed believed that SIPs reduced teacher
               absenteeism, 92.5 percent believed that SIPs had reduced learners’ absenteeism, and 96
               percent agreed that the SIPs had contributed to improved learning environments, IEG notes
               that these results do not constitute unequivocal evidence, given issues of incomplete data,
               unavailable data, and inconsistency between SRC and EMIS data, reported in the SIP endline
               evaluation.
            o Noted improvements and improved learning environments did not translate into improved
               learner enrollment in SIP schools.
            o EMIS data analysis reveal that learner-toilet ratio gradually improved from 26:1 to 20:1 for boys
               and 27:1 to 20:1 for girls.

                                                                                                 Page 11 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS Education Quality for Equality (P156001)



            o EMIS data indicate that 11 percent of teachers left SIP primary schools in 2021, compared with
                22 percent for non-SIP primary schools; and teachers leaving SIP secondary schools at the
                rate of 29 percent, compared with 38 percent for non-SIP secondary schools.
            o   The SIP program provided financing in the form of grants to schools that were used
                appropriately for the most part to support their plans to purchase eligible items and services to
                strengthen service delivery. These funds were used, with 371 of 377 schools having spent 50
                percent or more of the first tranche, and 343 of 377 schools having spent 50 percent or more
                of the second tranche).
            o   Data issues undermined the assessment of the SIP program effect. The SRC data set was
                only updated to 2018, containing data for 50 percent of the schools. Moreover, the data lacked
                key variables such as teacher and student absenteeism. While EMIS data was a
                complementary source to the SRC, the two datasets had inconsistencies warranting data
                cleaning and cautious interpretation and still were not comparable. These challenges made it
                difficult to draw conclusions on the impact of the SIP program. There remain challenges to the
                monitoring and improvement of service delivery, including: capacity building and transport for
                district level technical support staff, the need to decentralize EMIS into the district and school
                information systems, simplification of monitoring tools and activities of inspectors, and capacity
                building for new school boards and principals and refresher training.
            o   MOET officials could not carry out oversight monitoring of SIP schools as was intended due to
                transport constraints. In addition, in some cases monitoring reports were not adequately
                shared with communities, undermining the goal to strengthen accountability.
            o   No other outcome information is reported that would have indicated improved basic education
                service delivery, such as on: teacher effectiveness, academic performance, inspectors’
                reports/evaluations of school performance and follow-up actions, evaluation of teachers and
                school leaders and follow-up actions, among others.
            o   The targeting of schools with higher poverty rates, more difficult accessibility (especially
                mountainous areas), and lower student performance was an important step on MOET’s efforts
                to improve the equity of basic services, although improvements in equity were not measured.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve student retention in targeted schools.

Rationale
The three intermediate outcomes outlined under Objective 1 also may have contributed to the achievement of
Objective 2. This section highlights possible contributions of each of these intermediate outcomes that
addressed possible underlying reasons for dropouts. It is notable that, although the project set an
improvement in retention at the level of a PDO, it largely addresses supply-side factors (physical access,
quality of teaching and learning), and not demand-side constraints, especially poverty-related constraints,
such as: affordability and young boys leaving school to take on jobs as herders.



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS Education Quality for Equality (P156001)



Outputs and intermediate outcomes.

IO#1: Intermediate Outcome #1 Improved quality of the teaching and learning environment: The
construction of classrooms cited above may have had a positive effect on student retention, but the ICR
does not present data to validate this outcome. Similarly, improved student-toilet ratios, achieved through the
construction of toilet facilities may also have had a positive effect on student retention, and a more engaging
curriculum may have also affected student retention. However, the ICR does not present evidence to link
these contributions to improvements in retention. There are no data to suggest that student-teacher
interactions improved and that students were more engaged following the adoption of an improved
curriculum.

IO#2: Intermediate Outcome #2 Strengthened school management and accountability: The results of
the SIP Evaluation Note reveal that respondents believed that the introduction of heated facilities reduced
students’ and teachers’ absenteeism. However, as indicated in the SIP Evaluation Note, challenges with the
EMIS and the School Report Cards (incomplete and conflicting data, not always shared with communities and
other stakeholders) make it difficult to document findings and conclusions on the impact of the SIP
programme on the reduction in dropout rates, and students’ and teachers’ absenteeism. Furthermore, it is not
clear whether or how these results were used to implement changes in schools to improve retention rates.

IO#3: Intermediate Outcome #3 Strengthened capacity of MOET: One of the key factors of school
dropouts is that children attend school at a later age, because of late enrollment and many students also
repeat Grades. There are, consequently, many older students in lower Grades. The project, however, does
not address this problem fully. While community outreach activities promoted school enrollment and
attendance, no remedial support targeted to older, lower performing students was envisaged. A study on
dropouts was planned under the original project design, but not implemented. It could have shed light on
supply- and demand-side constraints to student retention and how they might effectively be addressed,
including poverty (unaffordability of indirect costs of primary school, such as transportation and uniforms, and
direct/tuition and indirect costs of junior secondary school), the tendency of boys to drop out to take herding
jobs, among others.

Outcomes.

Grades 1 to 6 dropout rate in targeted primary schools fell from a baseline of 16 percent on December 30,
2016, to 11 percent by April 30, 2023, exceeding the target of 13 percent. The ICR reports that this
impacted 86 percent of project beneficiaries.

The dropout rate for Grades 8 and 9 in targeted junior secondary schools increased from a baseline of 21
percent on December 30, 2016, to 26 percent by April 30, 2023, not achieving the original target of 16
percent or the revised target of 20 percent. This result is due to exogenous factors related to a prolonged
teacher strike during the 2018/19 school year that disrupted schooling, halted teacher training and hampered
schools in implementing their respective SIPs. COVID-related school closures and lockdowns also disrupted
project activities. Moreover, COVID lockdowns in Lesotho and South Africa led to unemployment, loss of
income and financial challenges for many households, keeping many families from sending their junior
secondary school children back to school when they reopened, because of increased unaffordability of junior
secondary school fees and other expenses. Consequently, the dropout rate in project junior secondary
schools rose to 37.9 percent by August 2020. However, by project closing, as a result of new efforts made
under the project, particularly the implementation of the ATL/COVID Recovery Strategy, the junior secondary
dropout rate was reduced to 26 percent, representing an 11.9 percentage points drop from the 2020 level, a

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 24
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               LS Education Quality for Equality (P156001)



                            substantial improvement in light of circumstances. In the absence of the project, the decline in junior
                            secondary dropout rate from the high level at the time of COVID to the level achieved at project completion
                            may have been considerably less.

                            The ICR (paras. 6-7) is clear in noting a number of factors underlying dropout rates that the project’s three
                            intermediate outcomes do not address fully: poverty and unaffordability of costs (indirect costs of primary
                            school, such as transportation and uniforms), the high concentration of dropouts among overage students,
                            due to late entry and high repetition rates; and the tradition of boys leaving school to become herders, among
                            others. However, the ICR does not assess attribution of the changes in dropout rates to other projects and
                            other sources of support that may have had an effect, especially those that might have addressed the above-
                            cited, demand-side factors.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is rated Substantial, but with moderate shortcomings, with the efficacy of Objective 1
                            (Improve basic education service delivery) rated Modest, because of insufficient evidence on outcome, and
                            the efficacy of Objective 2 (Improve student retention in targeted schools) rated substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency. An economic analysis was performed on an ex-ante basis at project appraisal and on an
   ex-post basis at project closing. The results of the economic analysis performed on an ex-ante basis point to a
   net present value (NPV) of US$25.9 million using a social discount rate of 10 percent and an internal rate of
   return (IRR) of 15.5 percent. The results of the economic analysis performed on an ex-post basis point to an
   NPV of US$11.6 million and an IRR of 12.2 percent. The ICR did not, however, specify the discount rate used to
   compute the NPV of the project at closing. In an email to IEG dated March 26, 2024, the Bank indicated that the
   ICR author relied on a financial discount rate rather than a social discount rate to compute the NPV of the
   project. Given that the economic analysis measured benefits at the societal level rather than at the private
   individual level, the economic analysis might have instead relied on a social discount rate, which would have
   resulted in a higher than estimated NPV. The economic analysis performed at project closing considered the
   anticipated benefits from Component 1, 2 and 5 activities, which accounted for 58 percent of total project cost,
   and relied on key data from the 2017 Household Budget Survey, which indicated that the average monthly wage
   of individuals with any upper secondary school attendance was 2,961 LSL, or 80 percent more than individuals

                                                                                                                            Page 14 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LS Education Quality for Equality (P156001)



with only primary school education who were earning 1,644 LSL. The ICR explains that differences in NPV and
IRR results across the PAD and the ICR stem from more optimistic projections on PDO level indicators at
appraisal, as well as differences in methodology.

Implementation Efficiency. Unaudited interim financial reports and external financial audits, which were
submitted to the Bank in a timely manner, revealed that the use of funds disbursed through the project was
adequately monitored and appropriately used during implementation. Changes in components and costs at the
2021 restructuring allowed for the efficient response to the urgent needs triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The ICR reveals that there were no cost overruns and that the closing date extensions did not adversely impact
operational efficiency. Lengthy procurement processes delayed somewhat project implementation (see Section
10 b on Fiduciary Compliance).


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?           Point value (%)         *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                  0
 Appraisal                                               15.50
                                                                                   Not Applicable
                                                                                  58.00
 ICR Estimate                                            12.20
                                                                                   Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Overall outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory. The relevance of the PDO – to country conditions, the
development priorities of Lesotho and the Bank’s CPF – is rated High.

Overall efficacy is rated Substantial but with moderate shortcomings. While the project invested in various
improvements to the teaching and learning environment, the establishment and financing of locally managed
school improvement programs, and MoET capacity building, there is insufficient evidence to verify that these
culminated in the achievement of Objective 1 (to improve the delivery of basic education services). Lack of
reliable data and the absence of relevant outcome indicators were significant factors. Efficacy in achieving
Objective 1 is, therefore, rated Modest. The project’s achievement of Objective 2 (to improve student
retention in targeted schools) was substantially achieved. Reduction in dropout rates at the primary level
exceeded targets. Dropout rates at the junior secondary rates increased substantially as a result of
COVID: many students did not return when schools reopened because of the economic hit of households of
lost employment/income, making school fees at the secondary level unaffordable. Although the original and
revised targets of 16 and 20 percent dropout rate were not achieved against a baseline of 21 percent, the
dropout rate declined substantially from a post-COVID high of 37.9 percent to an end-of-project level of 26
percent – representing an 11.9 percentage points drop against the initial reduction of 5 percentage points and

                                                                                                 Page 15 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LS Education Quality for Equality (P156001)



the revised reduction of 1 percentage point which were envisaged in the RF. This result may have been
achieved through the implementation of the ATL (COVID) Recovery Strategy adopted by the government and
supported by this project, and possibly other project interventions aimed at improving teaching and learning
quality. Efficacy in achieving Objective 2 is therefore rated Substantial. The ICR mentions (in its Risks to
Development Outcome section) that conditional cash transfers provided to students from poor households
under the Basic Education Project (P175065), may have mitigated dropout rates in the aftermath of COVID. But
IEG’s review of the December 2023 ISR on this project reveals that these transfers were disbursed to 1,683
students sometime during mid- to late 2023, around the time of the closing of the Education Quality for Equality
project that is the subject of this ICRR. The project’s economic and implementation Efficiency is rated
Substantial.

Taken together, these ratings indicate that there were moderate shortcomings in the project's preparation,
implementation, and achievement, resulting in an Outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project supported institutional strengthening, including, the introduction of local community construction
committees, the adoption of the PMI-PSI which introduced a new approach to teaching mathematics and
science, and the SIP which was intended to promote student retention and transition. The Bank further
added in an email to IEG dated March 26, 2024, that the project also minimized the risk of political
interference by establishing an objective criterion for identifying the lower performing schools, which relied on
metrics such as the student flow, the examination success rate, resources available per student, and the
poverty level. Finally, the potential risk of teacher unions resisting the project’s interventions pertaining to
improved classroom instructional time and teaching quality was mitigated by: an extensive public information
campaign reaching out to all education stakeholders, major investments made to upgrade teacher
competencies, and the introduction of school accountability mechanisms.

The ICR identifies increased financial constraints on poor households in the aftermath of the COVID-19
pandemic as a key risk to sustaining development outcomes, which may lead to increased dropout rates.
The ICR indicates, however, that the risk is partly mitigated by the support provided to poor children under
the Basic Education Project (P175065), which is currently being implemented. Another source of risk to
sustaining development outcomes relates to the fact that not all of the teachers’ grievances have been
addressed, which may lead to other teacher strikes.

The School Improvement Planning Technical Evaluation Report produced in April 2023 identifies additional
risks to sustaining development outcomes as it pertains to the SIP. First, the report finds that while political
will for the SIP remains strong, the poor implementation and low absorptive capacity of donor-funded
projects may threaten sustainability. Second, the lack of a funding model for the SIP beyond the project cycle
may also threaten the sustainability of development outcomes. With regard to the first risk, the report finds
that capacity building in planning, budgeting and procurement planning, which may be transferred to other
projects, could support the sustainability of development outcomes. The report also notes that the



                                                                                                     Page 16 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LS Education Quality for Equality (P156001)



sustainability of program activities will also depend on the availability of funds for operating costs (heating
classrooms, photocopying, among others).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project Design. The Bank’s team ensured that the project was strategically aligned with Lesotho’s
  sectoral needs, its national and education development strategies and goals, and the Bank’s CPF, in
  place at the time of design (See Section 3). It supported government’s policies, particularly those related
  to ensuring continued and improved delivery of basic education services and a focus on at-risk children to
  curb dropout rates. The original design included critical actions to improve learning, including those
  aimed at: improving teaching, providing quality learning materials, ensuring community involvement, and
  strengthening school management. The choice of an IPF instrument with traditional indicators was
  deemed appropriate given reservations regarding Lesotho’s limited preparedness for results-based
  financing and disbursement-linked indicators. A Project Preparation Advance was requested to fund: (i)
  various studies (teacher supply and demand projections and teacher management, baseline for math and
  science teacher skills; and baseline for Grade 9 assessment); (ii) consultant services to prepare the SIP
  manual; and (iii) technical assistance to support other preparation activities. M&E design included the
  establishment of outcome indicators to measure achievement of each of the project’s two objectives. The
  collection and use of project data envisaged the reliance on school report cards and EMIS, both to be
  strengthened under the project, and their use at decentralized levels. (Section 9. M&E).

  Technical aspects of design were informed by lessons from successful education projects and
  evaluations globally, on the importance of improving teacher effectiveness in the classroom and
  enhancing school leadership for greater accountability and results. In an email to IEG dated March 26,
  2024, the Bank’s team noted that Component 1 draws extensively on lessons from the Education for All
  Fast Track Initiative (FTI)-III project, especially on curriculum development, teacher training and
  assessment. The new math and science model is based on the successful Gambian
  experience. Component 2 is informed by international evidence on the importance of community
  engagement and empowerment for improving school accountability for student learning. Component 3
  also draws on lessons from FTI-III on the importance of capacity building, especially in planning and
  coordination, with provision of technical assistance to this end. Component activities were selected in
  close collaboration with Government to ensure their relevance and complementarity with other support.

  The project’s targeting of the lowest performing schools in deprived areas was an important element of its
  poverty focus and its aim to improve equitable access and quality of basic education service
  delivery. However, the design/theory of change does not address the affordability issue, especially
  among the poorest and most vulnerable households, which stands to undermine equitable access to
  basic education, both at the primary level (unaffordability to some of indirect costs, especially
  transportation and uniforms, even with the policy of no fees) and at the junior secondary level (both direct
  and indirect costs). Even if the project chose not to address the issue, the theory of change might have
  included an assumption about how this issue would be addressed or mitigated by other partners or
  initiatives.



                                                                                                       Page 17 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS Education Quality for Equality (P156001)



  Implementation arrangements were integrated into the government’s institutional structure for
  managing basic education. A Coordination Committee, responsible for overall project coordination and
  quarterly reviews of performance, was established. Chaired by the Principal Secretary, its members
  included the Chief Education Officers of MOET, with participation from Ministries of Finance and of
  Development Planning. Quarterly reviews were to be issues-focused culminating in corrective measures
  to improve performance. A Project Implementation Manual clarified roles and responsibilities of the
  Coordination Committee and the PFU’s reporting responsibilities. Reporting to the Director of Planning,
  the PFU was responsible for day-to-day coordination (of central and district level actors and activities)
  and reporting of project performance. Responsibilities for implementing various components and
  subcomponents were delegated to a range of MOET departments in line with their respective mandates
  (details outlined in ICR, para. 50). These turned out to be too complex, challenging coordination efforts,
  and were later simplified during restructuring.

  Risks and Mitigation Measures were identified during preparation. The ICR (para. 51) notes that
  overall risk was assessed as substantial, particularly in light of: (i) implementing agency capacity
  constraints; (ii) fiduciary management capacity constraints; (iii) limited sectoral policies; (iv) teachers
  unions resistance to project interventions; and (v) limited diagnostic studies to inform and address sector
  challenges, undermining a coherent policy framework. Mitigation measures included: (i) capacity building
  at central and local level (training and technical assistance); (ii) training in procurement and financial
  management; (iii) public information campaign to inform stakeholders about the project; (iv) PPA-financed
  studies; and (v) SIP program facilitators. Although it was raised as an issue in the PAD, the risk
  assessment did not include the risk of persistent or increasing unaffordability of school costs, especially
  to the poorest, most vulnerable households, which could undermine efforts to improve student retention.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision missions were composed of education specialists, fiduciary and safeguards staff, as well as
 consultants providing needed technical expertise. A total of 13 internal supervision reports were issued
 between effectiveness in mid-2016 to end-2022, averaging one every six months. The project team was
 regularly and actively engaged in supporting government in project implementation. In the face of
 significant challenges to implementation and to the achievement of objectives, especially the teachers’
 strike and the COVID-19 epidemic, the Bank was proactive, working with government to restructure the
 project to shift its focus to other, more potentially impactful activities. The project’s new post-COVID focus
 on Accelerated Teaching and Learning, involving the allocation of new teacher graduates for a period of six
 months to poorly resourced schools in rural and hard-to-reach mountainous areas, supported students in
 need of remedial support to keep them from dropping out.

 Supervision teams consistently monitored and reported on financial management, procurement and
 safeguards progress during supervision mission and undertook capacity building of the PFU and other
 implementing agencies in these areas. The Bank’s implementation support also involved onsite capacity
 building in other areas, including community construction and school-level SIP implementation. Aide-
 memoires and implementation status and results reports documented project progress, which kept World
 Bank management informed of progress, informed corrective action, and provided the foundation for the

                                                                                                   Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS Education Quality for Equality (P156001)



 ICR analysis. During COVID-19 lockdowns and restricted travel, the Bank undertook virtual missions to
 ensure continued implementation and on-track completion. To ensure regular interaction with
 implementing units, the Bank team held weekly meetings with the Principal Secretary, and other MOET
 officials to ensure that implementation was progressing. The Bank also introduced the Mobile Monitoring
 System (MMS) to support rapid data collection and monitoring, which informed Implementation Status and
 Results Reports on time, despite challenges encountered with the EMIS data. This approach, allowed
 multiple units within MOET to receive feedback directly from beneficiaries in the context of geographical
 challenges and COVID-19 travel restrictions.

 A moderate shortcoming of the project restructuring was the failure to replace the dropped outcome
 indicators (measuring teacher competencies in primary and junior secondary schools) with new indicators
 for assessing the achievement of Objective 1 improved basic service delivery.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  The original M&E design included four outcome indicators: two (measuring teacher competency) to assess
 achievement of Objective 1 (improve basic education service delivery in targeted schools) and two
 (measuring dropout rates in primary and junior secondary schools) to assess achievement of Objective 2
 (improve student retention in targeted schools. It also included a number of output and intermediate
 outcome indicators enabling, for the most part, the assessment of the various activities and inputs of the
 projects and their plausible links to the achievement of objectives. M&E design also included: (i) utilization
 of school report cards and the EMIS for data gathering (both of which were to be strengthened and further
 institutionalized under the project); (ii) a Grade 9 baseline assessment of science and mathematics; (iii) an
 endline evaluation of the SIP program; and (iv) an evaluation of the PMI-PSI activities. The design
 envisaged the use of data and studies by central, district and school level stakeholders. An M&E specialist
 within the PFU was charged with M&E implementation. The quarterly reporting of the PFU to the
 Coordinating Committee was expected to inform MOET, and Ministries of Finance and of Development
 Planning, about project performance and to identify and address any issues undermining implementation
 and outcomes. M&E design also envisaged the use of data collected: (i) by schools at the local level to
 inform progress, enhance accountabilities, and influence the design, implementation and evaluation of
 school improvement plans; and (ii) at the district level to enable the monitoring of performance and the
 targeting of their technical and pedagogical support to schools through supervisions and training.




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS Education Quality for Equality (P156001)



b. M&E Implementation
  The reporting of data tracking indicators in the results framework was carried out throughout project
  implementation, although with some delays. The ICR (para. 58) reports that, in general, M&E data was
  collected and analyzed in a methodologically sound manner. MOET had an experienced M&E specialist
  with the capacity to undertake sound data analysis. Neverthless, the remoteness of schools posed
  problems to the timely collection and reporting of data for the Education Management Information System
  (EMIS). This was further challenged when MOET introduced the new Open EMIS, which had not yet
  been tested or piloted prior to utilization, and consequently hampered data processing and
  analysis. Moreover, restrictions imposed by the COVID-19 pandemic prevented MOET and World Bank
  from undertaking field visits to monitor progress. The Bank resorted to drones and the Mobile Monitoring
  System (MMS) for the monitoring of progress in the aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic. Drones
  monitored classroom construction. A phone-based survey conducted as part of the MSS and covering
  400 schools targeted by the project, collected data and information from principals, teachers, parents and
  other beneficiaries through text messages at no cost to the user on their experiences with the project
  interventions while also confirming project provision of goods and learning materials delivered.
  School report cards, introduced under the project, were used for gathering data at the school level. The
  SIP assessment was completed with the support of a consulting firm. The Grade 9 mathematics and
  science assessment, as well as an assessment of the PMI-PSI were also completed.

  During the 2021 post-COVID restructuring culminated in the deletion of the two PDO level indicators
  (assessing teacher competencies) intended to assess the achievement of Objective 1 (improve basic
  education service delivery). There was a missed opportunity to add one or more new PDO level
  indicators, which would have enabled the measurement of the substantially changed results framework
  supporting Objective 1, due to both to the substantial changes in the kinds of activities undertaken to this
  end – essentially the dropping of most teacher training/capacity building because of teacher strikes and
  COVID-19 closures and travel restrictions, and the thrust of new activities focused on supporting
  government’s post-COVID response focused on addressing and mitigating learning losses during school
  closures. This is considered to be a significant shortcoming, given that IEG has found insufficient
  evidence to properly assess the achievement of Objective 1 (see Section 4. Efficacy).



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reports that M&E supported the MOET teams’ decision-making and led to Component 4 and 5
  activities being added at restructuring. The ICR also reports that the SIP program, which led to the
  training of 377 school boards, will lead to more community engagement in monitoring school activities
  and will be continued in the Lesotho Basic Education Strengthening Project (P175065) as school boards
  will be required to monitor students' attendance to determine eligibility for the cash transfer program
  supported by that project. The PMI-PSI assessment was used by the Bank team to expand the program
  in the Lesotho Basic Education Strengthening Project (P175065). Data gathered through the MMS and
  school report cards were transferred to the EMIS.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest



                                                                                                    Page 20 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS Education Quality for Equality (P156001)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified category C on environmental safeguards at appraisal as there was no
   construction or rehabilitation work planned at the time that would trigger safeguards policies. The May 2019
   restructuring introduced school construction activities, triggering OP/BP4.01 (Environmental Assessment)
   and OP/BP4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources) and leading the project to be classified category B on
   environmental safeguards. An Environmental Social Management Framework was consequently developed
   and environmental safeguards began to be monitored during implementation and were reported in
   Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs), with environmental safeguards being consistently rated
   Moderately Satisfactory or Satisfactory. The key problem pertained to the payment of wages to community
   laborers at construction sites and the complaints it triggered, which were ultimately resolved. The project
   established a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM), which was accessible to all stakeholders, including
   Community Construction Committee members and laborers. The GRM process was included in the
   Environmental Social Management Framework and the training of individuals for the GRM was led by the
   Education Facility Unit (EFU). Stakeholders’ concerns could be raised through the GRM boxes erected
   onsite, or reported directly to the chief, the headmaster or the chairperson of the school board. Staff
   members of the MOET’s Project Facilitation Unit (PFU) regularly visited school construction sites and spoke
   to the chief, head teachers and community leaders to resolve GRM issues. The Bank support capacity
   building at the EFU and the PFU.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. The project relied on the MOMPRO software for financial management and the
   quality of reporting was deemed acceptable. The project’s performance on financial management was
   generally rated Satisfactory, but was downgraded twice to Moderately Satisfactory due to delays in
   submitting annual audited reports. The auditor’s opinion was unqualified (clean). The ICR reports, however
   that the project closed with a lapsed credit due to abrupt changes in the MOET PFU financial management
   staffing requirements, but that the MOET submitted the reconciliation document in the system, which was
   signed by the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning on November 29, 2023.

   Procurement. The PFU migrated to the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) for
   uploading procurement documentation and procurement performance was monitored through regular
   assessment missions. The PFU experienced problems with: (i) weak capacity, (ii) consistently entering
   procurement steps in the STEP, and (iii) lengthy procurement processes. These problems were addressed
   through the Bank’s procurement staff providing training and carrying one-on-one capacity building sessions
   to the PFU and the EFU to support compliance with guidelines. The Procurement Strategy for
   Development and procurement plans were prepared on time and approved by the Bank, with the country
   executing activities in compliance with standards and regulations. Procurement performance was
   monitored through regular assessment missions. The P-RAMS ratings, which is an instrument tool used to
   analyze content, trace trends, or correlate risk management and procurement outcomes, were consistently
   rated Moderately Satisfactory or Satisfactory in ISRs.




                                                                                                 Page 21 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       LS Education Quality for Equality (P156001)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None noted.



d. Other
   None noted.



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                            ICR                IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                Shortcomings in measuring
Outcome                            Satisfactory      Moderately Satisfactory    progress toward achievement of
                                                                                objective 1.
                                                                                Moderate shortcomings in
Bank Performance                   Satisfactory      Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                project design and supervision.
                                                                                Insufficient evidence to assess
Quality of M&E                     Substantial       Modest
                                                                                Objective 1 efficacy.
Quality of ICR                     ---               Modest


12. Lessons

The ICR Review included the following ICR lessons:

    1. Reliance on Community Construction Committees in remote areas can support improved
       access to local school infrastructure if potential challenges are addressed. In this particular
       project, delays in salary payments and the provision of construction materials, which
       initially led to implementation delays, were later resolved and allowed school constructions in
       remote areas to be completed on a timely basis;
    2. The introduction of SIPs can promote a sense of community ownership, with the results of
       the SIP assessment indicating, among other things, that communities had increased their
       level of awareness of what happens in schools, and their concern over protecting the school
       facilities and materials; and
    3. Complex institutional arrangements necessitating interagency coordination within the context
       of high government staff turnover can impede implementation. In such instances, identifying
       a focal point for each sub-component may prove beneficial.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

                                                                                                  Page 22 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS Education Quality for Equality (P156001)




14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The quality of the ICR is rated Modest. The quality of evidence presented in the ICR is weak, with much of the
results framework indicators consisting of output/process indicators rather than outcomes indicators, making it
difficult to measure progress toward the achievement of the objectives. Moreover, the quality of data to track
various trends the project aimed to affect (dropout rates, teacher absenteeism, learner absenteeism…),
collected from school report cards and the EMIS, was inadequate, with significant data gaps, and
inconsistencies between the two sources, which undermined its use to assess project performance and
outcomes. These were acknowledged in the ICR and in the SIP endline evaluation.

The quality of analysis is also weak. The ICR considered the two PDO indicators tracking dropout rates in
primary and junior secondary schools to be appropriate for assessing achievement of Objective 1 (improved
basic education service delivery in targeted schools), as well as Objective 2 (improved student retention in
targeted schools). While IEG considered dropout indicators to be appropriate for assessing Objective 2, it
considered them to be insufficient, especially as the only outcome indicators, for assessing Objective 1. The
ICR noted that the literature reveals that improvements in teaching and learning environments and in school
management and the provision of school grants – all project interventions – positively affect dropout rates. But
evidence on the extent to which service delivery was improved is lacking to sufficiently link this outcome to the
consequent outcome of improved retention. The analysis did not delve sufficiently into the assessment of
attribution (or contribution). While the ICR notes that dropout rates are significantly affected by
poverty/unaffordability of direct and indirect costs of schooling, there is no analysis of the extent to which
declines in dropout rates were attributable to supply-side support provided by the project, and/or to
interventions outside of this project, financed by other sources, aimed at addressing the affordability issues,
which were exacerbated during COVID. In short, the report’s assessment didn’t always trace and establish the
linkages underpinning the theory of change and the results framework to highlight how activities contributed to
outputs, outputs to intermediate outcomes, and intermediate outcomes to outcomes, in other words, what
occurred as a consequence of the project. Nor did it document other contributions to outcomes that were made
outside of the project.

The ICR’s lessons are based on the findings and experience of this project.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                   Page 23 of 24
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
LS Education Quality for Equality (P156001)




                                                                           Page 24 of 24
