     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Earthquake Housing Reconst Project (P155969)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023995

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P155969                                   Earthquake Housing Reconst Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Nepal                                     Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-57060,IDA-61640,IDA-65300             31-Jul-2020                                        694,393,886.45

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Jun-2015                               30-Jun-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          200,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           700,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                       694,393,886.45                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ebru Karamete              Christopher David            Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 7), the project development objective is: ‘to restore
   affected houses with multi-hazard resistant core housing units in targeted areas and to enhance the
   government's ability to improve long-term disaster resilience’.

   The Financing Agreement’s (FA, page 4) statement of objectives was slightly different, where the FA used
   the word ‘ recipient’ instead of the word ‘government’ used by the PAD.


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Earthquake Housing Reconst Project (P155969)



   For this Implementation Completion and Results Report Review (ICRR), the PDOs are taken to be:

   PDO1: To restore affected houses with multi-hazard resistant core housing units in targeted areas; and

   PDO2: To enhance the government's ability to improve long-term disaster resilience.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  30-Nov-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had four components:

   1. Housing Reconstruction (Appraisal cost: US$180.0 million; actual cost: US$655.18 million)

   The component aimed to finance: (a) the provision of housing grants for reconstruction of approximately
   55,000 multi-hazard resilient core housing units. Eligibility was to be determined by an assessment of
   recovery needs and willingness to participate and adhere to project guidelines for resilient construction,
   quality standards and timelines; and (b) the establishment of a program of owner-driven housing
   reconstruction in targeted areas including: i) social, environmental, and technical support mechanisms for
   beneficiary households; ii) training of artisans and beneficiaries; iii) communication and outreach; iv)
   supervision and certification of compliance with multi-hazard resistant standards and of completion of multi-
   hazard resilient core housing units; v) implementation of the environmental and social management
   framework including identified safeguard mitigation measures; and vi) development of a grievance redress
   mechanism.

   Activities under this component would inform operational modalities for the development of the
   Government's owner-driven housing reconstruction program. The beneficiary households were to be
   screened and identified through the Earthquake Household Damages and Characteristics (EHDC) Survey
   taking place in the 14 most affected districts.

   2. Disaster Risk Management Systems (Appraisal cost: US$10.0 million; actual cost: US$4.77 million)

   This component aimed to support the government in putting in place systems to provide better disaster risk
   reduction, preparedness, and disaster response, in line with global best practices. The component planned
   to finance (as needed) disaster risk management, risk assessment and financing, structural engineering,
   remote sensing, Geographic Information System (GIS), land use and zoning, permitting and approval of site
   and building plans, professional accreditation, curriculum development, building code implementation and

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Earthquake Housing Reconst Project (P155969)



  enforcement, studies on safety net practices in post–disaster situations, and inclusive and gendered
  practices in disaster mitigation planning.

  Component 2 project activities were refined to align with priorities of the Disaster Risk Reduction National
  Strategic Plan of Action, 2018–2030, and address the constitutional mandate to decentralize DRM
  responsibilities and build local-level capacity.

  3. Project Implementation Support (Appraisal cost: US$5.0 million; actual cost: US$10.77 million)

  This component planned to finance the establishment and operation of the Project Management Unit
  (PMU), the Project Implementing Units (PIUs), and the District-Level Project Implementation Units (DL-
  PIUs). This was to cover support to strengthening capacity to effectively procure and manage delivery
  systems including damage assessment, beneficiary household identification, payment system, management
  information system (MIS), grievance redress, and communication/outreach. In addition, the component will
  also finance consultancies/service providers required for the preparation and supervision of specific
  activities, monitoring and evaluation.

  4. Contingency Emergency Response (Appraisal cost: US$0.0 million; actual cost: US$0.0 million)

  This component was designed to allow the Government of Nepal (GoN) to request the Bank to re-
  categorize and reallocate financing from other projects to cover emergency response and recovery costs,
  but it was not triggered.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project cost was originally estimated at US$200.00 million. The project had two
  additional financings of US$300.00 million and US$200.00 million. The actual cost a closing was
  US$694.39 million.

  Financing: At appraisal, the IDA credit amount (IDA-57060) was estimated at US$200.00 million. Additional
  financing of SDR 213.6 million (US$300 million) was approved in November 2017 (IDA-61640), and SDR
  145 million (US$200 million) was approved in December 2019 (IDA-65300) to address financing gap in the
  housing reconstruction program. By the project closing on June 30th 2023, the project had disbursed
  US$694.39 million of total funds under the three IDA credits. The undisbursed amounts were cancelled, and
  all project funds were accounted for at the time of project evaluation.

  Borrower’s contribution: There was no Borrower’s contribution estimated at appraisal. The GoN provided
  counterpart funding of US$39.4 million with the second Additional Financing.

  Restructurings: The project had two additional financings and went through six level 2 restructurings, as
  described below.

  First Restructuring (March 24th, 2016): This was to change one of the project’s implementing agencies
  from the Ministry of Finance (MOF) to the National Reconstruction Authority (NRA), following NRA’s
  establishment.




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Earthquake Housing Reconst Project (P155969)



First Additional Financing (AF1) (November 2017): An amount of US$300 million was approved to
address the financing gap in GoN’s housing reconstruction program. The total number of eligible
beneficiaries increased from a preliminary estimate of 500,000 in 2015 to more than 650,000, and housing
grants provided by GoN were revised upward to NPR 300,000 (approximately US$3,000) from the earlier
NPR 200,000 (approximately US$2,000) due to increased construction costs. The additional credit helped
finance an additional 96,000 hazard-resistant houses. The project closing date changed from July 31, 2020,
to June 30, 2023. Target values were revised in the Result Framework (RF), reflecting the increased scope
of work.

Second Restructuring (May 21st, 2019): This was to be aligned with the federalism structure. Based on
implementation of the 2015 Constitution, local governments (LGs) became the legal entities for
amendments and signing Participants Agreements (PAs). Furthermore, NRA was restructured, with Central
Level Project Implementation Units brought under its control, who were responsible for the verification of
project beneficiaries and endorsing the lists for release of funds. This facilitated direct transfer of grant
tranches from the government’s account to beneficiaries’ bank accounts.

Second Additional Financing (AF2) (December 2019): An amount of US$200 million was approved in
December 2019 and financed an additional 86,680 housing grant beneficiaries. The GoN also provided
counterpart funding of US$39.4 million.

Third Restructuring (May 29th, 2020): It allowed the first and/or second tranches paid by GoN to the
beneficiaries to be accepted as eligible expenditures for IDA reimbursement under AF2, with the second
and/or third tranches eligible for reimbursement through AF1. With this restructuring, in addition to the first
tranche, considered as counterpart financing, second tranche paid by GoN became eligible for
reimbursement under an IDA credit.

Fourth Restructuring (August 12th, 2021): This supported additional IDA beneficiaries by converting the
construction categories of 27,000 beneficiaries from retrofitting to reconstruction after grievance redress.
The restructuring also supported 12,537 additional eligible beneficiaries with second and third tranches. The
number of target beneficiaries were updated in the RF. The category reallocation also accommodated the
cost of the structural integrity assessment (SIA) and the cost of transferring records to District Coordination
Committees and local government. Since NRA’s tenure was ending in December 2021, National Disaster
Risk Reduction and Management Authority (NDRRMA) was added as an Implementing Agency (IA) and
allocated SDR 10 million to implement Component 2.

Fifth Restructuring (February 13th, 2022): This was to provide resources to Central Level Project
Implementation Unit to enable the complete inspections of the remaining 34,296 IDA beneficiaries and
process IDA reimbursements. It also allocated funds to NDRRMA to support data update and manage the
MIS and third-party M&E output verification and digitization.

Sixth Restructuring (June 20th, 2023): This revised the activities under Component 2 and repurposed
uncommitted IDA credit funds to support additional 10,288 IDA housing beneficiaries. RF targets were
updated to reflect additional project beneficiaries as well as new intermediate-level indicators were
introduced to capture the results achieved by NDRRMA under Component 2.

Dates: The project was approved on June 29th, 2015, and became effective six months later, on January
28th, 2016. The Mid-Term Review was conducted three years later on August 10th, 2018. The original
project closing date was July 31st, 2020. The project closing date was extended by three years, in


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Earthquake Housing Reconst Project (P155969)



   November 2017, during the AF1, to June 30th, 2023, to provide sufficient time to implement and fully utilize
   the credit funds.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
On April 25, 2015, a magnitude 7.8 ML earthquake struck central Nepal, affecting 32 districts (out of a total
of 75 districts) and causing more than 8,700 deaths and 25,000 injuries. A Post Disaster Needs
Assessment (PDNA) estimated the total damages and losses from the earthquake to be about US$7 billion,
and reconstruction needs at about US$6.7 billion, approximately one-third of Nepal’s GDP in 2014. Initial
assessments indicated the earthquake destroyed 490,000 low strength masonry - stone or brick masonry
with mud mortar houses occupied by the rural poor and partially damaged 265,000 houses making them
temporarily uninhabitable. The government estimated total financing for housing reconstruction at about
US$1.2 billion, which was financed through a combination of government’s resources, loans, and grants by
development partner organizations.

The project objective was highly aligned with the World Bank’s strategy as defined in the Country
Partnership Framework for FY 2019–2023 (CPF) for Nepal, particularly the objective 3.3 of the CPF,
increased resilience to health shocks, natural disasters, and climate change. The PDO was also aligned to
UNDRR’s Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction (2015–2030), that calls for enhancing disaster
preparedness for effective response and to “Build Back Better” in recovery, rehabilitation, and
reconstruction.

The project objective was also highly relevant to the country priorities and strategies. After the promulgation
of the new constitution in 2015, the government enacted a new law on Disaster Risk Reduction and
Management and initiated addressing disaster risk holistically. The PDO was relevant to the National Policy
for Disaster Risk Reduction Plan in 2018 and the 2017 National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management
Act and the Nepal Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Regulations. The Government established the
National Reconstruction Authority (NRA) in December 2015 as a temporary agency with a five-year lifetime
for the post-disaster reconstruction until December 2022. The NRA prepared policies, plans, budgets, and
programs with a schedule of operations for the reconstruction of earthquake-affected structures, including
housing reconstruction. Furthermore, project activities under Component 2 were updated to align with
priorities of the Disaster Risk Reduction National Strategic Plan of Action, 2018–2030 and built capacity for
DRM at the various levels of government.

Following the earthquake, the Bank began providing advice and support to the GoN on how to consider and
design reconstruction and recovery efforts. The Bank previously demonstrated global and regional
experience in post-disaster housing reconstruction and social protection - in such countries as Pakistan,
India, Haiti, the Philippines, and Indonesia - and was well positioned to bring its expertise and experience to
support GoN through recovery and reconstruction.

The project objective was realistic and sufficiently challenging as it included not only restoring affected
houses with multi-hazard resistant core units but also enhancing the government’s ability to improve long-
term disaster resilience.


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Earthquake Housing Reconst Project (P155969)



               Based on the above, the relevance of the objective is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To restore affected houses with multi-hazard resistant core housing units in target areas.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC): The ICR developed a TOC showing the causal links between project activities,
                             outputs, and outcomes. The project was designed to provide housing grants and socio-technical assistance
                             for safe, owner driven reconstruction. The project outputs included grants to cover multi-hazard housing core
                             units (this covered on average about one third of housing construction costs for the preferred houses); in
                             addition, raising awareness of beneficiaries and training of engineers and artisans in disaster resilient
                             reconstruction practices. The expected outcome was restoration of affected houses with multi-hazard core
                             housing units. The long-term outcome was reduced vulnerability of beneficiaries to future disasters. Overall,
                             the causal pathways from inputs to outcomes were direct, and the achievement of the outcomes could be
                             attributed to the project’s intervention. However, the project design did not support a differentiated approach
                             to low-income households (i.e. by connecting with affordable credits, and/or providing larger grants, and/or
                             joint house title / ownership for women), so that they could afford their share of reconstruction costs. The
                             PDO indicators to measure this objective included the number of households with resilient core housing
                             reconstructed under the project, and the number of citizens made aware of earthquake resilient
                             reconstruction. The indicator on the number of households with resilient core housing reconstructed could
                             have been differentiated using poverty parameters to better illustrate the importance of targeting in disaster
                             response.

                             Outputs:

                             The project provided housing grants for reconstruction of multi-hazard resilient housing units in the 32
                             affected districts. To ensure construction of multi-hazard resistant houses, tranche disbursements were tied to
                             three inspections, which ensured compliance with construction guidelines at plinth, roof-band, and completion
                             stages. Additionally, periodic Third-Party Monitoring and Assessment (TPMA) was undertaken for 160,000
                             buildings, in line with the “Technical Inspection Guideline for Housing Reconstruction,” providing an additional
                             layer of quality assurance. Where noncompliance was observed, District Support Engineers (DSEs) advised
                             on corrective measures based on the “Correction Exception Manual for Masonry Structures”.

                             The project provided training to engineers, including i) Master Training of Trainers on Building Inspection (130
                             engineers), ii) Building Inspection Training (434 engineers), and iii) Building Inspection Training in 10 Districts


                                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Earthquake Housing Reconst Project (P155969)



(1,720 engineers); iv) 113 Master Training of Trainers and 1,862 engineers were trained to implement the
Retrofitting and Correction /Exception Manual.

Socio-technical assistance (STA) as recommended by the Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) became an integral part of the owner-driven housing reconstruction approach. The STA
expedited reconstruction and ensured inclusion of the most vulnerable (women, children, and disabled
persons). The STA team included 755 mobile masons [149 women: 19.7percent], 246 social mobilizers [148
women: 60.2percent], and 145 engineers [23 women: 15.9 percent], exceeding the indicator target of 10
percent for “Women masons to be employed by the project in the provision of Socio-Technical Assistance.”

To ensure 100 percent of beneficiaries were aware of resilient housing, the project enrollment was coupled
with the provision of information before they signed the project agreement. In addition, a communication and
outreach strategy was prepared and implemented, reaching 450,000 beneficiaries in 14 districts. Toll-free
helpline numbers were provided, and information was disseminated on project information via FM radios,
television, and other media outlets.

Outcomes:

The project promoted owner driven resilient house reconstruction by covering the cost of a basic housing unit
and payments made in tranches, tied to compliance to disaster resilient reconstruction guidelines. The project
also trained engineers and artisans in disaster resilient reconstruction, to build capacity for resilient
construction practices. Thus, the project achieved a massive scale of reconstruction effort.

The PDO indicator “Households with resilient core housing reconstructed under the project,” was fully
achieved, with 319,621 houses reconstructed against the 309,335 revised target, of which 65,138 (20.37%)
were women-headed households, exceeding the indicator target of 63,407. All reconstructed houses adhered
to the project guidelines for resilient construction, quality standards, and were inspected at completion. The
STA program provided technical support to more than 157,691 households and reconstructed more than
1,771 houses for the most vulnerable beneficiaries.

However, the project lacked a differentiated approach to adequately address the needs of the ultra-poor
households, as noted by the ICR, the project could not sufficiently support the ultra-poor or persons with
functional limitations (except for vulnerable-headed households supported by STA, who received additional
grant of 50,000), who were either left with indebtedness or unable to complete reconstruction of their houses.
(ICR, para. 86) While this was not reported to be a widespread issue, it was an element that could have been
rectified by a more heterogenous support model.

Based on the above, the achievement of the PDO, to restore affected houses with multi-hazard resistant core
housing units in target areas, was rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

                                                                                                 Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Earthquake Housing Reconst Project (P155969)



To enhance the government's ability to improve long-term disaster resilience.

Rationale
TOC: The ICR developed a TOC showing the causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes.
The project design comprised establishment of disaster risk management systems and the outputs of housing
grants and socio-technical assistance for safe, owner driven reconstruction. The project outputs included
development of data and tools for planning of risk reduction investments and post disaster reconstruction,
capacity building of government for emergency response, capacity building of federal provincial and municipal
governments on disaster risk management. The expected outcome was the enhancement of the country’s
capacity to improve long term disaster risk management. The original PDO indicator to measure this objective
was insufficient, i.e. output oriented and measured only the government officials trained on DRM. However,
during the last restructuring, a new outcome indicator was included: “the number of municipalities covered for
assessing building vulnerability and hazard exposure of critical public facilities” to better reflect the project
results under Component 2. Additional indicators could have been designed to capture project results on
early warning systems as well as results of training events in terms of the extent of knowledge and skills
developed utilized and practiced and the transformation experienced by government counterparts supported
through the project.

Outputs:

      The following intermediate indicator targets for IRIs introduced at the last restructuring were achieved
         and exceeded:(a) number of public facilities surveyed and cataloged under rapid visual survey (RVS),
         10,833 achieved against the 10,000 target (6,722 education, 2,486 public service and 1,625 health
         facilities), and (b) Geo-referenced National Building Exposure Platform accessible via government
         website.
        The IRI “Number of public facilities covered under Seismic Vulnerability Assessment and Detailed
         Project Report prepared” was achieved and provided selected municipal governments with actionable
         engineering solutions, specifications, designs, and cost estimates of resilience interventions for select
         facilities.
        The project supported procurement, installation, and operationalization of 34 multi-hazard Early
         Warning Systems (EWS) in 13 municipalities providing EWS service to 211,072 persons which has
         helped strengthen disaster risk preparedness, planning, and response. The NDRRMA trained local
         governments on the operation of the EWS for emergency response planning through drills conducted
         in collaboration with International Nongovernmental Organizations (INGOs).
        The project installed and operationalized 1,539 SAR equipment, providing emergency response
         coverage to 2,502,803 persons in 53 municipalities. Communication equipment was also provided and
         operationalized, serving 13,588,319 persons in 31 districts and Lumbini, Karnali and Sudurpaschim
         Provinces, which facilitated telecommunication between relevant stakeholders. Through these
         activities, the project exceeded the intermediate indicator targets of 24 “District Emergency Operation
         Centers (DEOC) and Local Emergency Operation Centers (LEOC) equipped with SAR equipment.”,
         and 26 for “DEOCs equipped with communication equipment”.
        The project provided training on resilient construction to 1,818 elected representatives and local
         government officials (including 23 percent women), exceeding the IRI target of 1,000 people.
        The participation of more than 334 female-elected representatives and local-level officials in DRR
         training exceeded the IRI target of 250 for “Out of which, women elected representatives and officials
         of Local Level”.


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Earthquake Housing Reconst Project (P155969)




                                  The project developed DRM curriculum and materials for training of government and DRM
                                   stakeholders.
                                  Improvement in the capacity (knowledge) of engineers on the National Building Code was assessed
                                   through pre-and post-training test, which revealed improvements in their knowledge. Similarly, for the
                                   GIS training, pre-test and post-test evaluation showed an increased level of knowledge among the
                                   participants about the GIS and its uses for disaster risk reduction and management.

                            Outcomes:

                            The project supported the enhancement of GoN’s ability to improve long-term disaster resilience through the
                            provision of data and tools for planning of risk reduction investments and post-disaster reconstruction;
                            equipment and technical capabilities for emergency response; capacity building of federal, provincial, and
                            municipal governments on DRM. At local levels, and aligned with the government’s federalization agenda, the
                            project strengthened DRM capacities of institutions in all earthquake-affected districts.

                            In December 2018 the project included the scale-up of the Structural Integrity and Damage Assessment
                            (SIDA), with the aim of improving the ability of the government at the local level to improve long-term disaster
                            resilience of social infrastructure. Thus, the completion of the rapid visual survey activities in 145
                            municipalities achieved the new PDO indicator “Municipalities covered for assessing building vulnerability and
                            hazard exposure of critical public facilities. In addition to trainings provided to local governments, these
                            analytics provided to the municipal authorities helped them to understand the vulnerability of public
                            infrastructure and prioritize resilience efforts.

                            The project also supported operationalization of early warning systems in 13 municipalities. During severe
                            rainfalls in August and October 2023, early warning services were provided to residents in three
                            municipalities. However, it was not clear if these early warning systems were effective enough to help
                            residents take precaution against the disaster risk.

                            While concrete activities on resilience building were included later into the project, and the early warning
                            system’s effectiveness was not very clear, based on the above results at project closing, the achievement of
                            the PDO, to enhance the government's ability to improve long-term disaster resilience, was rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project successfully reconstructed 319,621 houses exceeding the revised PDO target, and all
                            reconstructed houses adhered to the project guidelines for resilient construction, quality standards, and were
                            inspected at completion. However, the project could not sufficiently support the ultra-poor, or persons with
                            functional limitations (except for vulnerable-headed households supported by the socio-technical assistance).


                                                                                                                              Page 9 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Earthquake Housing Reconst Project (P155969)



  Therefore, the efficacy of achieving the first objective “to restore affected houses with multi-hazard resistant
  core housing units in target areas” is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.

  The project supported enhancement of the government’s ability to improve long-term disaster resilience
  through the provision of data and tools for planning of risk reduction investments and post-disaster
  reconstruction; equipment and technical capabilities for emergency response; capacity building of federal,
  provincial, and municipal governments on DRM. The project also scaled up structural integrity and damage
  assessment, with the aim of improving the ability of the government at the local level to improve long-term
  disaster resilience of social infrastructure. The project showed the utilization of early warning systems that
  were supported under the project. Thus, the efficacy of achieving the second objective “to enhance the
  government's ability to improve long-term disaster resilience”, is rated Substantial.

  Overall, the project’s efficacy is rated Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency: The project conducted ex-ante and ex-post economic analysis using the component 1
activities, which are 97 percent of project costs. The main benefit used was the shadow annualized rental
income from the newly reconstructed 316,621 multi-hazard resilient housing units (estimated at $750 per year),
which are more valuable than the old houses due to the use of improved construction methods. The economic
life of the units was estimated at 20 years and the O&M costs were estimated at one percent of the investment
cost. The analysis did not consider the monetary value of social, indirect benefits and the value of human lives,
which inferred that the benefits are understated. The ex-post internal rate of return (IRR) was 30.4 percent (on
average using the original and the two additional financing credits), and the net present value was US$929.3
million (using 10 percent discount rate). The higher ex-post rates were due to more houses being built because
of splitting beneficiaries into different categories and providing different grant amounts into each category.

Operational/Administrative Efficiency: The project duration got extended for three years to provide sufficient
time to implement the additional financings. The implementation of component 1 was within the implementation
period, the ICR noted that the construction duration was well within the range from previous reconstruction
programs that varied from 4-7 years in Indonesia and Japan. The duration between beneficiary enrollment and
inspection and tranche release varied from 1.97 to 4.55 months among the three credits, which may be ascribed
to longer than anticipated construction durations, multiple field inspections and verification layers, and COVID-
19. (ICR, parag. 50). Regarding component 2, the efficiency improved over time as the activities were refined;
the project initially struggled to define how to enhance the government’s ability for long-term resilience; in
December 2018, concrete activities could be defined, including the structural integrity and damage assessment
for social infrastructure.

Based on the substantial economic and operational efficiency, the efficiency of the project is rated substantial.




                                                                                                      Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Earthquake Housing Reconst Project (P155969)



Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      92.50
 Appraisal                                                 21.20
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      97.00
 ICR Estimate                                              30.40
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project was prepared after the devastating 2015 earthquake that struck central Nepal to help restore the
affected houses and help improve the government’s ability on long-term disaster resilience. The project
objective was highly aligned with the World Bank and country strategies and context; thus, the relevance of
objective is rated High. The project successfully financed reconstruction of 319,621 houses that adhered to the
guidelines for resilient construction, quality standards, and exceeding the revised PDO target, noting that there
was a lack of a differentiated approach to address the needs of the ultra-poor and vulnerable. Therefore, the
efficacy of achieving the first objective “to restore affected houses with multi-hazard resistant core housing units
in target areas” is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings. The project supported enhancement of the
government’s ability to improve long-term disaster resilience through the provision of data and tools for planning
of risk reduction investments and post-disaster reconstruction; equipment and technical capabilities for
emergency response; capacity building of federal, provincial, and municipal governments on DRM. Thus, the
efficacy of achieving the second objective “to enhance the government's ability to improve long-term disaster
resilience”, is rated Substantial. The project’s efficiency is rated Substantial, due to substantial economic rates
of return and operational efficiency. Overall, the project’s outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR noted that systems to institutionalize resilient construction in local communities are still emerging,
which could pose a risk to the sustainability of project outcomes for resilient construction (ICR, parag.85).
The project promoted resilient building by providing housing grants that required compliance with resilient
measures, enforced through inspections. The ICR reported that so far, community awareness and skilled
labor have maintained the standards, and community leaders have encouraged safe construction practices,


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Earthquake Housing Reconst Project (P155969)



in some areas even without eBPS. However, in the long-term electronic building permit system (eBPS) that
is being piloted is seen as crucial, especially in rural areas.

There is also a financial risk to the project development outcomes. The financial burden of reconstruction on
households was high, with costs averaging NPR 907,647, which is three times the grant amount of NPR
300,000. Many households expanded their homes beyond the core unit provided by the grant, or house
construction costs increased over time, leading to increased financial requirements and indebtedness.
Despite job creation and livelihood support, many households had to take loans or sell assets, and the
project could not fully support the ultra-poor or those with functional limitations (ICR, parag. 86).

There is a need for sustained capacity at NDRRMA for long-term disaster resilience. At project closing,
NDRRMA faced reduced human and financial resources, with technical consultants' contracts expiring. To
address this, the ICR informed that NDRRMA budgeted funds in FY23-24 for hiring technical specialists, and
the World Bank's Resilient Infrastructure MDTF will train DRM focal points to use the provided equipment
and systems effectively. (ICR, parag. 97).

Lastly, the risk of unemployment for engineers, masons, and technicians trained in resilient reconstruction is
another significant risk as the reconstruction activities wind down. The project addressed this by providing
advanced training to 150 women masons to improve their employability post-project. However, without the
widespread adoption of resilient housing construction practices, the skills and resources invested during the
reconstruction phase may be lost (ICR, parag. 88).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  In the aftermath of the 2015 earthquake and the request from the Government for World Bank support,
  the project was prepared by using streamlined approaches in situations of urgent need. The project
  design reflected the needs identified by the post disaster needs assessment that was conducted jointly by
  The World Bank, the United Nations Development Program and the European Union and contributed to
  the government’s overall housing reconstruction program. The design also drew lessons from similar
  Bank operations in the region (e.g., the Pakistan Earthquake Emergency Recovery Credit Project and
  Gujarat Emergency Earthquake Reconstruction Project) particularly the lesson on adapting approved
  building designs to expedite reconstruction. Thus, the project design included short term recovery needs
  for housing reconstruction and long-term capacity development for resilience. Although the detailed
  interventions under Component 2 were initially defined as training of government officials and engineers
  and masons on disaster resilience, during implementation, activities were refined to align with priorities of
  the Disaster Risk Reduction National Strategic Plan of Action, 2018–2030, and address the constitutional
  mandate to decentralize DRM responsibilities and build local-level capacity. The adaptive design of the
  project at appraisal allowed for additional financing without changing the PDO.

  Overall risk rating at entry was rated “Substantial” due to high political, governance, and fiduciary risks.
  The main risks were, the need for direct cash transfers into beneficiaries’ bank accounts and ensure
  third-party audits address fiduciary risk, screening of beneficiary eligibility through the EHDC survey, and



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Earthquake Housing Reconst Project (P155969)



  providing additional resource and training to IA’s staff to address E&S safeguard issues, build capacity,
  and improve procurement and financial management.

  Based on the above, the quality at entry is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR reported that the Bank’s Task Team was composed of qualified specialists to provide
 implementation support to the project. Missions were regular, the Bank conducted a total of 15
 implementation support missions, which reviewed project progress and identified issues documented in
 aide memoires. In addition, the Bank team conducted monthly review meetings with the PMU to monitor
 progress and track agreed actions, which accelerated the resolution of issues on procurement and project
 management. Reviews resulted in actions to remove implementation setbacks by responding to the need
 of capacity building, supporting vulnerable beneficiaries, encouraging the government to undertake studies
 for project implementation decision-making, and adjusting to shifts in the government institutional structure
 by approving six restructurings. The TTL and key task members were mostly based in-country for a
 majority of the project implementation and worked closely with the government. The turnover rate of the
 key task team was low. The TTL role was handed over in 2016 and 2022 to project team members, which
 ensured consistent support to clients due to sustained institutional memory. The two additional financings
 and the adequate revision of Component 2 design to reflect changing needs was sound.

 However, the project did not address the needs of the poor households adequately. The socio-technical
 assistance supported vulnerable-headed households, but a wider and more adequate targeting of poor
 households could have been included in project design during implementation.

 Based on that Bank’s quality of supervision is assessed as Satisfactory.

 As a result of Satisfactory Quality at Entry and Quality of Supervision rating, the Overall Bank Performance
 is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Earthquake Housing Reconst Project (P155969)



a. M&E Design
 The initial M&E design was relevant to measure results, specifically to track the reconstruction progress. In
 addition, the number of grievances registered and addressed, and the number of artisans trained in multi-
 hazard resilient construction were measurable. One shortcoming of the M&E design was the result
 indicator did not clearly reflect component 2 outputs and outcomes, until implementation, when component
 activities were defined, and indicators were added at restructuring. For Component 2, additional indicators
 could have been designed to capture project results on early warning systems as well as results of training
 events in terms of the extent of knowledge and skills developed utilized and practiced. In addition, the
 indicator on the number of households with resilient core housing reconstructed could have been
 differentiated using poverty parameters.

 The project established a comprehensive and multi-layered Management Information System (MIS) to
 monitor physical and financial progress and results of the project to ensure transparency and accountability
 among various stakeholders. The design of the MIS included the survey for beneficiary selection, digital
 enrollment of beneficiaries, inspection of reconstructed houses and compliance certification, and tranche
 releases directly to beneficiary bank accounts after verification.



b. M&E Implementation
  As reported by the ICR, the quality of M&E reporting was initially adversely affected by data
  inconsistencies, lack of an M&E framework, and poor coordination between different agencies,
  nonetheless, this was significantly resolved over time and there were no issues at closure. (ICR,
  parag.70)

  M&E data were collected, analyzed, and accessible through the MIS. The MIS was reportedly, user
  friendly, allowing for data visualization in several data and multimedia formats. Physical monitoring of
  reconstruction progress was undertaken by M&E experts and a third-party M&E firm at PMU level to
  verify and confirm completeness of IDA beneficiary records and compliance with IDA requirements. Also,
  M&E provisions were made at the CLPIU-Building for the 14 most-affected districts, where CLPIU-
  Building recruited M&E experts to the DLPIU-Building to oversee districts. Progress of component 2
  activities were monitored via an MIS-Excel masterplan of activities and monthly progress reviews (ICR,
  parag. 67 and 68). During implementation of the RVS that required monitoring of three firms working in
  145 municipalities to collect data on 10,833 facilities (29,977 buildings), NDRRMA hired a third-party
  consultant that monitored the progress of the three firms and reviewed and validated the quality of the
  deliverables. (ICR, parag. 71)



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E was utilized to track progress, demonstrate results, and inform project management decisions.
  NRA submitted monthly progress reports on physical and financial progress with the World Bank. Third
  party monitoring assessments helped ensure IDA compliance before disbursement.

  The MIS demonstrated the project’s accountability characteristics by providing information that enabled
  the government to reconcile double payments. The District Treasury Controller Office (DTCO) cross-



                                                                                                   Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Earthquake Housing Reconst Project (P155969)



  verified payments, accomplishing the recovery of NPR 246,971,668.32 duplicate payments made to
  4,670 beneficiaries.

  While there were some weaknesses in terms of PDO indicators, the overall rating of M&E quality is rated
  as Substantial, based on a multi-level M&E system working at the central and local level and a robust
  MIS system that informed project decisions, provided accountability, transparency and efficient use of
  resources.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social: The project was classified as Category “B” per the World Bank Safeguard
   Policy on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). The project also triggered safeguard policies on natural
   habitats (OP/BP 4.04), forests (OP/BP 4.36), physical cultural resources (OP/BP 4.11), Indigenous peoples
   (OP/BP 4.10), and involuntary resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) to identify and mitigate potential environmental
   and social issues. The ICR noted that safeguard instruments, including ESMF, RPF, Environmental and
   Social Screening (ESS), and Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) were prepared and
   implemented as documented in the ESMP project completion reports and TPM reports. A Vulnerable
   Community Development Framework was prepared, and the STA addressed and ensured the project
   respected the dignity, human rights, economies, and cultures of vulnerable groups, including Indigenous
   Peoples and Dalit (ICR parag.73).

   According to the ICR, project implementation in the initial years revealed limited E&S impacts, with most
   issues related to health and safety, solid waste management, increased pressure on forest
   resources/timber, quarry sites, and additional support for vulnerable groups. The project reportedly ensured
   adequate E&S staffing and mainstream E&S aspects in the implementation of Component 2 activities. (ICR,
   parag. 75)

   A resettlement policy framework was also prepared as part of the ESMF to guide the resettlement process.
   The revised ESMF excluded community relocation; integrated settlement development, urban areas, and
   areas supported by other partner organizations, and reconstruction of heritage/cultural sites and other
   physical and social infrastructure and services. Site-specific ESMP were prepared, implemented, and
   monitored via third-party monitoring, with completion reports prepared to ensure alignment with the ESMF
   provisions.

   Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM): The project established a multi-tiered GRM system to redress
   grievances at ward, municipality, and NRA central levels. Grievances were registered orally, in writing
   through telephone, or SMS to the ward, rural municipality, DLPIU, and NRA. The ICR reported that GRM
   enabled the registration and redress of about 634,973 grievances from reconstruction programs (including
   37,093 for IDA credit). All grievances were digitized in the MIS to track grievance redress. The complaint
   management committee addressed grievances at the local level, such as a change in ownership and
   updating beneficiary information upon verification, and executive committee members at the central level


                                                                                                 Page 15 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Earthquake Housing Reconst Project (P155969)



  reviewed issues, such as exclusion-related grievances. The 2018 GRM report necessitated the cabinet’s
  decision to re-survey and verify the EHDC data, which, in combination with other GRM decisions, resulted
  in the admission of 106,645 beneficiaries into the reconstruction program from the retrofitting category. The
  fourth restructuring decision was informed by the GRM, demonstrating its effectiveness. (ICR, parag. 76)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management: The ICR noted that grant disbursement to beneficiaries was a complex process
  because of the multi-tranche system linked to the physical progress of reconstruction, thus, disbursements
  were made to bank accounts of all beneficiaries. Bank for all eligible beneficiaries were activated with the
  first tranche payment. The 2nd and 3rd tranches were made only after inspection, digitalization, and
  approval of the field inspection form and photos. (ICR, parag. 78) The project experienced payment
  duplication and beneficiary tracking issues in the initial phase of the project in housing reconstruction
  tranche payments. There were also delays in payment and reconciliation of payments made by the DTCO
  to the beneficiaries’ bank accounts. These issues were addressed during implementation, and all FM
  issues were resolved by NRA by closure of the project, with no ineligible expenses. Although, FM issues
  improved during project implementation, reconciliation took time and required additional resources. (ICR,
  parag. 79) The project team subsequently stated that there were no qualified opinions in audit reports.

  Procurement: According to the ICR, the project complied with procurement procedures in the Financing
  Agreement and Procurement Plan, and no waivers were sought. Due to the emergency nature of
  procurement needs, procurement activities were submitted in the plan as and when needed rather than in
  a planned way. Although this created difficulties for the Bank in reviewing fragmented procurement plans, it
  was managed satisfactorily. Procurement delays recorded during the project could be attributed to
  procurement decision-making and slow approvals from the NRA Secretary. After the project authorized the
  PIU chief for budget spending and procurement decision-making, as per the World Bank’s advice, the
  delay issue was resolved. The project demonstrated procurement flexibilities during implementation, such
  as adopting GoN’s recruitment process to hire more than 2,000 engineers to support housing
  reconstruction, increasing the threshold for direct selection/contracting methods (ICR, parag. 77).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR reported the project’s contribution in improving the construction sector. The project triggered a
  major shift in housing typologies in earthquake-affected districts, from low strength masonry - stone or
  brick masonry with mud mortar to reinforced concrete and cement mortar. This was because of increased
  availability of construction material, and increased number of trained masons and engineers informed
  about safer construction practices (ICR, parag. 59).



d. Other
  Gender: The ICR reported that the project design recognized that women were disproportionality affected
  by disaster and addressed gender-related issues by ensuring strong community involvement, including
  women, elderly, landless, youth, disabled, and Indigenous Peoples. Throughout implementation of the

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Earthquake Housing Reconst Project (P155969)



   project, several positive gender equity and inclusion trends were observed, steered by NRA’s Gender
   Equity and Social Inclusion guideline, such as increased participation of women in technical jobs, social
   mobilization, financial access and inclusion, and skill development; ensuring a share of employment in the
   STA; share of women-elected officials and local government officials trained in DRM and reconstruction
   orientation; and joint ownership of houses. These helped the project achieve and exceed the gender-
   inclusion PDO indicator on “the percentage of women-headed households.” In addition, the transfer of
   housing grants directly into beneficiary bank accounts facilitated the opening of accounts for 100 percent of
   participating households, including 30 percent women. The 2018 GESI audit, in five districts,30 revealed
   that women felt more empowered due to their involvement in housing reconstruction and interaction with
   government officials and Banks. (ICR, parag. 55)



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR formulated several useful lessons. The most relevant ones, with IEG’s modification, are as
follows:

Bank-to-bank fund transfers can be useful to ensure transparency, improve financial
inclusion, and access to banking services, including housing insurance. Under the project, the
grant payments to beneficiaries were made through the banking system to reduce the possibility of
corruption and ensure building code compliance. This decision contributed to increasing the number
of bank account holders from 52 to 70 percent. A district-wide analysis showed that banking
coverage among the beneficiaries increased from 0 to 100 percent in some districts. Using the
banking system also helped to unlock constrains in the credit and savings market, promote payment
system, bolster risk mitigation capacities, and enhance the capacity of locally based financial service
providers.149,000 households were brought to the banking network, thereby exposing them to
savings and credit facilities, which are crucial precursors for prosperity.

When a project works with an agency with a limited tenure, early planning is critical to ensure
transition of institutional memory and capacities built by the project to permanent agencies
for the country to be able to continue strengthening the related sectors. Under the project,
successful housing reconstruction is attributed to the NRA, whose mandate was specific to the
country’s reconstruction from the 2015 earthquake. NRA’s closure before completion of housing
reconstruction and incomplete tasks from the 2019 NRA overwhelmed the successor agency,
NDRRMA. However, the overwhelming challenge to NDRRMA strengthened their capacity and

                                                                                                   Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Earthquake Housing Reconst Project (P155969)



helped them get acknowledged by other government agencies at national, district, and local levels
through project implementation, facilitation, and coordination.

Adoption of an owner-driven approach, in terms of moving from building homes for people to
supporting people to build safer homes by themselves not only ensures effective use of
financial resources but also improves disaster resilience. Under the project, individual families
used financial assistance to rebuild their houses. The grant was disbursed in tranches and with
compliance to earthquake resistant building standards. The project provided technical, material,
supervisory, training, and social facilitation. An owner-driven approach to reconstruction also meant
using locally available materials and incorporating traditional construction methods and
designs found to be culturally relevant and environment friendly, in conjunction with special disaster-
resisting features recommended by the relevant technical codes/guidelines, which improved disaster
resilience.

Projects that include housing reconstruction for low-income households could benefit from
considering the affordability of these investments for such households. In this project, the
housing reconstruction grant provided about a third of the construction cost, and the participation by
low-income households in the project led to their increased exposure to higher indebtedness, and
some persons were reported to have resorted to selling assets to participate in the program. It is
important to consider in project design that low-income households could afford their share of
reconstruction costs.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is concise, candid and provides a detailed overview of the project. The report is internally consistent
with logical linking and integration of various sections of the report. The report follows and adequately responds
to the Bank guidance both with regards to ratings and the performance narrative, which is sufficiently
evaluative. Lessons are comprehensive and based on experiences of the project. However, the ICR does not
adequately discuss the lack of focus in the results framework on poverty aspects in the project areas. Overall,
the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 18 of 19
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Earthquake Housing Reconst Project (P155969)




                                                                            Page 19 of 19
