     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CAR Reintegration Project (P160272)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023997

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P160272                                   CAR Reintegration Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Central African Republic                  Social Sustainability and Inclusion


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D1800                                 31-Dec-2020                                         29,526,442.15

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Apr-2017                               30-Jun-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          30,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           30,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                       30,476,184.30                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Maria Shkaratan            Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Original Project Development Objective (PDO) was “to support the social and economic reintegration of
   demobilized ex-combatants and improve access to socio-economic infrastructure and economic opportunities
   for host communities” (Financing Agreement, page 5). The PDO was stated identically in the Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD) (PAD, page 4).

   The PDO was not revised.


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CAR Reintegration Project (P160272)



   For the purposes of this Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR) review, the objective
   will be assessed as follows:

   PDO 1: To support the social and economic reintegration of demobilized ex-combatants.

   PDO 2: To improve access to socio-economic infrastructure and economic opportunities for host
   communities.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  08-Oct-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Original components

   Component 1 Social and Economic Reintegration Support (cost at appraisal: US$16.94 million;
   actual cost: 13.6 million) financed support to ex-combatants through the following subcomponents: (i)
   orientation, counseling and skills training (6 months) (livelihood guidance and career counseling; training on
   entrepreneurship, financial literacy, and management; formation of economic associations); (ii) start-up
   reintegration support (one-time event) (provision of start-up kits to launch an economic activity); (iii) follow-
   up reintegration support (24 months) (follow-up training, and information, advisory, and referral services);
   and (iv) support to vulnerable ex-combatants (entire Project) (female and those with physical and
   psychosocial disabilities).

   Note: Definition of the term “ex-combatant”. According to the UN Integrated DDR Standards, an ex-
   combatant is a person who has assumed any of the responsibilities or carried out any of the activities
   mentioned in the definition of “combatant” and has laid down or surrendered his/her arms with a view to
   entering a Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration (DDR) process. (PAD, page 10)

   Component 2 Support to Host Communities (cost at appraisal: US$9.0 million; actual cost: 12.0
   million) financed of the following subcomponents: (i) improvement of socio-economic infrastructure
   (rehabilitation of connective infrastructure, water sources, schools, dispensaries, markets, training centers;
   provision of training for teachers; and supporting linkages to microfinance); and (ii) capacity building for host
   communities (establishment and capacity building of community councils, and training on social cohesion
   and conflict prevention).

   Component 3 Project Management (cost at appraisal: US$4.06 million; actual cost: US$4.4 million)
   was to support administration and management of Project activities, technical and implementation capacity

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CAR Reintegration Project (P160272)



  building at the central and local government levels, sensitization activities (public information to build trust in
  the Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration (DDR)), communications activities, and monitoring and
  evaluation (M&E).

  2. Changes in components and indicators during implementation

  The Project was restructured three times, with changes to components and indicators at the first
  and second restructurings that had no impact on the Project’s overall scope or ambition.

  At the first restructuring of October 2018, at government request, the following activity was added as
  subcomponent 2(iii): on-the-job skills training for members of host communities (cost US$1.0 million). In line
  with this change, the target for the intermediate results indicator (IRI) “Number of host community members
  participating in community-based decision making/participatory planning exercises” was increased from
  1,500 people to 2,500 people, and three new indicators were added to monitor Project activities in greater
  detail. To finance the new subcomponent, funds were reallocated across the subcomponents of component
  2 as follows (while the total component 2 financing did not change): from subcomponent 2(i) Improvement
  of Socio-economic Infrastructure to both subcomponent 2(ii) Capacity Building for Host Communities
  (US$0.5 million) and the new subcomponent 2(iii) (US$1.0 million). The targets for subcomponent 2(ii) were
  not modified despite the reduced financing. The restructuring also involved re-phrasing most of the RF
  indicators, mainly to clarify their meaning and with no changes to their core substance or units of
  measurement.

  At the second restructuring of October 2020, at government request, the following activity was added to
  subcomponent 2(iii): support to the youth-at-risk through social, life skills and vocational training, including
  providing them with start-up support kits and livelihoods guidance. The scope of component 1 was reduced
  accordingly, so that the overall scope of the Project remained the same. A related IRI was added: “Number
  of youth-at-risk expected to receive basic and vocational trainings”, target 1,000 people. At the same time,
  the target for the component 1 PDO indicator “Number of demobilized ex-combatants who have undergone
  socioeconomic reintegration” was reduced from 5,000 people to 4,000 people. In line with this change,
  funds were transferred from component 1 to both component 2 (US$3.0 million) and component 3 (US$0.34
  million).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The appraisal estimate was US$30.0 million, and the actual disbursement was
  US$30.0 million.

  Project Financing: The Project was fully financed by an IDA grant.

  Borrower/Recipient contribution: There was no Borrower’s contribution.

  Project Dates: The Project was approved on April 13, 2017 and became effective on December 21, 2017.
  The MTR review was on July 19, 2019. The Project was restructured three times: (i) on October 26, 2018;
  (ii) on October 8, 2020; (iii) on February 16, 2022. The original closing date was December 31, 2020. The
  Project was extended twice, for a total of two years and six months (or 30 months), to June 30, 2023, which
  was the date of the Project’s actual closure.



                                                                                                       Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CAR Reintegration Project (P160272)



   Split evaluation.

   The project was revised three times, and neither of the restructurings involved a change in the Project’s
   scope or ambition; therefore, a split evaluation is not required. However, the first two restructurings aimed at
   improving Component 2 implementation, and in relation to it, one IRI target was increased at the first
   restructuring of October 2018, two targets were lowered at the second restructuring of October 2020 (for a
   PDO indicator and for an IRI), and several indicators were added at both the first and second restructurings.
   Therefore, a split evaluation, with the split at the second restructuring, will be conducted to provide more
   clarity.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context. The Central African Republic (CAR) is a country characterized by a Fragile
and Conflict-affected Situation (FCS); it has been experiencing recurrent conflicts, political volatility, and
extreme poverty for decades. At appraisal, due to a violent civil conflict lasting since 2013, the country was
suffering from a severe humanitarian crisis, including the displacement of one-quarter of the population, a
high poverty rate (estimated at 76 percent), chronic food insecurity, and limited employment and income
generating opportunities. The economically marginalized population was highly vulnerable to exploitation by
criminal or armed factions, as both victims and recruits. In 2016, the newly formed government started
reforms aiming at peace, stability, and growth. However, the situation was very challenging. Violent
incidents were increasing, and many displaced people were not returning home in fear of retaliation,
insecurity, and lacking economic opportunities. Disarmament was necessary, and the top three reasons to
leave the armed groups were job opportunities, inclusion in the Disarmament, Demobilization, Reintegration
and Repatriation (DDRR) process, and integration into the armed forces/police/gendarmerie. A new
Security Sector Reform (SSR) program, which would include, along with a reform of defense and security
institutions, social and economic re-integration of eligible ex-combatants was needed. (PAD, pages 9-12)

Relevance to Government Strategies at approval. By Project appraisal, the newly elected (in 2016)
government has identified its main priorities as Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration (DDR),
SSR, and National Reconciliation (NR). At the Bangui Forum in May 2015, the framework documents for
the transition to peace and stability - Republican Pact for Peace, National Reconciliation and
Reconstruction, as well as an Accord on the Principles of DDRR - were signed. In July 2016, the
government established two committees - one strategic and one technical - for the DDRR, SSR, and NR
and developed a set of documents guiding the DDRR implementation. These documents represented the
basis for the development of the reviewed Project. As stated in the government letter requesting Bank
assistance (May 12, 2016), the DDRR program was a top government priority. (PAD, pages 9-12)

Relevance to Government Strategies during implementation and at closure. Despite the
implementation of the DDRR, fighting continued. In February 2019, the Khartoum Peace Accord was signed
by 14 major armed groups and the government. However, violence was still preventing development and
democratic processes: for example, only 35 percent of the voters participated in the December 2020
elections, due to insecurity. The 2021 “Luanda Road map”, backed by Rwanda and Angola, stated the need
for negotiations with the armed groups, as well as for the DDR, SSR, and the repatriation of the ex-
combatants from foreign countries. At the end of 2023, while some rebel groups had disarmed, violent

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CAR Reintegration Project (P160272)



attacks by armed groups were still a reality. The SSR process had been stalled, and an estimated 3,000 ex-
combatants remained to be integrated. The World Bank had been the only institution financing the socio-
economic reintegration process, which the government still considered critical, as it provided a way out for
the combatants in the armed groups. (ICR, pages 5-6)

Relevance to the World Bank Group's (WBG’s) Assistance Strategies at approval. The Project was
aligned with all three objectives of the Country Engagement Note (CEN) FY2016-17: (i) restoration of core
public sector institutions (which included the restoration of authority and of basic service delivery); (ii) basic
support to livelihoods (which included creation of jobs and return of the displaced population); and (iii)
support to basic social service delivery (which included improvement of social infrastructure). The Project
was also aligned with the post-conflict resilience priorities highlighted in the 2016 CAR Policy Synthesis
Note: (i) reconciliation through extensive dialogue, community-driven development, and transitional justice
to avoid relapse into conflict; and (ii) sustained economic recovery marked by expanded employment
opportunities as a powerful alternative to crime, violence and exploitation.

Relevance to the WBG’s Assistance Strategies at closure. The Project was aligned with the 2019 CAR
Economic Update (EU), which emphasized the importance of building a social contract and of a
“progressive appropriation of institutions by communities and society”; it also stated that these processes
were “constrained by a low level of security” (EU, page 48). The Project was also aligned with the two focus
areas of the WBG’s CPF FY2021-25, specifically, with Focus Area 1 Human Capital and Connectivity to
Boost Stabilization, Inclusion and Resilience (Strategic Objectives 1.1. Support Stabilization Efforts for
Improved Resilience and 1.5. Build Resilient Infrastructure (power, mobility, water) for Improved
Connectivity) and Focus Area 2 Economic Management and Improved Governance to Build State
Legitimacy and Foster Growth (Strategic Objective 2.3 Enhance the Business Environment and Support
Job Creation).

Related World Bank operations. Prior to the reviewed Project’s preparation, in 2017, the World Bank and
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in CAR (MINUSCA) supported the
preparation of the strategic documents for the DDRR program. The reviewed Project was designed as an
immediate follow-up (PAD, page 10). The Project also complimented the CAR LONDO (“Stand-up” in
Sango, the official language in CAR) Project (P152512, approved in 2016, ongoing), whose PDO is “to
provide temporary employment to vulnerable people and to facilitate access to basic services throughout
the entire territory of the Recipient, and to provide a response in the case of an eligible crisis or
emergency”, and the CAR Service Delivery and Support to Communities Affected by Displacement Project
(P161591, approved in FY2017, ongoing), whose PDO is “to increase access to basic services,
infrastructure and safety nets for communities affected by crises, including forced displacement and
COVID-19”. The design of the reintegration activities in the reviewed Project was based on the prior
analysis and piloting, including by the CAR Community Reintegration Project (P122099). Following the
reviewed Project’s, a follow-up operation was designed: the CAR Local Governance and Community
Resilience Project (P178699, approved in September 2023), which followed the same theory of change and
aimed at improved service delivery, access to basic infrastructure, and socio-economic reintegration of ex-
combatants. Using the lessons learned from the reviewed Project, it expanded vocational training duration,
included a follow-up guidance for six months after training, involved local authorities more, encouraged
income-generating groups involving both the ex-combatants and a wider community.

Overall, the relevance of objectives is rated High since it was aligned with the country and Bank strategy,
and pitched at an appropriate level of ambition given the country context.



                                                                                                        Page 5 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CAR Reintegration Project (P160272)




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             PDO 1: To support the social and economic reintegration of demobilized ex-combatants.

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change (ToC) for the Project was not included in the PAD but was developed for the ICR. It
                             showed direct, logical causal links from inputs (activities) to outputs, and to the two PDO outcomes of the
                             Project. To achieve the two PDO objectives, the Project supported the following activities: (i) orientation,
                             counseling and training, and the start-up and the follow-up reintegration support; and (ii) improvement of
                             socio-economic infrastructure, capacity building of the host communities (in governance and conflict
                             prevention), and training of the youth-at-risk. The expected outputs of these activities were: (i) accomplished
                             training and provided start-up and follow-up reintegration support; and (ii) improved infrastructure and
                             provided support to strengthen community capacities in governance and conflict prevention and to train
                             youth-at-risk. The achievement of the outputs was expected to lead to the following intermediate outcomes: (i)
                             social cohesion between the ex-combatants and the host communities increased, ex-combatants start income
                             generation activities, and ex-combatants take advantage of the follow-up reintegration support; and (ii) access
                             to services improved, infrastructure maintenance skills are acquired by the communities, and the capacity of
                             the youth-at-risk to take advantage of economic opportunities is increased. The achievement of the
                             intermediate outcomes would ultimately result in the following PDO outcomes: (i) social and economic
                             reintegration of the demobilized ex-combatants and (ii) improved access to socio-economic infrastructure and
                             economic opportunities for host communities.

                             The ToC provided a comprehensive picture of the logic of Project interventions, listing all main inputs and
                             outputs, and the PDO outcomes, and illustrating links from inputs to outputs and to the PDO outcomes.
                             However, the critical assumptions were not listed.

                             The efficacy of the Original Project under Objective 1 was assessed using the following indicators:

                             Outputs/Intermediate results:

                             Objective 1 outputs were measured by the Original Project using the following IRI indicators:

                             1. “Percentage of ex-combatants who successfully completed orientation, counseling and skills training
                             (Percentage)” (result of phase 1 of component 1). The achievement at closure was 78.3 percent, against the
                             target of 90 percent and the baseline of zero. The target was 87 percent achieved.



                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CAR Reintegration Project (P160272)



2. “Percentage of identified eligible former combatants who received specialized support” (output of phase 3
of component 1). The achievement at closure was zero percent, against the target of 100 percent and the
baseline of zero. The target was zero percent achieved. The ICR noted that this target was not achieved
because the implementation of phase 3 of component 1 barely started prior to Project closure due to
significant delays with the previous two phases of component 1 activities. (ICR, page 15)

3. “Percentage of ex-combatants who received, from those who requested, additional drop-in reintegration
support” (output of phase 3 of component 1). The achievement at closure was zero percent, against the target
of 100 percent and the baseline of zero. The target was zero percent achieved. The ICR noted that this target
was not achieved because the implementation of phase 3 of component 1 activities barely started before
Project closure due to significant delays with the previous two phases. (ICR, page 15)

4. “Percentage of targeted former combatants reporting satisfaction with services provided by this program”.
The achievement at closure was 94.64 percent, against the target of 95 percent and the baseline of zero. The
target was 99.6 percent achieved.

5. “Percentage of ex-combatants who are satisfied with the start-up reintegration support”. The achievement
at closure was 90.7 percent, against the target of 90 percent and the baseline of zero. The target was
exceeded.

PDO outcomes:

1. “Number of demobilized ex-combatants who have undergone socioeconomic reintegration” (phase 2 result:
completed orientation and received reintegration start-up support). The achievement at closure was 2,819
people, against the target of 5,000 people and the baseline of zero. The target was 56.4 percent achieved.
The ICR explained that the target could not be achieved because only 4,389 ex-combatants were interested
in demobilization, out of whom 804 opted for joining the Defense and Security Forces or the Special Mixed
Security Units. The Project worked with the remaining 3,585 eligible ex-combatants, and, as a result, 3,494 of
them (including 207 women) were enrolled into the socio-economic reintegration program and 2,819
(including 173 women) completed it. (ICR, page 13)

2. “Percentage of demobilized ex-combatants availing income generation opportunities”. The achievement at
closure was 70.5 percent, against the target of 75 percent and the baseline of zero. The target was 94
percent achieved. However, this is an input indicator, and the outcomes of the related activity are likely
significantly lower for the following reasons. The ICR noted that this indicator measured the share of program
trainees who received kits containing tools and materials to start own income generating activities (ICR, page
19), which is an input indicator. At the same time, there were no indicator to measure the actual outcome of
this activity, which was socio-economic reintegration of ex-combatants (ICR, page 19) or, as phrased in the
PAD: “In addition to acquiring a civilian mindset, ex-combatants will need to generate a sustainable income by
the end of the reintegration project” (PAD, page 46). Further, only 39 percent of surveyed beneficiaries were
satisfied with the kits they received, which was attributed to poor quality of materials, insufficient quantities, or
failure to account for the beneficiaries’ choices with regards to the type of kits. (ICR, page 14).

3. “Percentage of total project beneficiaries who report acceptance to return of demobilized ex-combatants”.
The achievement at closure was 100 percent, against the target of 65 percent and the baseline of zero. The
target was exceeded.



                                                                                                      Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CAR Reintegration Project (P160272)



4. “Percentage of total beneficiaries in local communities reporting higher security and reconciliation”. The
achievement at closure was 95.54 percent, against the target of 80 percent and the baseline of zero. The
target was exceeded.

Rating. The Original Project partially achieved its intended Objective 1 results, and its efficacy rating is
Modest. While the targets that measured social cohesion and beneficiary satisfaction with the program were
mostly achieved, the socio-economic reintegration program was only partially achieved, with the first phase
largely completed, the second phase partially completed, and the third phase barely started.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
PDO 1: To support the social and economic reintegration of demobilized ex-combatants.

Revised Rationale
Please see the discussion of the ToC under Objective 1, Original Project.

The following target (reflecting the phase 2 reintegration result) was revised at the second
restructuring of October 2020:

A PDO indicator “Number of demobilized ex-combatants who have undergone socioeconomic reintegration”.
The achievement at closure was 2,819 people, against the revised target of 4,000 people and the baseline of
zero. The target was 70 percent achieved.

Rating. The Revised Project partially achieved its intended Objective 1 results, and its efficacy rating is
Modest. The reduced targets were only 70 percent achieved, and the Project still only partially reached its
objectives.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO 2: To improve access to socio-economic infrastructure and economic opportunities for host
communities.

Rationale
Please see the discussion of the ToC under Objective 1, Original Project.



                                                                                                   Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CAR Reintegration Project (P160272)



The efficacy of the Original Project under Objective 2 was assessed using the following indicators:

IRI outputs:

1. “Number of host community members participating in community-based decision making/ participatory
planning exercises”. The achievement at closure was 908 people, against the target of 1,500 people and the
baseline of zero. The target was 60.5 percent achieved. The ICR provided the following details: to facilitate
the planned small-scale socioeconomic infrastructure subprojects, 51 Local Community Councils (LCCs)
were established, comprising 20 members each, out of which 908 members benefited from participatory
planning and decision-making exercises. However, other community members did not opt to use these
opportunities, and this explains the level of target achievement.

2. “Number of host community members participating in capacity building activities”. The achievement at
closure was 3,920 people, against the target of 6,000 people and the baseline of zero. The target was 65.3
percent achieved.

PDO outcomes:

1. “Number of beneficiaries in target communities with improved access to socioeconomic infrastructure”. The
achievement at closure was 72,613 people, against the target of 30,000 people and the baseline of zero. The
target was 2.4 times overachieved. The team clarified, at IEG’s request, that the significant overachievement
of the target was due to the cancelation of other infrastructure development projects and the subsequent
wider utilization of the infrastructure financed by the reviewed Project.

Note: The ICR reported the result for this indicator at closure as 436,052 people. At IEG’s request, the team
clarified that this was the number of indirect beneficiaries (all people in the area who could benefit from the
new/improved infrastructure), while the ICR should have reported the number of direct beneficiaries, 72,613
people (both direct and indirect beneficiary data were monitored).

2. “Number of planned small-scale socioeconomic infrastructure subprojects successfully completed”. The
achievement at closure was 69 subprojects, against the target of 76 subprojects and the baseline of zero. The
target was 90.8 percent achieved.

Rating. The Original Project significantly achieved its Objective 2 intended results, and its efficacy rating is
Substantial, with moderate shortcomings. While the objectives related to the improvement of socio-economic
infrastructure were almost fully achieved, the objectives related to community participation in capacity building
and decision making were 60-65 percent achieved.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
PDO 2: To improve access to socio-economic infrastructure and economic opportunities for host
communities.

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CAR Reintegration Project (P160272)




Revised Rationale
Please see the discussion of the TOC under Objective 1, Original Project.

The efficacy of the Revised Project under Objective 2 was assessed using the following indicators
(this is the full indicator list):

IRI outputs:

1. “Number of host community members participating in capacity building activities”. The achievement at
closure was 3,920 people, against the target of 6,000 people and the baseline of zero (the target was not
revised). The target was 65.3 percent achieved.

2. “Number of host community members participating in community-based decision making/ participatory
planning exercises”. The achievement at closure was 908 people, against the revised (at the first restructuring
of October 2018) target of 2,500 people and the baseline of zero. The target was 36.3 percent achieved.

The following IRIs were added at the first restructuring of October 2018:

3. “Number of host community members, including at risk/ vulnerable peoples, who completed skills training
related to the construction, rehabilitation and maintenance of infrastructures”. The achievement at closure
was 908 people, against the target of 5,200 people and the baseline of zero. The target was 17.5 percent
achieved.

4. “Number of members of host communities, including at-risk and vulnerable peoples, employed and paid by
the project”. The achievement at closure was 4,646 people, against the target of 5,200 people and the
baseline of zero. The target was 89.3 percent achieved.

5. “Number of host communities’ (local committees/ community councils) members trained in conflict
mediation, social cohesion and technical aspects related to the maintenance of infrastructures”. The
achievement at closure was 30,920 people, against the target of 1,012 people and the baseline of zero. The
target was significantly overachieved.

The following IRI was added at the second restructuring of October 2020:

6. “Number of youth-at-risk who received basic and vocational trainings”. The achievement at closure was
1,000 people, against the target of 1,000 people and the baseline of zero. The target was 100 percent
achieved.

PDO outcomes:

1. “Number of beneficiaries in target communities with improved access to socioeconomic infrastructure”. The
achievement at closure was 72,613 people, against the target of 30,000 people and the baseline of zero. The
target was 2.4 times overachieved. The team clarified, at IEG’s request, that the significant overachievement
of the target was due to the cancelation of other infrastructure development projects and the subsequent
wider utilization of the infrastructure financed by the reviewed Project.




                                                                                                Page 10 of 20
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 CAR Reintegration Project (P160272)



                              Note: The ICR reported the result for this indicator at closure as 436,052 people. At IEG’s request, the team
                              clarified that this was the number of indirect beneficiaries (all people in the area who could benefit from the
                              new/improved infrastructure), while the ICR should have reported the number of direct beneficiaries, 72,613
                              people (both direct and indirect beneficiary data were monitored).

                              2. “Number of planned small-scale socioeconomic infrastructure subprojects successfully completed”. The
                              achievement at closure was 69 subprojects, against the target of 76 subprojects and the baseline of zero. The
                              target was 90.8 percent achieved.

                              Rating. The Revised Project significantly achieved its Objective 2 intended results, and its efficacy rating is
                              Substantial, with moderate shortcomings. The objectives related to the improvement of socio-economic
                              infrastructure, the youth-at-risk training, and the community members’ training were almost fully achieved. At
                              the same time, the objectives related to community participation in capacity building and decision making, as
                              well as to the completion of training in construction, rehabilitation and maintenance of infrastructures, were
                              partially achieved.



                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Original Project:

                            For the Original Project, the rating for efficacy is Substantial, with moderate shortcomings. Many of the targets
                            were reached, or largely reached, or exceeded. This includes targets related to such important Project
                            objectives as social cohesion and improvement of socio-economic infrastructure, as well as to beneficiary
                            satisfaction with the Project overall and with the ex-combatants’ training program in particular. However, other
                            targets were partially reached, including those related to community participation in capacity building and
                            decision making (60-65 percent achieved) and to the socio-economic reintegration program (results ranged
                            from the largely achieved for the first phase, to the partially achieved for the second phase, to the barely
                            achieved for the third phase).



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Revised Project:


                                                                                                                                Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CAR Reintegration Project (P160272)



  For the Revised Project, the efficacy rating is Substantial with moderate shortcomings. The reduction of
  targets under Objective 1 led to improved performance: the modified targets were 70 percent reached. Under
  Objective 2, the targets were almost fully achieved in relation to the objectives of improving socio-economic
  infrastructure, training the at-risk youth, and training the community members. At the same time, the
  objectives related to community participation in capacity building and decision making, as well as to
  infrastructure-related training, were partially achieved.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic analysis

No economic analysis was conducted at appraisal or at closure. The ICR noted the following: “In light of the
inadequacy of available information to facilitate a comprehensive assessment of input and output metrics,
encompassing the entire spectrum of project components and their associated delivery costs in relation to
specified deliverables, which include considerations of deliverable quality, beneficiary satisfaction, and delivery
timelines, a thorough efficiency analysis could not be conducted."

Administrative efficiency

The ICR pointed out that Project efficiency was negatively affected by difficult circumstances of implementation,
in particular, by the highly volatile political and social context and recurring cycles of violence (ICR, page 19).
During 2021-2023, there was also high inflation. In addition, many of the intervention sites were located in
isolated areas with almost non-existent infrastructure, limiting access to the sites (ICR, page 18). The Project
was also affected by the uncertainties during the initiation and execution of the national DDRR process. Also,
the Project initially experienced significant staff turnover due to the difficulty in sourcing adequate in-country
expertise; and engaging local authorities in Project activities presented recurring challenges (ICR, page 22). In
addition, the Project’s institutional arrangements led to inefficiencies: technical implementation responsibilities
were placed under the DDRR’s PIU and fiduciary aspects under the Fiduciary Project Implementation Unit PIU,
while coordination between the two entities was cumbersome. This issue was resolved during the first
restructuring of October 2018 when fiduciary responsibilities were transferred to the DDRR PIU.

Despite the challenging circumstances, most of the activities were accomplished, the Project was implemented
within the original financing envelope, and the three restructurings did not involve a reduction in Project scope.
Also, the Project was able to use its first two restructurings to adjust the design in reaction to the changing
external factors outside of its control. However, delays amounted to two years and six months, which is a
relatively long time considering the expected length of the Project of three years and eight months (from
approval to the originally expected closure); and even with these significant extensions, component 2, phase 3
activities (follow-up reintegration support and specialized support) were barely started at the time of closure.

On balance, considering the difficult circumstances of Project implementation and the ability of the team to adapt
the design to the changing external factors of implementation, but also the lack of information about Project’s


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CAR Reintegration Project (P160272)



economic efficiency and taking into account closing extensions and the failure to implement component 2 phase
3 activities by closure, Project’s efficiency rating is Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives was rated as High. The Efficacy was rated as Substantial with moderate
shortcomings both pre-and post-restructuring due to shortcomings in achievement of the objective related
to supporting the social and economic reintegration of demobilized ex-combatants. Efficiency is rated as
Modest. Overall, the outcome is rated as Moderately Satisfactory both pre-and post restructuring. Thus, the
overall outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial. The socio-economic infrastructure, which was constructed or renovated by the Project, will need
to be maintained. There is a risk that local governments, as well as the beneficiary communities, have
insufficient capacity and limited financial means to support the maintenance. However, this risk was partially
mitigated by the training the Project provided to the local and infrastructure management committees on
rehabilitation and maintenance of infrastructure (ICR, page 47). Also, the members of the community are
equipped with the skills gained during the civil works aimed at infrastructure improvement. However, the
financial risk remains, and additional financial support from the development community might be needed in
the future.

Social. Life skills provided to Project beneficiaries are likely to significantly contribute to their wellbeing,
social integration and employability. However, the vocational skills activities were not fully implemented by

                                                                                                       Page 13 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CAR Reintegration Project (P160272)



the Project, and the follow-up reintegration activities barely started at Project closure. This creates the risk
that the longer-term objective of economic integration activities will not be achieved. However, the Bank has
initiated a follow-up project—the Local Governance and Community Resilience Project (P178699) – which is
to continue the reintegration activities of the reviewed Project, thus mitigating this risk. The new project aims
at building state and citizen capacity for local service delivery, improving access to basic socio-economic
climate adaptive infrastructure, and providing socio-economic support to the reintegration of ex-combatants.
(ICR, page 26)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The ICR reported that the World Bank’s Project team responded quickly to the request from the
  government to support its reintegration efforts and mitigated the identified risks, notably those of the
  inadequate capacity of the central and local governments, through Project design. The Project design
  comprised the mutually synergetic elements of both individual support provided to ex-combatants and
  support to their families and the communities. A deficiency of the Project design was that the activities
  within the first component (reintegration of the ex-combatants) were planned as a sequence, and when
  the first stage (the Disarmament and Demobilization (DD)), which was conducted independently of the
  Project, was delayed, postponements of the rest of component 2 activities followed, and the Project had
  to be restructured twice. A synchronized design of the DD and Rehabilitation and Reintegration (RR)
  activities (e.g., using three intake periods per year, coordinating the initiation dates for the RR program,
  and ensuring the referral of ex-combatants from DD into RR on time), as opposed to designing the DD
  and RR as independent phases, would have helped to avoid the inefficiencies. (ICR, page 25, pages 27-
  28). The Project’s institutional arrangements originally placed technical implementation responsibilities
  with DDRR-PIU and fiduciary aspects with F-PIU. However, coordination between the two entities was
  cumbersome, and the issue was addressed during the 1st restructuring, as fiduciary responsibilities were
  transferred to DDRR-PIU as well. There were M&E shortcomings discussed under section 9.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR reported that the Project operated in a difficult security and political context of the CAR, drawing
 on a close working relationship between the government, the Bank, and the UN agency MINUSCA. The
 Bank provided effective supervision and continuous support to the Borrower and was able to accommodate
 the significantly tightened implementation timeline, affected by the initial delays. The task team also
 extensively supported the newly established DDRR-PIU, especially on financial management and
 procurement issues, which were challenging for the Borrower. The Bank carried out regular supervision
 missions to the CAR (three or four times per year in the early stages of implementation and three times a
 year afterwards), with the participation of relevant technical specialists to oversee all aspects of the Project.
 The task team was able to adjust during COVID-19 and supported the PIU through regular virtual meetings

                                                                                                      Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CAR Reintegration Project (P160272)



 to resolve the issues and identify solutions. By financing technical specialists, the Bank provided enhanced
 supervision over the life of the Project. The Bank team was able to accurately assess fiduciary and
 safeguard aspects, development outcomes, and to report candidly on issues identified.

 There were initial delays related to the DD program and to difficulties in engaging skilled staff to supervise
 various components of the program, as well as to difficulties in coordinating the RR programing with the DD
 program. However, the team was able to adapt the Project to both internal and external circumstances of
 the implementation though the restructurings. (ICR, page 28)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The original RF reflected the logic of Project interventions in the PAD, was sufficiently linked to the PDO
 and the ToC, and was comprehensive yet manageable. The PDO outcome indicators reflected all expected
 Project outcomes. The intermediate indicators were linked to the PDO indicators, providing more details.
 The indicators measured both objective results and beneficiary satisfaction with different aspects of the
 Project. All of the RF indicators were quantitative, time-bound, and attributable to the Project. However,
 there were deficiencies in the RF, including the inadequacy of measuring the PDO indicator “Percentage of
 demobilized ex-combatants availing income generation opportunities”, which was estimated as a share of
 program trainees who received kits with tools and materials to start own income generating activities (ICR,
 page 19), an input indicator. There was no indicator to measure the actual outcome of this activity, which
 was socio-economic reintegration of ex-combatants. There were also errors in the estimation of targets for
 the following PDO indicators: “Number of demobilized ex-combatants who have undergone socioeconomic
 reintegration” (an overestimate) and “Number of beneficiaries in target communities with improved access
 to socioeconomic infrastructure” (an underestimate). The ICR noted that an M&E manual was prepared as
 part of the Project Operational Manual and included the approach to data collection, both for monitoring
 project activities and evaluating the project impact; it also noted that a Management Information System
 (MIS) was designed, but no functional dashboard was created (ICR, page 23).



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR reported that during implementation, data collection and analysis were inadequate. The
  information sharing among project stakeholders, which included DDRR-PIU, MINUSCA, ACTED, IOM,
  local implementing partners, and local authorities, was deficient. Field data collection lacked systematic
  procedures and was primarily reliant on a single implementing partner (ACTED). Moreover, the
  participation of local authorities in the data collection process was limited, and there was a lack of regular
  and consistent reporting from implementing partners to DDRR-PIU. Further, no baseline survey or end-

                                                                                                      Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CAR Reintegration Project (P160272)



  line survey was conducted. COVID was a complicating factor, however, the Project should have initiated
  a survey immediately after COVID restrictions were lifted, which did not happen. A survey was
  undertaken in 2020 but was deemed problematic and was not accepted. A number of studies and largely
  qualitative surveys were undertaken during the implementation. In addition, ACTED and IOM each
  undertook a quantitative completion survey. Three quantitative surveys of ex-combatants, youth and
  beneficiary communities were undertaken in 2023 at the request of the ICR team. The functionality of the
  MIS was limited. MIS was only utilized to store data, which could only be retrieved on request. The
  design of the MIS consisted of a simple SQL database with a file for each beneficiary, and it served no
  purpose beyond a depository of data. There were no data presentation (dashboard), or analysis and
  reporting procedure embedded in it. (ICR, page 23-24)



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reported that M&E reports were compiled regularly and sent to senior management and further
  notes that no evidence is available of whether and how these reports were utilized to inform Project
  activities. The lack of an MIS dashboard also meant that operational details of the RR process were
  unavailable beyond the reports sent to senior management. Given the limitations of both data collection
  and the MIS, the resulting data analysis by the team was constrained in its scope and provided minimum
  insights to guide Project activities in terms of informing the RF. The utilization of the M&E as a
  management tool was therefore weak, albeit it did serve the function of informing Project stakeholders.
  This challenge hindered the assessment of Project results, both during Project implementation and
  during the ICR preparation. (ICR, page 24)

  Given the shortcomings in M&E design and implementation, the overall M&E quality is rated as Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards. At appraisal, the Project was classified as Environmental
   Category B (Partial Assessment) in relation to the infrastructure improvement subprojects under component
   2 and agricultural activities during training on pilot farms. An Environmental and Social Action Plan (ESSAP)
   was developed, but the preparation of safeguards instruments was deferred into the implementation period
   as per paragraph 12(a) of Operational Policies for Investment Project Financing (OP 10.00) for projects in
   situations of urgent need for assistance or capacity constraints. Three environmental safeguards policies
   were triggered, namely: Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Pest Management (OP 4.09), and Physical
   and Cultural Resources (OP 4.11). (PAD, pages 30-31 and pages 77-78) The Borrower prepared an
   Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). In line with the ESMF, Environmental and
   Social Management Plans (ESMPs) were finalized, approved, and disclosed in accordance with the World
   Bank procedures for all infrastructure subprojects that involve civil works (ICR, page 24). The Pest
   Management Plan prepared during the CAR Emergency Food Crisis Response and Agriculture Relaunch
   Project (P149512) was updated, applied to the Project, and disclosed. During implementation, the overall

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CAR Reintegration Project (P160272)



   safeguard rating was consistently Satisfactory or Moderately Satisfactory; and at closure, the rating was
   Satisfactory.

   The Project created a functional grievance redress mechanism (GRM). Grievances management
   committees were set up in all Project locations. Sensitization and trainings were organized on handling
   complaints and on participation in community-driven Project activities. In total, 340 complaints were
   received, mostly expressing gratitude, suggestions, or questions (241). The GRM process was rated
   Moderately Satisfactory. (ICR, page 23-24)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management (FM) and procurement. The ICR reported that the Project complied with all
   fiduciary requirements during implementation, despite some contracting and financial management
   hurdles, as follows. First, there were issues in relation to contracting the International Organization for
   Migration (IOM), since as a UN Agency, it had already had a Memorandum of Understanding with the
   WBG regarding a number of protocols. In addition, IOM had a preference for using their own financial
   reporting system versus that of the Bank. Second, the annual work plan validation process was notably
   time-consuming, causing significant delays in contracting. Third, the verification of demobilized ex-
   combatants entering the reintegration program encountered challenges with providing accurate lists.
   Fourth, both implementing partners (IOM and Agency for Technical Cooperation and Development
   (ACTED)) often struggled to produce timely and accurate budgets, complicating the annual audit process.
   Fifth, difficulties arose with respect to IOM’s reimbursement for its expenses, since it was using its own
   trust fund money, which could not be easily earmarked. Despite these challenges, internal control
   arrangements were in place and adequate financial management, procurement, and disbursement
   systems were maintained. The ICR reported that the Project’s financial and procurement controls
   contributed to keeping the costs within the budget, despite the difficult implementation conditions in the
   country. (ICR, pages 19, 24) During implementation, FM rating was mostly Moderately Satisfactory; it was
   upgraded to Satisfactory in 2022 and sustained this rating at closure. The procurement rating was mostly
   Satisfactory; this rating was sustained at closure.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory


                                                                                                  Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CAR Reintegration Project (P160272)



Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory   Shortcomings in quality at entry

Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons were derived from the ICR (ICR, pages 26-30):

1. Local capacity building, aimed both at local governments and communities, can be critical
for the long-term sustainability of community-based projects, and investing in such efforts
may increase projects’ net benefits, especially in low income FCS countries. The reviewed
Project provided capacity building to the DDRR-PIU - the government unit responsible for the
national DDRR program, - thus increasing the sustainability of Project outcomes. However,
institutional strengthening at the local level, which would have been even more important for results
sustainability, was less successful due to such challenges as the fragility of local governance,
volatile security conditions, and COVID-19 travel restrictions. The Project could have made more
efforts in this area: engage local council members more systematically in a range of Project
activities, from data collection to the implementation of socio-economic infrastructure subprojects;
and provide more encouragement to community members to participate in the Project’s capacity
building activities.

2. The DDRR process requires continued multi-dimensional interventions over a long period
of time. Such an approach proved to be a constructive solution for the reviewed Project, especially
considering the FCS circumstances in the CAR. The Project addressed socio-economic
reintegration, social cohesion, and community infrastructure rehabilitation. It was designed as an
immediate follow-up on the Bank’s (and UN’s) advisory work, which built the foundation for Project
implementation, and was followed up by a new operation, which used the same ToC and continued
its efforts. The Project was also supported by parallel operations in other sectors, with such
objectives as improved service delivery and infrastructure, created employment opportunities, and
established social safety nets.

3. A synchronized (parallel) implementation of the DD and RR activities, versus their
sequential completion, can be more effective, especially considering multiple FCS risks. The
Project experienced delays with the implementation of the RR activities under component 1 and, as
a result, the third phase of these activities barely started by Project closure. This also resulted in
Project restructurings, reallocation of funds, and the need to add new activities. The delays could
have been avoided if the DD activities (which were implemented outside of the Project) and RR
activities were designed not as a sequence, in which the RR stage could not start until the DD stage
is completed, but in a synchronized way. This could have been done, for example, by using three
intake periods per year, ensuring precise initiation dates for the RR program, and enabling a prompt
referral of ex-combatants from DD into RR.

4. More substantial efforts to conduct verification and monitoring of training activities might
be needed in FCS countries than in other situations. Project beneficiaries expressed satisfaction
with the life skills training, emphasizing its role in fostering their reintegration and enhancing their


                                                                                                    Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CAR Reintegration Project (P160272)



resilience against challenges, but were unsatisfied with the vocational training due to its brevity and
the lack of resources and equipment. This could have been prevented if the Project had adequate
mechanisms for verifying and monitoring the vocational training activities to ensure the adequacy of
training duration, daily hours of learning, access to essential equipment, and the quality and value of
the post-training kits. Closer monitoring of the implementation partners and training organizations to
ensure they are adequately resourced and have the right teaching/training modules would also be
beneficial.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides relevant technical details to understand the logic of the Project, the factors of Project
performance, the outcomes, and various aspects of implementation. It delivers a good quality efficacy analysis,
which is based on comprehensive information and was well-supported and candid, with evidence linked to
findings; relevant information on other aspects of project performance; and suggests lessons that are useful for
future lending operations in FCS countries.

However, the ICR has some shortcomings. The PDO relevance section is lacking information on Project's
relevance to the WBG strategies. The Bank performance and M&E sections could have been more candid
regarding the shortcomings. Annex 1.B. Key Outputs by Component is not filled out at all; and Annex 3 Project
Costs is missing data in the "at appraisal" column.

On balance, considering that the ICR provides detailed data and sufficient analysis (importantly, of Project’s
efficacy), these omissions are considered to be moderate, and the quality of the ICR is evaluated as
Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 20
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
CAR Reintegration Project (P160272)




                                                                   Page 20 of 20
