     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Water and Electricity Upgrading Project (P162245)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023881

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P162245                                      Water and Electricity Upgrading Project

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Central African Republic                     Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D2690                                    30-Jun-2022                                        17,386,927.83

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 17-Jan-2018                                  30-Jun-2023

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             20,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              20,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                          17,386,928.28                                              0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Craig Phillip Kullmann       Vibecke Dixon                 Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (Schedule 1), the Project Development Objective (PDO) was to enhance
   SODECA’s and ENERCA’s operational performance and increase access to improved water supply and
   electricity in Bangui and selected towns. The PDO as formulated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p.
   14) is identical to the Loan Agreement. The PAD identified the Project Area to include Bangui, Bambari and
   Berberati. (PAD, p. 14)



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Water and Electricity Upgrading Project (P162245)



   The PDO did not change during the life of the project, and this review has assessed the PDO achievement in
   terms of the following four objectives:

         I.   Enhance SODECA’s operational performance.
        II.   Enhance ENERCA’s operational performance.
       III.   Increase access to improved water supply in Bangui and selected towns.
       IV.    Increase access to improved electricity in Bangui and selected towns.

   The PDO outcome targets for access to water supply were reduced in scope during the only restructuring of
   the project; therefore, the ICR (p. 12) and ICR Review opted to conduct a split evaluation.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Water Supply Infrastructure. (US$6.7 million at appraisal, and US$5.7 million actual). This
   component financed:

          civil works in Bangui to secure the water intake station including the installation of a new backup
              generator, replacement of electro‐mechanical equipment at the water treatment plant and pumping
              stations, the installation of a remote control and monitoring system and new bulk meters, and the
              extension of the water distribution network to facilitate up to 3,000 new household connections and
              15 new public standposts. The June 2022 restructuring dropped the installation of the remote control
              and monitoring system and the 15 new public standposts and reduced the number of household
              connections from 3,000 to 2,000 (Amended legal agreement, p. 1). There is a discrepancy between
              the ICR (p. 9) and the amended legal agreement (p. 1), where the revised legal agreement retains
              the bulk meters and the ICR indicates that they were dropped.

          the rehabilitation of civil works in Bambari that included the intake and water treatment plant,
              reservoir, and the transmission and distribution lines to facilitate up to 300 new household
              connections and 60 new and restored public standposts. The June 2022 restructuring dropped these
              activities and replaced them with the installation of pumps in Bangui for the intake station and
              pumping stations (Amended legal agreement, p. 1).

          the rehabilitation of civil works in Berberati including boreholes, an associated power source,
              disinfection equipment, and the drilling and equipment of three new boreholes and the extension of
              the distribution network to facilitate up to 300 new household connections and 40 new and restored
              public stand posts.



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Water and Electricity Upgrading Project (P162245)



        Feasibility studies and supervision activities for all three sites; and inputs for SODECA to ensure the
         continuation of the operation of water facilities.

  Component 2: Energy Infrastructure. (US$8.4 million at appraisal, and US$7.2 million actual). This
  component financed:

        the installation of backup equipment, refurbishing existing turbine alternators at the Boali 1
         hydropower plant; the purchase and installation of 500 smart meters and 6,000 prepaid meters; a
         communication campaign; and targeted investments in the distribution system in Bangui.

        the construction of a new hybrid solar-diesel power station; the rehabilitation of the existing
         distribution network and the construction of a new distribution network with up to 600 connections in
         Bambari.

        the conversion of existing diesel generators into hybrid solar diesel power stations; rehabilitation of
         the existing distribution networks, and construction of a new distribution network and new
         connections including a dedicated distribution line to SODECA’s boreholes in Berberati.

  Component 3: Technical Support to Water and Energy Sectors (US$4.9 million at appraisal, and
  US$3.4 million actual). This component financed:

        technical assistance to SODECA aimed at improving their operational performance, including
         feasibility studies for four selected towns, a financial audit of SODECA, and vehicles and mopeds for
         the Project.

        technical assistance to ENERCA aimed at improving their operational performance, Dam Safety
         Study, and the financial audit of ENERCA.

        an energy sector strategy, a least cost development plan and tariff study, a rural electrification and
         investment strategy, drafting of the electricity law’s application decrees, and a study on a proposed
         regional project to bring power generated in Mobayi (Democratic Republic of Congo) to Bambari and
         Bangassou.

        Project Implementation Unit (PIU) costs such as studies, PIU salaries, operational costs, and the
         financial audit of the Project.

  Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response (US$0 million at appraisal, and US$0 million actual).
  This component intended to finance:

        a disaster response contingency funding mechanism that could be triggered in the event of an
         Eligible Crisis or emergency.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Water and Electricity Upgrading Project (P162245)



   Project Cost: The total project cost was estimated at US$20 million but the actual total cost was US $16.27
   million.

   Financing: At appraisal, the IDA financing was estimated at US$20 million. The amount used was
   US$17.39 million, which was 87 percent of the loan. The ICR (p. 46) indicated that the difference in total
   costs and financing is because the ICR team converted the component costs into US$ using the exchange
   rate on the project’s closing date, while the disbursement data under the “Financing” section in the “Data
   Sheet” had been calculated using the exchange rate at the time of each disbursement.

   The project refunded the undisbursed amount to the national IDA envelope of the Central African Republic.

   Borrower Contribution: At appraisal, no borrower’s contribution was estimated, and none materialized at
   project closing.

   Dates: The Project became effective on May 24, 2018, and was completed by June 30, 2023, following one
   extension that added 12 months to the project period. A Mid Term Review (MTR) was conducted from
   November 2-12, 2021. There was one restructuring of the project that include the following:

         On June 22, 2022, a level 2 restructuring modified Component 1 by dropping activities to address
          emergency water shortages in Bangui and Berberati. The restructuring established a new PIU in the
          Ministry of Development of Energy and Water Resources to manage the project, reallocated budget
          across components, revised the results framework and reduced PDO 3 targets, and extended the
          project closing date from June 30, 2022, to June 30, 2023. At the time of restructuring, US$10.54
          million was disbursed (60.6 percent) of the US$17.39 million.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The Central African Republic (CAR) has a long history of violence related to natural resource disputes and
inter-ethnic tensions and is considered a Fragile, Violence and Conflict (FCV) country context. At design
and appraisal, the PDOs were highly relevant to the 2016 IDA Turnaround Eligibility Note (TEN) that was
supporting the Recovery and Peace Building Assessment (2017-2021). Recovery efforts from the conflict
included the restoration of basic services.

The PDOs remained relevant to the World Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF 2021-2025) for the
CAR. The project sought to address the development problem of access to basic water and electricity
services, which underpin human development in the country and strengthen the state-citizen compact for
basic services. The CPF highlights that improved infrastructure will support service delivery in social
sectors, facilitate income generating activities and expand state presence by facilitating access between the
capital and the regions (CPF, p. 28). Inadequate electricity has important human capital and social
implications, as it hobbles the functionality of hospitals, schools, and social service provision. Lack of
access to basic water has a direct impact on treatment costs related to infectious disease, time from missed
work and time spent fetching water, and lower school attendance (PAD, p.19).



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 26
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Water and Electricity Upgrading Project (P162245)



               This development problem fits under Focus Area 1 of the CPF - Human Capital and Connectivity to Boost
               Stabilization, Inclusion, and Resilience and directly contributes to the achievement of “Objective 1.5: Build
               resilient infrastructure (power, mobility, water) for improved connectivity”, and the CPF’s indicators on
               people with access to improved water and electricity services (CPF, p.29, 55).

               The Project is aligned with CAR’s National Water Policy (Politique Nationale de l’Eau) 2021-2030, which
               has four strategic orientations, the first being to guarantee access to water and sanitation for all by 2030.
               The Project is also consistent with CAR’s objective of providing access to clean and affordable electricity
               services to 50 percent of its population by 2030, as established in its 2010 National Energy Policy
               Document (Document Politique Energétique Nationale) (ICR, p.12).

               The Project builds on a previous World Bank engagement in the water and electricity sector under the CAR
               Emergency Urban Infrastructure Rehabilitation and Maintenance Project (P104595) and the Emergency
               Power Response Project (P114111) that were implemented since 2009 (PAD, p.18).

               The development problem of providing access to water and electricity as articulated by the CPF and the
               government’s national water and energy policies is directly aligned with the PDO of the project. The
               operational performance of the water and electricity service providers underpins the sustainability of these
               services and is therefore appropriate to be included in the PDO.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Enhance SODECA’s operational performance.

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change (ToC) in the Implementation Completion Report (ICR, p.7) identified NRW reduction as
                             the outcome indicator to measure operational performance. The inputs identified to reach the outcome target
                             included:(i) construction of water connections, (ii) rehabilitation of storage tanks and transmission and
                             distribution lines, and (iii) technical assistance. The technical assistance inputs were not explicit in the ICR’s
                             ToC but were included in the PAD. These inputs included: (a.) new equipment such as leak detection,
                             geographic information systems (GIS), new commercial and billing system, (b.) training, (c.) client
                             enumeration to verify existing accounts, and (e.) strategic business plan (2018-2022). As a result of these
                             inputs, expected outputs would have been # of household water connections constructed, # of storage tanks
                             and kilometer of pipeline rehabilitated. Regarding technical assistance, output or intermediate outcomes
                             expected would have been # of leaks detected and resolved, updated user cadaster, improved billing
                             efficiency. The PDO outcome would be reductions in NRW.


                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Water and Electricity Upgrading Project (P162245)



A shortcoming of the ToC in the ICR is that it included a limited set of inputs and confused outcome
indicators, such as NRW, with output indicators. In addition, there were no identified intermediate outcome
indicators such as improved billing efficiency that would have embodied the inputs of improved user cadaster
along with new billing software and training, which could lead to reduced commercial losses supporting
reductions in NRW. Other inputs that were included in the technical assistance to support SODECA’s
operational efficiency, but not directly impacting NRW, included the preparation of a financial model, human
resource plan, and independent financial audits.

The ToC made some critical assumptions related to this objective: (i) peace and stability would be
maintained, (ii) SODECA leadership are committed, and (iii) SODECA can cover required expenses through
tariffs and subsidies. These assumptions did not hold true as there was a resurgence in violence leading up
to the presidential elections, starting in 2019, and up to December 2020 and after, bringing project activities to
a halt (ICR, p. 23), SODECA’s leadership was not engaged in project missions and activities (ICR, p.25), and
the Project reallocated resources to SODECA to cover operational materials because of rising costs due to
supply chain issues as a result of COVID-19 and the conflict.

The ICRR identified inconsistencies in the information presented in the ICR, which included three topics: (i)
definition of NRW used at appraisal and ICR, (ii) calculations of NRW at ICR, and (iii) the contributing
activities to measure and reduce NRW.

Definition of NRW and baselines: The definition of NRW used at appraisal does not adhere to international
good practice. NRW is a measure of the volume of water that is produced and distributed, but that is not
billed, and it is not a metric intended to measure cashflow. The modified definition at appraisal includes the
“volume of water that is billed but unpaid” (PAD, p. 41), which was the basis for the reported baseline of 72
percent NRW (PAD, p. 69). This modified definition incorporates other efficiency metrics related to collections
and confuses the intention of the NRW metric. Neither the June 2022 restructuring nor the ICR identified this
issue. The PAD (p. 69) also provided information on volumes of water produced and volumes of water billed
as of 2016 allowing for an estimation of NRW according to international good practice, which was 61 percent.
Supporting data to validate the percent of NRW at ICR using the PAD definition was not available; however,
data provided by the Task Team was available to substantiate the definition of NRW without the PAD
modification. Any further discussion in the ICRR on NRW reductions will rely on the NRW international
standard definition and reference the PAD definition as needed.

Calculations of NRW at ICR: There was no supporting data such as production and billing volumes of water
in the ICR to substantiate the reported reduction in NRW from 72 percent at appraisal to 50 percent at
closing. It should be noted that the end target for NRW was 62 percent (a reduction of 10 percentage points).
The reduction to 50 percent was first reported in the Implementation Supervision Report (ISR) #8 (January
2022) with a specific date of November 2021, and this figure was maintained throughout the life of the project.

The Task Team provided IEG additional data on volumes of water produced, and volumes of water billed for
the year 2022 to substantiate the numbers reported in the ICR. However, there were inconsistencies between
the NRW figures reported in the ICR and the data provided by the Task Team from the client
(correspondence Feb 15th, 2024). Using the best available information from the PAD (p. 74) for the year 2016
and data provided by the client for 2022, the Task Team and ICRR author agreed that a baseline of NRW
using the international definition was 61 percent (not 72 percent). The data provided by the client for 2022
generated a NRW rate of 48.3 percent (a reduction of 12.7 percentage points from baseline). The first quarter
of 2023, prior to the project closing, showed a NRW rate of 52.3 percent (a reduction of 8.7 percentage


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Water and Electricity Upgrading Project (P162245)



points from baseline). These two data points suggest that the reduction in NRW at ICR ranged between 8.7-
12.7 percentage points, and this is in line with the original target using the PAD definition of NRW.

Contributing activities to measure and reduce NRW: The ToC described above articulates a series of
interventions intended to reduce NRW that would focus on physical losses through the construction of social
connections and public standposts as well as the rehabilitation of civil works (water treatment facilities and
replace/repair of transmission lines). Commercial losses would be reduced through improved cadaster
management and the installation of a new billing and collection system.

The ICR (p. 13) reported that the reductions in NRW were principally achieved through improvements in
production systems, household metering, and rehabilitation and extension of networks. Upgrading of works
such as production systems (i.e. wells) would exacerbate NRW without improvements in billing because it
would push more water into the system. The production levels at the end of 2022 were lower than production
levels in 2016 (PAD, p. 74), despite the project aiming to increase production (correspondence with Task
Team Feb 27th, 2024). See further explanation below in Objective 3. In 2022, the total volume of water
produced by SODECA was estimated at 11,517,500 m3 (correspondence with Task Team Feb 27th, 2024) as
compared to 2016, which was 12,978,000 m3 (PAD, p. 69). Meanwhile, in 2022 the estimated volume of
water billed was 5,545,995 m3 (correspondence with Task Team Feb 27th, 2024) compared to 2016 when it
was 5,017,000 m3 (PAD, p. 69). Therefore, with reductions in volumes of water produced and increases in
volumes of water billed, a reduction in NRW, using the international standard - not the PAD definition, is
justifiable; 61 percent in 2016 vs 52.3 percent in the first quarter of 2023.

OUTPUTS:

The output level indicator for this objective in the results framework was limited to:

      Independent Audit & Financial Statements for 2017, 2018, 2019, and 2022 available, exceeding the
       target of having at least one audited financial statement. (PAD, p. 42) (ICR, p. 37)

The ICR reported the following additional outputs that did not have targets and were not included in the
results framework:

      Installation of GIS software with related training conducted. This was achieved, but at the end of
       project and did not influence NRW indicator. (ICR, p. 38)
      Procurement of leak detection equipment with related training conducted. This was achieved but was
       not operational at project close. (ICR, p. 38)
      Installation of commercial and billing software and related training conducted. This was achieved but
       at the end of the project and did not influence NRW indicator. (ICR, p. 38)
      Rehabilitation of networks. There was no indicator provided in the results framework nor ICR to
       quantify length of networks rehabilitated. (ICR, p. 13)
      Rehabilitation of reservoirs. There was no indicator provided in the results framework nor ICR to
       quantify the number of reservoirs rehabilitated. (ICR, p.13)
      Installation of household meters. There was no indicator provided in the results framework nor ICR to
       quantify the number of meters installed. (ICR, p. 13)

OUTCOMES:


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Water and Electricity Upgrading Project (P162245)




      Reduction in Non-Revenue Water: The ICR reported a 22-percentage point reduction. The
       supporting evidence was not consistent and subsequent information provided by the client and the
       team justified a reduction from 61 percent (baseline) to 48.3-52.3 percent NRW using the standard
       international definition of NRW. This is an 8.7-12.7-percentage point reduction out of a target of 10
       percentage points (baseline 62 percent NRW). (correspondence with Task Team February 27, 2024).
       (achieved).

The Project resulted in achieving the original outcome target, resulting in a Substantial efficacy rating.

The ToC in the ICR had several shortcomings to logically capture the expected change in NRW as previously
mentioned. These shortcomings included a lack of indicators to capture outputs or intermediate outcomes
that would have helped support the ToC. A reduced set of indicators in the results framework could be a
reflection that the project contains two sectors and there was decision at design and during implementation to
maintain simplicity in monitoring given the FCV context and capacity constraints of the
counterparts. Likewise, the emphasis on physical losses and a lack of emphasis on reducing commercial
losses in the ToC may have reflected the realism of the Bank Task Team that the organizational behavior
changes within SODECA to improve billing may have been limited given the FCV context. In either case, one
or two output or intermediate outcome indicators supporting NRW would have benefited the
ToC. Nevertheless, the information provided by the Task Team, despite its weaknesses, substantiates the
reduction in NRW, and indicates that SODECA’s operational performance was enhanced. Moreover, there
were no other investments made by other organizations to support SODECA with NRW reduction. (ICR, p.13)



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
No change.

Revised Rationale
As outlined above.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Enhance ENERCA’s operational performance.

Rationale
The ToC for this objective suggested that improvements in operational performance of ENERCA would
largely be accomplished through the procurement of the following inputs: (i) pre-paid and smart meters, (ii)

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Water and Electricity Upgrading Project (P162245)



technical assistance, (iii) consultancy to develop an energy sector strategy, (iv) consultancies for feasibility
studies to expand access, (v) consultancy for tariff study, and (vi) consultancy for financial audits. The
principal resulting outputs directly impacting PDO outcome would include (i) pre-paid and smart meters
installed, and (ii) sector strategy developed. The other outputs such as (iii) feasibility and tariff study
completed, and (iv) financial audits conducted would help ENERCAs overall operational performance, but do
not directly impact the PDO outcome indicator.

Similar to objective 1, the ToC in the ICR for this objective missed the opportunity to capture intermediate
outcome indicators to support the PDO indicator and reflect the logic of moving from outputs to outcomes.
The PDO outcome would be that the bill collection ratio improved.

The ICR also mentions that the installation of hybrid solar-diesel power stations would reduce operating costs
for ENERCA, which was not part of the ToC for this objective. These hybrid power stations are captured
under Objective 4, but they also have a direct positive impact on ENERCA’s operational costs.

The ToC made some critical assumptions related to this objective: (i) peace and stability would be
maintained, (ii) ENERCA’s leadership is committed, (iii) ENERCA can cover required expenses through tariffs
and subsidies, and (iv) long-term sector strategy is established and maintained. Some of these assumptions
did not hold true, such as the resurgence in violence bringing project activities to a halt (ICR, p. 23), and
ENERCA not yet being able to cover operational expenses (ICR, p. 19). The assumption that the ENERCA
leadership would be engaged did hold true and was a large part of the success for making progress on the
electricity component despite the challenges with COVID-19 and the resurgence in violence (Interview with
Task Team).

OUTPUTS:

The output level indicators for this objective in the results framework were limited to:

      5,500 Prepaid and smart electricity meters installed, exceeding the original target of 5,200 meters.
       (ICR, p.36)
      Independent Audit & Financial Statements for 2017, 2018, 2019, and 2020, exceeding the original
       target of having at least one audited financial statement. (PAD, p. 42) (ICR, p. 37)
      Least-cost development plan and tariff study (2020-2024) was prepared and achieved. (ICR, p. 37-
       38)

The ICR (p. 40) reported the following additional outputs that were achieved but not included in the results
framework:

      Energy sector strategy prepared and related application decrees of electricity laws issued.
      Rural electrification and investment strategy prepared.

OUTCOMES:

Increase in the energy bill collection ratio from 60 percent in 2016 to 63 percent in 2023. (Original target was
70 percent). The ICR (p. 34) reported an increase to 76 percent without any supporting documentation, and
the subsequent information on billing and collection rates for 2021 and 2022 shared by the client
substantiated an increase to only 63 percent. The ICRR uses the best available information which is the 63


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Water and Electricity Upgrading Project (P162245)



percent bill collection ratio from the ENERCA Project Activity Report 2022. (not achieved). The total amount
of electricity billed in megawatt hours (MWH) almost doubled between 2016 and 2022 from 73,797 MWH
(PAD, p. 76) to 129,048 MWH (ENERCA Activity Report 2022), and the amounts billed in terms of francs
(CFA) went up from 7.40 billion to 12.72 billion CFA. However, collections rose at slower pace from 4.44
billion CFA in 2016 to 7.92 billion CFA in 2022 representing a bill collection ratio of 63 percent in 2022. The
ENERCA activity report indicates that one reason for the slow growth in collections is due to a lack of
payment from other government entities and a reduction in budget support in the last few years leading up to
2022 (ENERCA Project Activity Report 2022). Unpaid debt from other government entities makes up 19
percent of total unpaid debt. While household collections increased due to prepaid meters, ENERCA
continues to struggle with payment from its larger consumers such as government agencies.

The Project achieved or exceeded all the output targets but did not achieve the outcome target. Despite
the lack of evidence at the outcome level, it is plausible that improved collections did occur among specific
customers such as residential and commercial sectors due to prepaid and smart meters. As a result, this
objective has an overall Modest efficacy rating. The 2022 Annual Activity Report was used as the basis to
validate the outcome results.

The ToC in the ICR had shortcomings in logically capturing the expected change in bill-collection ratio. One
important shortcoming was a missing assumption around payments from other government entities to
ENERCA. Failure by other government entities to pay for electricity services, due to decreased budget
support, appears to be one principal factor that offset the gains in collections made by ENERCA with the
installation of prepaid meters. Given the macro fiscal volatility of the country context, it may have been more
realistic to specify the outcome target as a subset of electricity users (e.g. residential and commercial) to
accurately capture the impact of the project interventions and eliminate the risk of non-payment posed by
government entities. ENERCA’s operational performance was modestly enhanced.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
No change.

Revised Rationale
As outlined above.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Increase access to improved water supply in Bangui and selected towns.

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Water and Electricity Upgrading Project (P162245)




Rationale
The ToC in the ICR (p.7) for this objective included inputs such as the procurement of goods and services to:
(i) upgrade pumping stations, (ii) rehabilitate networks and reservoirs, (iii) conduct water quality tests at
rehabilitated reservoirs, and (iv) expand networks and install community water points. The principal resulting
outputs would include: (i) pumping stations upgraded, (ii) networks and reservoirs rehabilitated or expanded,
(iii) community water points installed, and (iv) water quality tests conducted. The ToC included increased
water production (volumes of water) as an outcome indicator, but this would be a prerequisite (i.e.
intermediate outcome) to the PDO outcome of people provided with access to improved water sources
(outcome indicator).

The ToC was explicit that the rehabilitation of the water treatment facilities for Bangui was intended to
improve the quality of water supply, but this activity was eliminated with the restructuring. The ToC was not
explicit on how Component 3 technical assistance activities would contribute to improved services, and
therefore assumed that infrastructure alone would improve the delivery of services, which was a shortcoming
of the ToC for Objective 3.

The Project adjusted component activities to address the critical needs of the population prior to the June 22,
2022, restructuring. In February 2019, Bangui experienced emergency water shortages due to pump failures.
Several pumps required replacement, which the project financed, and as a result restored services to 199,703
people (ICR, p. 17). In addition, network rehabilitation in Berberati, that was originally not planned, was
required to connect the rehabilitated water points. Also, during the COVID-19 operational expenses for oil and
chemical reagents that were needed to maintain service provision (ICR, p.14). As result, the rehabilitation of
the water treatment plant in Bambari was cancelled.

The Task Team and client adjusted activities to help restore services to a significant population, but as the
ICR (p. 29) noted, the restructuring did not incorporate an indicator in the results framework for “access to
restored water supply services”. As a result, this population was not considered in the benefits for the
economic analysis. The restructuring was a missed opportunity to fully account for these positive outcomes
because the costs for these interventions were captured in the economic analysis while the benefits were not.

The same critical assumptions made in the ToC for Objective 1 apply to Objective 3 except for two additional
assumptions: (i) that the existing water production equipment remained functional and (ii) the complementary
sector activities such as the distribution main in Bambari financed by Arab Bank for Economic Development in
Africa (BADEA) are completed on time (ICR, p. 7). Neither assumption held true, and the project had to
restructure to address the pump failures and do light rehabilitation of a distribution main that was to be
replaced with BADEA financing.

OUTPUTS:

The output level indicators for this objective in the results framework were limited to:

      2,625 new piped household water connections were constructed out of the original target of 3,600.
       This target was not achieved. (ICR, p.34)
      47 improved community water points constructed or rehabilitated out of the original target of 115. This
       target was not achieved. (ICR, p. 39)



                                                                                                  Page 11 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Water and Electricity Upgrading Project (P162245)



The ICR reported (p.40) the following additional outputs that did not have targets and were not included in the
results framework:

        9 pumps installed in Bangui pumping stations.
        Back-up power generators and electrical cabinets were installed in Bangui, Bambari, and Berberati. ()
        Reservoirs in Bambari and Berberati rehabilitated.
        Distribution network in Berberati extended.
        Existing distribution network in Bambari rehabilitated.
        Pumping and treatment stations in Bambari rehabilitated.

OUTCOMES:

      22,525 people were provided with new access to an improved water supply out of the original target of
       40,000. This target was not achieved.
      1,945 m3/hour water production capacity constructed or rehabilitated out of an original target of 300
       m3/hour. This was achieved through the installation of 4 intake pumps in Bangui, 2 intake pumps in
       Bambari, and 4 boreholes in Berberati. This target was exceeded. (ICR, p. 35)
      0 Water quality tests at rehabilitated utility water storage that meet required standards. The original
       target was 85 percent, and this was not achieved. (ICR, p. 35)

The Project made progress but did not achieve the original PDO indicator target for the number of people with
new access to improved water supply. The Project exceeded the production capacity target but did not
achieve the water quality target. The ICR reported a series of additional outputs not in the results framework
that supported the results achieved for the PDO indicator. The objective to increase access to improved water
supply was modestly achieved against the original targets. The efficacy rating is thus Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
There was no change in the objective.

Revised Rationale
At the project restructuring on June 22, 2022, the original PDO remained unchanged but some of the PDO
targets decreased in scope. The rational for the restructuring was the need to finance emergency
rehabilitation works to reestablish services, additional works that were to be financed by another entity, and
operational expenses to ensure that services did not collapse during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Theory of Change: The TOC provided under Objective 3 above applies to the revised Objective 1 as well
except that the rehabilitation of the water treatment plant was dropped. The Project adjusted component
activities to address the critical needs of the population, but as the ICR (p. 29) noted, the restructuring did not
incorporate an indicator in the results framework for “access to restored water supply services”. As a result,
this population was not considered in the benefits for the economic analysis. The restructuring was a missed

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Water and Electricity Upgrading Project (P162245)



opportunity to fully account for these positive outcomes because the costs for these interventions were
captured in the economic analysis while the benefits were not.

The restructuring scaled back only the PDO 3 indicator target - the number of people provided with access to
improved water sources from 40,000 to 32,000 people to account for reduced funding to extend the networks.
Likewise, the related intermediate results indicator – new piped household water connections that are
resulting from project intervention was scaled back from 3,600 to 2,600. In addition, the need to restore water
supply services required an increase in the PDO indicator target of water production capacity constructed or
rehabilitated which was modified from 300 m3 per hour to 1,800 m3 per hour.

The output level indicators for this objective in the results framework were limited to:

      2,625 new piped household water connections were constructed exceeding the revised target of
       2,600. (ICR, p.34)
      47 improved community water points constructed or rehabilitated out of a revised target of 100. This
       target was not achieved. (ICR, p. 39)

See original objective 1 for the additional outputs that did not have targets nor were included in the results
framework:

OUTCOMES:

      22,525 people were provided with new access to an improved water supply, not achieving the
       revised target of 32,000.

      1,945 m3/hour water production capacity constructed or rehabilitated exceeding the revised target of
       1,800 m3/hour. This was achieved through 4 intake pumps in Bangui, 2 intake pumps in Bambari, and
       4 boreholes in Berberati. (ICR, p. 35)

      0 Water quality tests at rehabilitated utility water storage that meet required standards. The original
       target was 85 percent, which was not revised, it was not achieved. (ICR, p. 35)

The ICR reported the following additional outcomes that did not have targets and were not included in the
results framework:

      199,703 people in Bangui had their water supply restored. (ICR, p. 17)

The Project achieved 70 percent of the PDO indicator target for the number of people with new access to
improved water supply. The target was partly reached because of contractor performance issues and the
cancellation of the contract for the installation of community standpipes. However, the Project also made
adjustments and provided critical interventions to restore improved water supply services to a population of
199,705 in Bangui that had lost access to services. While the restoration of services was not incorporated into
the results framework, the Project should be credited for this achievement, as it clearly contributed to
achieving the objective of increased access to improved water supply. The outcome target for production
capacity was exceeded enabling the restoration of services for the population in Bangui, but the water quality




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Water and Electricity Upgrading Project (P162245)



target was not achieved. Despite these weaknesses, the efficacy rating is a weak Substantial given the
overall progress toward the PDO.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
Increase access to improved electricity in Bangui and selected towns.

Rationale
The ToC for this objective suggested that improvements in operational performance of ENERCA would
largely be accomplished through the procurement of the following inputs: (i) rehabilitation of four turbine
alternators at the Boali hydropower plant, (ii) hybrid solar-diesel electricity plants in Bambari and Berberati,
(iii) rehabilitation of the local distribution network to reduce loadshedding (i.e. scheduled outages), and (iv)
pre-paid and smart bulk meters. The principal resulting outputs would be: (i) four turbine alternators
rehabilitated, (ii) solar-diesel electricity plants installed, (iii) local distribution networks rehabilitated, (iv) pre-
paid and smart meters installed. These outputs would contribute to intermediate outcomes such as increased
generation. The PDO outcome would be people with increased access to new or improved electricity
services.

The ToC (ICR, p. 7) was not explicit how Component 3 technical assistance activities would contribute to the
desired outcomes; however, the rural electrification and investment strategy could eventually lead to
expanded access to electricity in the future. Similar to the water supply objectives, the ToC for Objective 4
was focused on infrastructure and did not mention activities to support capacity development of ENERCA in
electricity service delivery, which was a weakness as sustainable service delivery goes beyond construction
of infrastructure.

The ToC for Objective 4 had the same critical assumptions as Objective 2, and the engagement and
leadership of ENERCA with the Project underpinned the achievements for this objective and the ability to
exceed the original targets (Interview with Task Team).

OUTPUTS:

The output level indicators for this objective in the results framework were limited to:

      5,500 Prepaid and smart electricity meters installed, exceeding the original target of 5,200 meters.
        (ICR, p.36)
      4 Turbine alternators of Boali 1 hydropower plant refurbished, achieving the original target of 4. (ICR,
        p. 45)

The ICR reported the following additional outputs that did not have targets and were not included in the
results framework:

      Construction of hybrid solar-diesel power stations in Bambari and Berberati. (ICR. P 45)

                                                                                                          Page 14 of 26
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Water and Electricity Upgrading Project (P162245)




                                    The distribution network in Bambari rehabilitated and extended. (ICR, p. 45)

                            OUTCOMES:

                                    25,000 people were provided with a new or improved electricity service, exceeding the original target
                                     of 16,000. (ICR, p. 21)
                                    2.8 MW generation capacity installed, exceeding the original target of 1 MW. (ICR, p. 21)

                            The ToC for the objective was largely based on increasing electricity production through the Boali hydropower
                            plant, the construction of the hybrid solar diesel powerplants, rehabilitating and extending the distribution
                            network, and installing prepaid meters. As result, the Project exceeded the original PDO targets for both
                            people with access to improved electricity services and generation capacity, hence achieving the objective to
                            increase access to improved electricity, resulting in a High efficacy rating.



                            Rating
                            High


                            OBJECTIVE 4 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective
                            No change.

                            Revised Rationale
                            As outlined above.



                            Revised Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            While noting the weaknesses in the availability and quality of data for NRW, there was sufficient evidence
                            through multiple sources to substantiate Objective 1 efficacy rating as Substantial. Objective 2 made progress
                            at the output level but had weaknesses in the data and the outcome target was not achieved resulting in a
                            Modest rating. Objective 3 made progress at the output level, but the original PDO target related to access to
                            water supply services was not achieved resulting in a Modest rating. Objective 4 received a High rating for
                            substantially exceeding PDO targets related to electricity. The combined overall efficacy rating is a weak
                            Substantial rating.




                                                                                                                            Page 15 of 26
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             Water and Electricity Upgrading Project (P162245)




         Overall Efficacy Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Under Revision 1, the overall efficacy is assessed as Substantial based on underlying efficacy ratings of
         Substantial for Objective 1 and Modest for Objective 2. Under Revision 1, Objective 3 rating improved from
         Modest to Substantial accounting for progress made toward the revised outcome targets and the additional
         population served with restored water supply services. The Objective 4 rating is High.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Ex Ante Economic Efficiency: At appraisal, the economic rate of return (ERR) was estimated at 9.6 percent
with a Net Present Value of US$3.42 million for the investments based on various benefit streams for water that
included: (i) reduction of the water-related burden of disease; and (ii) opportunity cost of time, (iii) productivity
and education gains due to times saves realized by households gaining access closer to their home (PAD p.
64). The main benefit stream for the electricity component was the cost savings for consumers relative to private
energy generation from small diesel generators (PAD, p. 70). For reference, this NPV calculation used a
discount rate of 6 percent.

Ex Post Economic Efficiency: The economic analysis at project completion in the ICR included the same
benefits streams identified at appraisal (ICR, p. 18). The economic rate of return (ERR) at closing was estimated
at 16.8 percent with a Net Present Value of US$5.15 million. The ex-post analysis also used a discount rate of 6
percent.

The ex-post ERR considered the costs associated with restoring water supply services in Bangui but did not
incorporate the benefits of those restored services to 199,705 people with improved water supply as they were
not captured in the results framework. As a result, the ERR is likely a conservative estimate.

Financial Efficiency: The ICR (p. 52) indicated that both utilities (SODECA and ENERCA) at appraisal were
not financially viable as neither utility could cover their operational and maintenance costs. Operational
efficiency metrics such as NRW for SODECA was at 61 percent at baseline (using the standard international
definition) and ENERCA’s electricity transport and distribution losses were at 48.5 percent. In addition,
at appraisal, ENERCA reported a 60 percent collection rate which indicated that actual revenues of ENERCA
were based on 31 percent of its production. There was no financial net present value calculated at appraisal.

The ICR (p. 57) reported significant improvements for ENERCA’s bill collection ratio from 60 to 76 percent, but
subsequent correspondence with the Task Team and information provided by the client substantiated only an
increase to 63 percent. The reduction in NRW for SODECA was approximately 10 percentage points going from

                                                                                                        Page 16 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Water and Electricity Upgrading Project (P162245)



63 percent to 47.3-52.3 percent; however, the project did not monitor other financial efficiency metrics such as
operating cost coverage ratio or collection ratio to have broader assessment of financial efficiency. At project
close, neither utility was financially viable, and both continued to struggle to cover operating costs (ICR, p 19).

Operational and Administrative Efficiency: The project was designed to be implemented over 4 years. Delays
in implementation were a result of several factors that included: (i) a resurgence in violence related to the
presidential elections in 2020 that halted project activities, (ii) the COVID-19 pandemic, (iii) change in Project
Implementation Unit (PIU) to a different ministry, and (iv) severe water shortages that required emergency
interventions, (v) procurement issues and market availability of qualified contractors, and (vi) delays in
compensation for Project Affected Peoples (PAPs) resulted in some works not being executed. The resurgence
in violence forced a halt in project activities, and COVID-19 slowed implementation with supply chain issues and
a rise in the price of materials. Moreover, the market availability of quality contractors also impeded the
completion of some of the planned water supply infrastructure such as community standpipes (ICR, p. 24).

As a result, disbursements reached US$8.77 million (50 percent) by the time of the MTR in November
2021. These challenges led to a number of actions including: (i) dropping activities such as the water treatment
plant in Bangui and reallocating resources to finance emergency water supply interventions, supporting
SODECA with operational costs such as oil and chemical reagents during COVID-19, and allocating more
resources to the PIU to cover increased supervision costs of enhanced security and air travel because of the
violence; (ii) in 2020 relocated the PIU from an existing World Bank financed project in the transportation sector
to the Ministry of Development of Energy and Water Resources, and (iii) extension of the project closing date by
12 months.

Conclusion. The project's estimated ERR at 16.8 percent at project close was a significant result compared to a
range of 10-12 percent discount rate suggested for sub-Saharan African countries in the World Bank economic
analysis guidelines. Moreover, the ERR calculated for the water supply component is likely conservative
because it did not account for the benefits of restoring critical water supply services. While the project required a
12-month extension, the project substantially achieved the desired results despite the significant setbacks from
civil unrest, COVID-19, and changing of the PIU to a difference ministry, and dealing with low market availability
of quality contractors. As a result, the rating for efficiency is considered Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       100.00
 Appraisal                                                   9.60
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       100.00
 ICR Estimate                                                16.80
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

                                                                                                       Page 17 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Water and Electricity Upgrading Project (P162245)




6. Outcome

The PDO was highly relevant to the government and Bank strategy for Central African Republic and directly
aligned with the sector strategies and organizational needs of SODECA and ENERCA. Efficacy of the four
PDOs to enhance SODECA and ENERCA’s operational performance and increase access to improved water
supply and electricity in Bangui and selected towns was rated as Substantial given the supporting evidence that
the targets were almost fully achieved, and several outputs exceeded the targets. Efficiency was rated as
Substantial. The economic analysis showed that the project had a high ERR. The project benefited from
exceeding targets for PDO 4 in the electricity component at reduced costs, and adjusting activities to meet the
critical needs of water supply of the population for which the benefits were not accounted for. Actions were also
taken to improve the administrative efficiency by moving the PIU to a more relevant ministry in 2020.

The overall outcome, accounting for the split evaluation, was rated Moderately Satisfactory, reflecting minor
shortcomings in the Project's achievement of its objectives and in its efficiency. The table below shows a
comparison between the ICR split rating and that of the ICRR, which upgraded Split 1 for PDO 3 from Modest to
Substantial accounting for reestablishing services for 199,705 people, and downgrading PDO 2 from Substantial
to Modest based on the best available evidence to substantiate the results.

                                                         Original                  Revised
Relevance                                                High                      High

PDO Objective 1                                          Substantial               Substantial
PDO Objective 2                                          Modest                    Modest
PDO Objective 3                                          Modest                    Substantial
PDO Objective 4                                          High                      High
Efficacy                                                 Substantial               Substantial
Efficiency                                               Substantial               Substantial
Outcome                                                  Moderately Satisfactory   Moderately Satisfactory
Numerical value of outcome rating                        4                         4
Amount disbursed (out of US$17.38 million total
                                                         US$ 10.54 million         US$ 6.84 million
disbursed)
Share of disbursements                                   60.6%                    39.4%
Weighted value of outcome ratings                        2.42                     1.58
Rounded score                                            4.0
Final Outcome Rating                                     Moderately Satisfactory*

*Note that according to the IEG ICR Guidelines, an outcome rating can be no higher than Moderately
Satisfactory if one of the objectives is rated as modest achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                      Page 18 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Water and Electricity Upgrading Project (P162245)



7. Risk to Development Outcome

Based on the information in the ICR, the following issues posed risks to the development outcome:

      Political Risk: Armed conflict in project areas poses a major risk for the sustainability of
       project outcomes. The situation in the project area is currently stable; however, cycles of conflict
       and violence continue to plague the country and threaten the project’s development outcomes
       particularly around Bambari and to a lesser extent Berberati. If there is a resurgence of violence in
       the future, project-supported infrastructure could be damaged and service delivery halted, as was the
       case during the civil war (ICR, p. 28).
      Institutional and Financial Risk: SODECA and ENERCA struggle with limited capacity and
       financial sustainability. SODECA continues to operate in a reactionary manner responding to daily
       challenges in service delivery limiting their ability for long-term planning. Their financial position limits
       their ability to cover daily operating expenses including electricity payments to ENERCA, putting the
       sustainability of investments and services at risk. ENERCA also struggles to cover the operation and
       maintenance costs of its services, despite improvements in their bill collection ratio (ICR, p. 28).
       Overstaffing in ENERCA contributes to inefficiencies in their cost structure, and loss of talent
       contributes to their struggles in service delivery (ENERCA Activity Project Report – 2022) and their
       financial sustainability.
      Ownership Risk: and commitment to project outcomes. Despite the overarching challenging
       country context in terms of fragility and country economic factors, ENERCA’s management
       demonstrated commitment to the project and empowered its staff to take decisions supporting
       implementation. This commitment was evidenced by the achievements in the electricity component of
       the project and signals a positive sign for the future of the organization. While SODECA’s technical
       staff were engaged in the project, the management did not empower them to take decisions causing
       delays. The SODECA management were not engaged in the project activities (ICR, p.29) putting at
       risk the longer-term sustainability of investments. The World Bank continues to provide technical
       assistance to SODECA on the implementation of its 2023-2025 Strategic Plan and the more
       elaborate five-year strategic plan (2023-2027) developed with Bank executed trust fund support.
       However, without a follow-on investment project from the World Bank providing direct financial
       support to implement core actions and further improvements to its infrastructure, SODECA’s progress
       may be limited (ICR, p. 29).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The technical design of the project was grounded in the needs of both SODECA and ENERCA and
  responded to the service delivery challenges in a post-conflict setting in each sector in Bangui, and on
  reestablishing services in Bambari and Berberati. The project recognized the synergies between the
  water and electricity sector and recognized that improvements in the water sector would be limited
  without supporting the electricity sector.

  The design was informed by lessons learned from the preceding CAR Emergency Power Response
  Project (Projet d’Urgence en Réponse à la Crise Energétique, P114111, EPRP) and other World Bank

                                                                                                        Page 19 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Water and Electricity Upgrading Project (P162245)



  experience supporting the water and energy sectors in FCV contexts. These lessons included using an
  established PIU, at least initially, given the low-capacity context. The project also aimed to leverage prior
  investments from previous projects to get quick wins. Project activities were agreed upon with the
  MDEWR and were well-coordinated with the complimentary interventions of key development partners
  (ICR, p 27).

  A noted shortcoming in the ICR was that the Task Team underestimated the capacity of the PIU. The PIU
  was originally established to manage the CEMAC Transport-Transit Facilitation Project (Projet de
  Facilitation du Transit et des Transports en Zone CEMAC), and since it had developed capacity in Bank
  policy it was tasked to also manage the Water and Electricity Upgrading Project. This strategy made
  sense given the limited capacity in other government entities, but the PIU was overburdened and did not
  give the project priority. The Task Team worked with the client to arrange a project advance to ensure
  readiness, but this had limited impact because of capacity constraints in the PIU to utilize it. An additional
  shortcoming was that at appraisal any compensation for Project Affected Peoples (PAPs) would be
  covered by ENERCA or SODECA due to the limited financing from the loan. However, these entities
  struggled to provide such compensation, despite government assurances, and PAP compensation would
  be an impediment to implementation of some works such as the water transmission line in Bambari (ICR,
  p. 27). The Project had strategic relevance, a sound technical design, a focus on reaching vulnerable
  populations with basic services, and clear implementation arrangements. Despite some minor
  shortcomings, the ICRR rates the Quality at Entry as Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The quality of supervision was adequate. A key factor in supervision was that the Task Team included a
 Bangui based energy specialist as co-Task Team Leader. In addition, a local water consultant was hired to
 augment the international-based Task Team Leader who was not located in the country. The presence of
 staff in the country to supervise and troubleshoot problems was critical to support implementation.

 Despite dealing with a complex environment that included security challenges and the restrictions placed
 on Bank staff during the COVID-19 pandemic, the Task Team maintained regular contact with the client
 and conducted 11 supervision missions. In between formal supervision missions, the Task Team held
 monthly meetings with the PIU, ENERCA, and SODECA to improve contract management and supervision.

 The Task Team eventually recommended moving the PIU from the CEMAC project and mobilizing a new
 PIU in MDEWR, which was a more natural fit since it is the ministry that oversees ENERCA and SODECA.
 Moreover, the Task Team was proactive and adapted the project to meet the emergency water supply
 needs that emerged in February 2019 because of dysfunctional infrastructure. This intervention avoided a
 humanitarian crisis. In addition, the Project helped SODECA procure basic supplies needed for daily
 operations during COVID-19 when supply chain issues raised prices on goods. The Task Team
 demonstrated agility, responded to the client’s needs, and restructured the project accordingly. The
 restructuring eliminated some of the technical assistance activities, and the Task Team responded by
 securing trust fund resources to support the client with technical assistance.


                                                                                                     Page 20 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Water and Electricity Upgrading Project (P162245)



 Despite security challenges, COVID-19 restrictions, emergency needs, and the need to relocate the PIU to
 another institution, the Task Team demonstrated agility and proactivity to provide close supervision to
 ensure project activities advanced. The Task Team did not make the necessary adjustments at the
 restructuring to capture the population that benefited from having water services reestablished, nor were
 PDO indicators that were reported on in 2021 updated during the last years of the project.

 There were moderate shortcomings in the identification of opportunities and threats; therefore, the rating
 for Quality of Supervision is Moderately Satisfactory



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project did not have an explicit theory of change in the PAD, but the results framework was logical and
 the PDOs had indicators at outcome levels. The results framework captured key metrics related to
 infrastructure for both water supply and electricity. The definitions of the PDOs and intermediate outcomes
 indicators were generally clear, and the level of detail of the results framework generally corresponded to
 the capacity of the PIU to manage the project.

 One of the main shortcomings of the results framework was the inclusion of NRW reduction as a PDO
 indicator for water, which appeared to be overly ambitious given the fragile country and institutional context
 of SODECA.

 To address NRW in a meaningful and sustainable manner, it requires buy-in from the utility’s management
 to ensure that it is an organizational priority since it requires the operations, engineering, and commercial
 departments to work across silos. To lay the foundation for NRW reduction, the results framework could
 have focused on the output rather than at the PDO level, and on the technical building blocks. For
 example, a subset of indicators such as the number of water audits conducted, km of pipeline rehabilitated,
 number of trainings conducted on NRW, NRW reduction and energy efficiency strategies endorsed by
 management, number of pilot district metered areas implemented, number of change management pilots
 conducted, number of macro and micro meters installed, or updated user and network cadaster are
 examples of the types of indicators that could have been used to lay a foundation for NRW reduction.

 Moreover, the definition of NRW used at appraisal was not aligned with international best practice. The
 Task Team at appraisal was explicit about this, but the justification to incorporate other efficiency metrics
 such as collections (billed but unpaid volumes of water) into the NRW was not clear, and complicated
 monitoring by the PIU. This was evidenced in the monitoring which did not adhere to the PAD definition.




                                                                                                     Page 21 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Water and Electricity Upgrading Project (P162245)



b. M&E Implementation
  The project performance was monitored through regular reporting by SODECA and ENERCA and then
  compiled by the PIU. The Task Team held monthly meetings with stakeholders to review progress on
  procurement, safeguards, financial management, and troubleshoot issues. Various challenges arose
  during implementation in monitoring results such as the miscalculation in the number of people provided
  with access to services. The household size that was being reported did not correspond with the
  definition in the results framework, which was eventually corrected by the Task Team and PIU.

  During implementation, the Task Team appropriately scaled back the target for PDO 3 indicator on the
  number of people with access to an improved water source to reflect changes to Component 1
  interventions because of the restructuring. Given the potential for a humanitarian crisis with a collapsed
  water supply system in Bangui, the restructuring could have included an indicator such as the number of
  people with restored water supply to give the project proper credit for the intervention.

  In addition, the ongoing monitoring of NRW for water and the bill collection ratio for electricity proved to
  be challenging to report on regularly. The Implementation Supervision Report #8 from January 2022
  noted the first changes in the NRW and the bill collection ratio indicators. Both changes were significant,
  but the justification for the change was not documented. The values reported in ISR #8 were maintained
  through project close, and limited information was provided in the ICR to substantiate the change. The
  methods for measuring some of the indicators were inadequate, causing confusion in how to measure
  them resulting in inadequate reporting.



c. M&E Utilization
  The PIU and the Bank team utilized the M&E to diagnose and troubleshoot bottlenecks as they occurred
  in implementation. The Task Team tracked contracts and PAP compensation issues in a regular manner
  to guide the client on making course corrections, and monitored project advances that informed the
  restructuring of components and related indicators and targets.

  The results framework allowed for the majority of intermediate and some of the PDO indicators to be
  adequately tracked. The shortcomings of the results framework and monitoring included: (i) the
  definition of NRW was not aligned with international standards confusing calculations during
  implementation, (ii) data to monitor the NRW and bill collection ratio indicators for water and electricity
  were inconsistent between the ICR and information provided by the client but were ultimately resolved;
  (iii) an indicator for the number of people having restored access to improved water services would have
  formally given credit to the project for its intervention and accounted for in the economic analysis.

  Collectively, the issues identified above constitute minor shortcomings in the M&E design,
  implementation, and utilization; therefore, the Overall M&E Quality is rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues


                                                                                                     Page 22 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Water and Electricity Upgrading Project (P162245)




a. Safeguards
  The Project was designated as Category B. Environmental and social risks were deemed low and
  manageable, and consistent with the experience in previous projects of a similar nature. The safeguard
  policies triggered were Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11),
  Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12), and Safety of Dams (OP 4.37) (ICR, page 26).

  The PIU was responsible for the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the
  Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), which were prepared and disclosed both in the country and on the
  World Bank’s website with some delay. Environmental and social screenings and environmental and social
  studies including environmental and social impact assessments and environmental and social management
  plans were carried out prior to the start of works. In addition, the Task Team provided No Objections to the
  Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) prior to commencing work.

  During implementation, supervision missions identified that contractors were not always following certain
  risk mitigation measures such as barricading open trenches or holes. Monitoring environmental compliance
  by the PIU was complicated when its environmental special departed, and the position was not filled for
  several months in 2022. This position was eventually filled, and the new person was mentored by the Task
  Team.

  The most significant issue was the delay and lack of compensation to some of the Project Affected Peoples
  (PAPs) by SODECA. The delay in payments caused delays in works and resulted in the canceling of an
  activity to replace a water transmission pipeline. As a result, the project instead made temporary
  improvements to the transmission line. The project’s Grievance Redress Mechanism committees were
  established in Bambari and Berberati prior to the start of activities, with complaints being registered and
  resolved during the project duration (ICR, p. 26)

  The overall safeguard rating of the project was moderately satisfactory. This was driven by OP 4.01 and
  4.12 being rated as moderately satisfactory, while OP 4.11 and 4.12 were rated as satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management: The project generally complied with the Bank's financial management (FM)
  requirements. During the first two years of the project, the PIU’s internal controls and record keeping were
  deficient. The PIU was delayed in submitting quarterly interim financial reports (IFRs) and external auditor
  reports, and the IFRs did not adhere to standards of quality. During this time, the FM rating was
  downgraded to Moderately Unsatisfactory, but the situation improved over time with the recruitment of an
  experienced financial specialist. Once the PIU had an experienced FM specialist, the project consistently
  submitted on time quarterly IFRs adhering to quality standards and certified annual external audit reports,
  and effectively kept up-to-date transaction records. The PIU acted on the recommendations by the Bank
  team and the external auditor. At project close, unused funds were returned to the Bank. The project
  closed with a Moderately Satisfactory FM rating (ICR, p. 27).

  Procurement. The project suffered from regular procurement delays and proactive contract management
  was lacking by the PIU. The PIU initially had procurement staff that did not meet the expectations to


                                                                                                  Page 23 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Water and Electricity Upgrading Project (P162245)



   comply with procurement policy. In 2019, the PIU was able to contract a senior procurement specialist and
   with support from the Task Team, management of procurement processes improved over time. Contract
   management remained a significant issue throughout implementation with contracts expiring before
   contracts could be extended or canceled. The ICR noted that procurement issues are endemic across the
   country portfolio regardless of sector, and that significant improvement was observed once the new PIU
   was established with continued coaching by the World Bank team (ICR, p. 24).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                  Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                                                                   Shortcomings with bank
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory            Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                   supervision.
Quality of M&E                   Substantial             Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                     Modest                    Modest


12. Lessons

Selecting outcome indicators that are fit for purpose can ensure that realism is built into the
project results framework. In fragile country contexts, security, macroeconomic stability, and
institutional capability influence project outcomes. The project aimed to restore basic services in
conflict-affected areas, acknowledging the potential for conflict resurgence. Public institutions like
SODECA often struggle in such contexts, operating reactively even at project close. While including
Non-Revenue Water (NRW) indicators is technically justified due to losses, reducing NRW is
complex. It requires organizational prioritization, behavior change, strategic planning, and technical
capacity building. In FCV contexts, where institutional capability is low and institutions operate
reactively, understanding their capacity and willingness to reduce NRW is crucial. Monitoring NRW
reduction at an intermediate outcome level seems more practical, allowing tailored interventions to
build institutional capability without risking project outcomes.

Establishing a technical assistance mechanism through Bank-executed trust funds at the
start of a project can improve outcomes and relationships with client. In FCV contexts, where
capacity constraints are likely to be endemic and procurement delays anticipated, establishing a


                                                                                                    Page 24 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Water and Electricity Upgrading Project (P162245)



technical assistance mechanism through Bank-executed trust funds from the beginning of the
project can accelerate capacity development. Often, investment projects will include a component on
capacity or institutional development with technical assistance being procured through the project. If
procurement delays occur or there is a shift in need, technical assistance is often first to be cut.
Particularly in FVC contexts, the development of human capital within institutions is essential, and
Bank-executed trust funds offer the potential to deliver high quality technical assistance in a timely
manner. Establishing a trust-funded technical assistance mechanism from the beginning of the
project would support the Bank Task Team in delivering the best advice and developing trust with
the client. In this project, the Task team mobilized trust funds only after it became clear that project
financed technical assistance would be delayed or cut, which was well into implementation (ICR, p.
30 and ICRR author).

Identifying synergies between sectors, particularly in FCV settings, can be a way to leverage
existing capacity. The connections between water and electricity service delivery can be highly
interdependent, and in FCV contexts where capacity constraints are salient, tackling two sectors in
one project can be strategic. In contexts such as CAR, where the provision of water supply is reliant
on pumping and electricity, investments in water supply service delivery may have a limited impact
without simultaneously addressing electricity. In such contexts, analyzing the institutional
arrangements to understand if there are natural connections that could leverage existing capacity
and relationships would be important. In the context of CAR, the existence of a Ministry of
Development of Energy and Water Resources provided the space to bring project management
under one institution benefiting both the water and electricity sector. This does not guarantee project
success, but strengthening the capacity of an institution with ties to both sectors not only leverage
existing capacity and accountability mechanisms but also potentially minimizes the need to have two
projects with implementing units in different agencies (ICR, p. 29-30).

Market analysis of contractors at project identification or preparation could mitigate against
delays. In FCV contexts, where availability of quality consultants and contractors in country may be
limited, understanding the market in-country and at the sub-regional level is important. Typically, this
market analysis is expected by the Bank from the client through the procurement strategy that is to
be developed during project preparation. Given capacity constraints in such contexts, assistance
from the Bank to do this market analysis at an early stage such as at identification could help guide
the dialogue with the client on the best way to proceed with procurement to mitigate delays. (ICRR
author)

Including compensation of PAPs as an eligible expenditure in the project design can help
mitigate implementation delays. Even in non-FCV contexts, it can be difficult for implementing
agencies to secure budget to compensate PAPs in a timely manner. This issue is particularly salient
in FCV contexts, such as CAR, where fiscal constraints can be higher, and utilities struggle to
finance basic operational costs as demonstrated by SODECA. While the government may signal
their ability to cover such costs, implementation may prove more challenging as was the case in this
project delaying project interventions or resulting in canceled activities. Including PAP compensation
as an eligible expenditure in the project design in FCV contexts could ease the burden on
implementing agencies to secure and disburse resources in a timely manner mitigating against the
risk of lengthy implementation delays (ICRR author).




                                                                                                    Page 25 of 26
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Water and Electricity Upgrading Project (P162245)



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well-written, concise, and generally supported the ratings. The theory of change was clear with
some shortcomings. The ICR captured the country and institutional aspects, which are important given the FCV
context, the changes to the project during implementation, and appropriately applied the ICR guidelines for a
split rating because of the restructuring that reduced the scope of PDO 3. The ICR was relatively candid about
the weaknesses during implementation and data availability.

The ICR could have gone beyond the infrastructure elements in the theory of change to better explain the
institutional aspects that supported project outcomes. Likewise, more discussion on the institutional constraints
for both implementing agencies (SODECA and ENERCA) would have provided a clearer picture of the
challenges faced by these two providers. The main weakness of the ICR was the inconsistency in the
information provided to substantiate PDO 1 and 2 outcomes. There was little supporting evidence in the ICR to
substantiate the ratings for these two PDOs. Follow-up discussions with the Task Team produced additional
information provided by the client, which contradicted the figures presented in the ICR.

Further discussion with the Task Team reconciled the information to support the ratings presented in this
ICRR. As a result, the figures for the PDO 1 and 2 outcome indicators were modified. While the achievements
in PDO 1 were reduced from a 22-percentage point change in reduction of NRW to 10 percentage points, the
documented change achieved the original target. However, the achievements for PDO 2 were scaled back
from a 16-percentage point increase to a 3-percentage point increase (out of a target of 10 percentage points).
The ICR presented figures that substantially exceeded the original targets; however, the post-ICR information
that was shared confirmed achievements against the original targets just of a lesser magnitude. Since these
issues were addressed after the ICR was written, the rating of the ICR is Modest.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                    Page 26 of 26
