     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Lao Environment & Social Project (P128393)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023978

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P128393                                    Second Lao Environment & Social Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Lao People's Democratic Republic           Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53830,IDA-56200,IDA-H9150,TF-          30-Jun-2021                                         37,428,500.09
 16619

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 02-Apr-2014                                30-Jun-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           17,000,000.00                                     6,825,688.00

 Revised Commitment                            38,825,688.00                                     6,825,688.00

 Actual                                        37,428,500.09                                     6,825,688.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl             Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




 P128392_TBL
 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P128392                                    Second Lao Environment & Social Project ( P128392 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                                 0

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Lao Environment & Social Project (P128393)



 02-Apr-2014

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                       0.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                                        0.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                                    0.00                                               0.00




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. viii) and the Financing Agreement of My 14, 2014 (p.
   6) the objective of the project was “to strengthen the management systems for national protected areas
   conservation and for enforcement of wildlife laws”.

   In April 2015, the project received Additional Financing (AF) in the amount of US$15.0 million to scale up
   certain activities. Also, the objective of the project was revised to “to help strengthen selected environmental
   protection management systems, specifically for protected areas conservation, enforcement of wildlife laws,
   and environmental assessment management.”

   The objective will be parsed into three objectives for the purpose of this review:

          i. To help strengthen the environmental protection management system for protected areas
            conservation;
         ii. To help strengthen the environmental protection management system for enforcement of wildlife laws;
        iii. To help strengthen the environmental protection management system for environmental assessment
            management.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  29-Apr-2015

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Second Lao Environment & Social Project (P128393)



d. Components
  The project included three components:

  Component 1: Institution Development and Capacity Building (appraisal estimate US$6.5 million,
  actual US$6.50 million, revised US$14.40 million, actual US$19.20 million): This component was to
  finance sub-projects which were to be implemented through Environment Protection Fund’s (EPF’s) window
  Policy Implementation and Capacity Enhancement (PICE). Sub-projects were to include: i) capacity building
  for national biodiversity planning and monitoring; ii) capacity/institution building for PA management/wildlife
  conservation; iii) capacity building for addressing regional wildlife trafficking; iv) human resources
  development for wildlife and PA management; v) constituency building of high level officials; and vi)
  constituency building of public administration. Additional sub-projects were to be identified during project
  implementation.

  Component 2: Management of Wildlife and Protected Areas (appraisal estimate US$8.60 million,
  revised US$20.6 million, actual US$13.11 million): This component was to finance sub-projects which
  were to be implemented through the EPF’s window Community and Biodiversity Investment (CBI). The
  initially proposed sub-projects were to include: i) Management of the Nakai Nam Theun NPA and the Nam
  Et Phou Louey NPA; ii) Coordination of NPA management in Bolikhamxay Province, Khammouane
  Province, Houaphan Province, Luang Prabang Province, Xiengkhouang Province, and iii) wildlife law
  enforcement in Bolikhamxay Province, Khammouane Province, and Houaphan Province.

  Component 3: Project Administration and EPF Capacity Building (appraisal estimate US$3.20
  million, revised US$5.40 million, actual US$7.43 million): This component was to finance the
  administration of the sub-project mechanism by EPF. It was to include capacity building of EPF staff and
  systems including fund raising, compliance with the World Bank’s fiduciary requirements, especially
  procurement, and environment and social safeguards, monitoring and evaluation, communicating with
  stakeholders, and facilitating effective coordination and cooperation among SDAs.

  The cost of refinancing for the original PPA (IDA Q843) was: $0.53 million at approval; $0.27 million actual.
  The cost of the PPA for the 2015 AF was: $0.90 million at approval; $0.42 million actual.

  When the project received AF in April 2015, the scope and coverage of the original project was increased
  by a) improving the financing capacity of the EPF; b) supporting capacity building of national, provincial, and
  district institutions to implement the Lao legislation on environment and social impact; c) strengthening the
  university environment and social curriculum; d) broadening project support to forested upper-watersheds of
  rivers important to hydropower, agriculture irrigation, and flood prevention; and (e) increasing the number of
  eligible provinces from five to eight.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost: The project was estimated to cost US$40.22 million. Actual cost was US$40.42 million.

  Financing: The project was financed by an IDA grant in the amount of US$4.50 million (of which US$4.23
  million disbursed), an IDA credit in the amount of US$12.50 million (of which US$11.49 million disbursed),
  an IDA credit in the amount of US$15.0 million (of which US$14.87 million disbursed), and a Trust Fund in
  the amount of US$6.82 million (which completely disbursed).


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Lao Environment & Social Project (P128393)



   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$1.4 million. Actual contribution was US$3.0
   million.

   Dates: The project was restructured five times:

         On April 29, 2015, the project was restructured to: i) receive AF in the amount of US$15.0 million to
            increase the scope of PDO and components, including renaming project from PAW to LENS2; ii)
            revise/add PDO Indicators (two revised, two new); iii) trigger Safeguard policy on international
            waterways (OP/BP 7.50).
           On February 14, 2018, the project was restructured to: i) redistribute funds across components 1
            and 2 (to reflect actual costs); ii) reallocate unused project preparation advance (PPA) refinancing
            balance to implementation budget; iii) revise results indicators (all five PDO indicators and several
            intermediate indicators); iv) increase ceiling for advance disbursement to designated account; and v)
            partially cancel DFRM subproject activities for re-delineation of forest boundaries and concessions.
           On August 28, 2020, the project was restructured to extend the project implementation by 12 months
            from June 30, 2021, to June 30, 2022, to allow for the completion of project activities which were
            delayed due to COVID-19 travel restrictions, time needed to resolve an external infrastructure risk,
            and restructuring of departments at Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MONRE).
           On March 21, 2022, the project was restructured to: i) extend the project implementation by six
            months from June 30, 2022, to December 31, 2022, to allow for the completion of project activities,
            support the preparation of the proposed Environmental and Waste Management Project (P175996)
            and to maintain the project’s Project Management Unit for the upcoming project; and ii) revise
            disbursement percentages of the GEF grant and IDA credit to ensure full utilization of funds.
           On December 23, 2022, the project was restructured to: i) extend the project implementation period
            by six months from December 31, 2022 to June, 30, 2023 to allow for MONRE to complete its
            capacity strengthening activities; and ii) revise disbursement percentages to ensure full utilization of
            IDA credit after GEF grant is fully disbursed.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. According to the PAD (para. 4) a challenge to long-term prosperity in Lao
was the lack of investments in the natural resource base that fueled, at the time of project appraisal, the
economic growth, especially natural habitats. Continued, unsustainable degradation of natural ecosystems
had the potential to negatively impact infrastructure and public health through the enhanced probability of
flooding, declining water availability and quality, soil fertility loss, spread of diseases and alienation of
economic opportunities such as nature tourism. All of which affected the poorest population
disproportionally.

Despite progress in poverty reduction, many Lao citizens remained poor and dependent on natural
resources. At the time of project appraisal, in rural areas, non-timber forest products (NTFPs) contributed to
about 30-70 percent of income for forest-dependent households. Forests covered 40 percent of the country.



                                                                                                      Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Second Lao Environment & Social Project (P128393)



               However, forests were threatened by deforestation, encroachment, degradation as a result of fires,
               unsustainable wood extraction, shifting cultivation, agricultural expansion, industrial tree
               plantation infrastructure development, and urban expansion. Especially, Protected Areas (PAs) were
               threatened by road construction, mining, and hydropower development. Also, hunting, and illegal wildlife
               products (for food, skins, medicinal ingredients and ornaments) presented a threat to biodiversity and
               habitats.

               The government’s PA management policy was based on integrated conservation and development, aiming
               to collaborate with the local population. However, the government faced issues with the complex PA
               management organization which led to diffuse accountability with limited funding, staff, equipment, and
               training.

               Alignment with the government strategy. The objective of the project was in line with the government’s
               Forestry Strategy 2020 which aims to restore forested areas to about 70 percent of the total land area, “to
               generate a sustainable stream of forest products, to preserve unique and threatened habitats, and promote
               environmental conservation and protection”. The objective of the project also supported the government’s
               2007 Wildlife Law which needed stronger enforcement due to the country’s limited capacity. Finally, the
               objective of the project was in line with the government’s 2019 National Green Growth Strategy, which
               stresses the need to benefit from the nation's ample natural resources more sustainably and efficiently
               while taking a development path that is more resilient to risks such as climate change.

               Alignment with the World Bank strategy. The objective of the project was in line with the World Bank’s
               most recent Country Partnership Framework (FY22-26), particularly high-level outcome 3 “sustainable
               livelihoods through better management of natural resources”, and objective 8 “improved and climate-
               adaptive management of forests, biodiversity, and protected areas”.

               This was the fourth phase of a horizontal Adaptable Program Lending (APL) on “Strengthening Regional
               Cooperation for Wildlife Protection in Asia” program. Phase 1 included Nepal and Bangladesh. Phase 2
               (Bhutan) was ongoing at the time of this project’s preparation. Phase 3 (India) was dropped.

               The objective of the project was pitched at an appropriate level to address the development problem.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To help strengthen the environmental protection management system for protected areas conservation



                                                                                                                         Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Second Lao Environment & Social Project (P128393)




Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change stated that project activities such as building capacity in
different areas including for national biodiversity planning and monitoring, PA
management/wildlife conservation, addressing regional wildlife tracking, and developing human resources for
wildlife and PA management were to result in several outputs. These outputs were to include capacity for
national biodiversity planning and monitoring as well as capacity/institution for PA management/wildlife
conservation being built, and human resources for wildlife and PA management being developed. Finally,
these outputs were to result in the intended outcome of the environmental protection management system for
protected areas conservation being strengthened.

The theory of change was sound. However, there were logical gaps such as the underlying assumption that
training and building capacity for PA management/wildlife conservation would automatically lead to behavior
change.

Outputs:

      A score tracked the development and management of an NPA system, achieving the target of tracking
       the score. This indicator measured progress towards developing and managing an effective NPA
       management system with points awarded in seven categories (target of 90 out of 100 possible points).
       The seven categories included: i) final report on optimization of the NPA management system,
       including legal, policy, institutions, and financing; ii) baseline NPA information available; iii) NPA
       Master Plan approved; iv) NPA management guidelines officially approved by MONRE; v) MAF DOF
       or successor department website operational; vi) database for tracking investments in NPAs; vii) draft
       decrees formulated to establish two national parks. The project achieved a score of 100 points, target
       achieved.
      191 village organizations met the terms of Conservation Agreements and, as a result, received grants
       for implementing their action plans, exceeding the original target of 140 village organizations and the
       revised target of 190 village organizations.
      184 of those village organizations had at least 40 percent female participation, exceeding the target of
       160 village organizations having at least 40 percent female participation.

The following outputs are stated in the ICR but not included in the Results Framework. Therefore, they did not
have any targets.

      The project supported the establishment of six national parks. In 2019 Nakai Nam Thuen and Nam Et-
       Phou Louey national parks were established. Between 2020 and 2021, Hin Nam No, Dong Hua Sao,
       Xe Pian, and Phou Khao Khouay national parks were established. Being identified as national park
       provides stricter protection, enhances the international recognition of the parks, and establishes
       national park Management Offices to improve the protection and management of their respective park.
      Surveys conducted before and after the outreach campaigns of the Nam Et Phou Louey NPA sub-
       project found that there was an average increase of 29 percent in stakeholder knowledge about the
       national park.

Outcomes:

      The Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool (METT) scores across the 11 PAs increased from zero
       in 2016 to an average of 24 in 2023, exceeding the original target of a score of 15 and the revised

                                                                                                 Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Second Lao Environment & Social Project (P128393)



       target of a score of 10. The METT scoring was estimated through a self-assessment covering a broad
       range of management effectiveness issues such as: a) management planning; ii) resource protection;
       iii) infrastructure and facilities; iv) law enforcement; v) stakeholder engagement; vi) visitor
       management; and vii) budget and financial management.

The following outcome was reported in the ICR but was not included in the Results Framework. Therefore, it
did not have a target.

      As a result of financing provided to train, equip, and fund 11 new rangers to conduct regular patrols,
       the area covered by rangers increased from 60 percent to over 80 percent of the park.

The project substantially improved the capacity for PA conservation as demonstrated through the
achievement of the target of the average METT score for all 11 PAs.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To help strengthen the environmental protection management system for enforcement of wildlife laws

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change stated that project activities/inputs such as implementing
sub-projects including: i) managing the Nakai Nam Theun NPA and the Nam Et Phou Louey NPA; ii)
coordinating NPA management in Bolikhamxay Province, Khammouane Province, Houaphan Province,
Luang Prabang Province, Xiengkhouang Province, and iii) enforcing wildlife law in Bolikhamxay Province,
Khammouane Province, and Houaphan Province were to result in several outputs. These outputs were to
include improved capacity in various offices such as Provincial Offices of Forest Inspection (POFI), Provincial
offices of Forest Resources Management (PFRM), WMPA, as well as improved capacity within communities
and other stakeholders to conserve NPAs and protect wildlife in five provinces against threats from
infrastructure development and illegal use or trade of natural resources. These outputs were to result in the
outcome of environmental protection management system for enforcement of wildlife laws being
strengthened.

The theory of change was sound. However, the theory of change had a logical gap assuming that improved
capacity within NPAs was to automatically result in better protection of natural resources. Also, there was an
attribution issue since other factors might be contributing to this outcome too and achievement of this
outcome cannot solely be attributed to this project.

Outputs:

      On 643,678 hectares of area within selected PAs the status of selected wildlife population and threats
       were measured, exceeding the original target of 242,000 hectares and the revised target of 634,000
       hectares.


                                                                                                  Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Second Lao Environment & Social Project (P128393)




      The number of wildlife crime cases detected by law enforcement officers of STAs supported by the
       project, increased from 188 cases in 2016 to 5,593 cases in 2023, exceeding the target of 3,100
       cases.
      648 people were trained at the central and local level on theory and practical knowledge on law, patrol
       inspection, investigation, and prosecution of crimes, exceeding the target of 400 people being trained.

The following outputs are stated in the ICR but not included in the Results Framework. Therefore, they did not
have any targets.

      The project supported the development of key strategic and operational documents including the Lao
       Wildlife Enforcement Network (Lao-WEN) Strategic Plan, Lao-WEN Standard Operating Procedures,
       Lao Wildlife and Forest Law Enforcement Network Operational Manual, and the National Wildlife and
       Aquatic Crime Response Action Plan. This contributed towards Lao-Wen becoming operational.
      The project established Provincial Environmental Police Divisions in all provinces resulting in
       improved coordination and reporting, establishment of Provincial Wildlife Enforcement Networks (P-
       WENs) and raised awareness within police departments.
      An Information management System was developed to collect records and report information about
       wildlife law violations to enable more systematic monitoring wildlife crimes.

Outcomes:

      41 wildlife trafficking cases involving CITES1 listed species were referred to the national and/or
       provincial public prosecutor office, not achieving the target of 75 cases. According to the ICR (p. 41)
       evaluating the achievement was complicated since the prosecution referrals only counted CITES1
       species while the investigations in the sub-indicator included all CITES species and non-CITES
       species.
      116 wildlife trafficking cases involving CITES1 and non-CITES listed species were opened for
       investigation not achieving the target of 250 cases.

While the project was able to strengthen Lao’s wildlife enforcement capacity, further strengthening is
necessary for it to be effective and sustainable. Achievement of this objective was Modest, due to low
achievement.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To help strengthen the environmental protection management system for environmental assessment
management

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change stated that project activities/inputs such as improving the
financing capacity of the EPF, supporting capacity building of national, provincial, and district institutions,

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Second Lao Environment & Social Project (P128393)



strengthening the university environment and social curriculum, as well as broadening project support to
forested upper-watersheds of rivers important to hydropower, agriculture irrigation, and flood prevention
were to result in several outputs, such as improved financial capacity of the EPF, capacity built in various
institutions to implement legislation on environment and social impact. These outputs were to result in the
outcome of a strengthened environmental protection management system for environmental assessment
management.

The theory of change was sound and logical without any logical gaps. However, the achievement of his
objective cannot solely be attributed to this project.

Outputs:

      A score of 80 points (out of possible 100 points) was achieved for the development of national,
         provincial, or sectoral guiding documents and planning tools that integrated environment into
         development planning, not achieving the target score of 90 points. The project produced the following
         documents and tools: i) national green growth strategy; ii) integrated spatial planning guidelines; iii)
         Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) guidelines; iv) six provincial Integrated Spatial Plans; and
         vii) Environment and Natural Resources and M&E guidelines. The project also developed two SEAs
         which had not been approved when the project closed.
        A score of 80 points was achieved for the delivery of the following outputs: i) a pollution prevention
         and control regulation was submitted for approval; ii) a waste and hazardous chemical management
         regulation was submitted for approval; iii) a national environmental standard regulation was submitted
         for approval; iv) national pollution control planning documents were approved including: Vision to
         2030, 10 Year Strategy (2016-2025), and five year action plan (2016-2020). The target of 80 points
         was achieved.
        The project contributed to the upgrading of curricula in wildlife management, and community
         development in PAs, benefitting 877 students (of which 446 were female). This output did not have a
         target.
        46 five-year provincial or sectoral development plans that included environmental planning,
         monitoring, assessment, or management components were supported by MONRE or MPI, exceeding
         the target of 20 plans.
        32 plans on environmental monitoring arrangements were supported by MONRE, exceeding the target
         of eight plans.
        Six plans on integrated spatial planning (ISP) and/or strategic environmental assessment (SEA) were
         supported by MONRE, not achieving the target of seven plans.
        Eight plans were supported by MPI or National Institute for Economic Research (NIER) on green
         growth M&E, exceeding the target of five plans.
        146 up to date reports were published on relevant government websites including: i) compliance
         monitoring for category 2 projects; ii) state of air and noise quality; iii) national pollution inventory,
         exceeding the target of 87 reports.
        45 compliance monitoring reports for hydropower projects registered in environment impact category 2
         were published on the MONRE website, exceeding the target of 40 reports.
        66 compliance monitoring reports for mining projects registered in environment impact category 2
         were published on the MONRE website, exceeding the target of 24 reports.
        Six compliance monitoring reports for road projects registered in environment impact category 2 were
         published on the MONRE website, not achieving the target of seven reports.

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Second Lao Environment & Social Project (P128393)




      18 state of air and noise quality reports were published on the MONRE website, exceeding the target
       of seven reports.
      11 national pollution inventory reports were published on the MONRE website, exceeding the target of
       nine reports.

Outcomes:

      The area within selected PAs where the gross forest loss rate was measured, increased from 305,000
       hectares in 2016 to 1,250,385 hectares in 2023, achieving the target of 1,250,000 hectares.
      The percentage of category 1 and 2 projects that were under design, construction or operation that
       had a valid Environmental Compliance Certificate (ECC) increased from 19 percent in 2016 to 82
       percent in 2023, far exceeding the target of 50 percent.
           o The percentage of category 1 hydropower projects with ECC increased from 35 percent in
              2016 to 79 percent in 2023, exceeding the target of 50 percent.
           o The percentage of category 1 mining projects with ECC increased from 11 percent in 2016 to
              90 percent in 2023, exceeding the target of 50 percent.
           o The percentage of category 1 road projects with ECC increased from zero in 2016 to 65
              percent in 2023, exceeding the target of 50 percent.
           o The percentage of category 2 hydropower projects with ECC increased from 65 percent in
              2016 to 87 percent in 2023, achieving the target of 85 percent.
           o The percentage of category 2 mining projects with ECC increased from 10 percent in 2016 to
              84 percent in 2023, exceeding the target of 50 percent.
           o The percentage of category 2 road and railway projects with ECC increased from zero in 2016
              to 95 percent in 2023, exceeding the target of 50 percent.

The project was able to deliver several outputs that may contribute to building capacity at the national,
provincial, and district institutions in key areas for environmental assessment and management. The
increased areas under protection and the increase in percentage of projects with a valid ECC demonstrate a
strengthened environmental protection management system for environmental assessment management.
Objective 3 is thus rated Substantial.

Outputs that were relevant across all objectives:

      16,246 staff of SDA and SDA partner institutions received formal short courses (between eight and 16
       hours) or participated in study tours under the project, exceeding the target of 3,000 staff. Out of this
       staff, 4,405 were female, exceeding the target of 600 female staff. According to the World Bank team
       (April 9, 2024), the target was substantially exceeded due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the
       cancellation of in person trainings. Instead, the trainings were held virtually, allowing more people to
       participate.
      The amount of financing mobilized by the Community and Biodiversity Investment Window (EPF) each
       year from public sources increased from US$350,000 in 2014 to US$396,781, not achieving the target
       of US$700,000.
      The amount of financing mobilized by EPF from private sources increased from US$450,000 in 2014
       to US$1.88 million in 2023, exceeding the target of US$900,000.
      The project made investments in the National University of Laos (NUOL) and National Academy of
       Public Administration (NAPA). The five NUOL faculties—Economics and Business Management
       (FEB), Environmental Sciences (FES), Forest Science (FFS), Natural Science (FNS), and Social

                                                                                                 Page 10 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Second Lao Environment & Social Project (P128393)



                                     Science (FSS)—were able to build institutional and academic capacity, enhance technical skills,
                                     improve curricula on environmental management and biodiversity conservation, and provide training
                                     for government staff.

                            Outcomes that were relevant across all objectives:

                            The index of functional capacity is based on self-defined capacity criteria and scoring systems adapted to the
                            needs and priorities of each entity or group of entities. The indexes typically include criteria related to different
                            capacity aspects such as existence of a functional board, staffing, fiduciary system etc.

                                  The score of functional capacity of EPF and key institutions implementing subprojects increased from
                                     11 in 2016 to 46 in 2023, exceeding the target score of 31.
                                    The score of the functional capacity of the Environment Protection Fund increased from 22 in 2015 to
                                     72 in 2023, exceeding the target score of 52.
                                    The score of the functional capacity of the Department of Public Relation of the Prime Minister Office
                                     increased from 11 in 2015 to 33 in 2023, not achieving the target score of 34.
                                    The average score of functional capacity of faculties (NUOL, FFS, FSS, FNS, FES and FEB)
                                     increased from 11 in 2016 to 31 in 2023, exceeding the target score of 28.
                                    The average score of functional capacity of Protected Area Management Units (NEPL, WMPA, and 7
                                     PAFOs) increased from 11 in 2016 to 33 in 2023, exceeding the target score of 31.
                                    The score of functional capacity of MAF DOF Protected Area Management Division increased from 10
                                     in 2014 to 69 in 2023, exceeding the target score of 22.
                                    The score of functional capacity of National Academy of Public Administration (NAPA) increased from
                                     one in 2016 to 40 in 2023, exceeding the target score of 13.

                            Since the project achieved most of the targets, the objective is assessed to be substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Achievement of the first and third objective was Substantial while achievement of the second objective was
                            Modest. While the project was able to strengthen Lao’s wildlife enforcement capacity, further strengthening is
                            necessary for it to be effective and sustainable. The efficacy is rated as Substantial with moderate
                            shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating



                                                                                                                                  Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Second Lao Environment & Social Project (P128393)



  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency:

At the time of appraisal, a full economic analysis was not completed due to data constraints (such as no data for
project payoffs from improved enforcement of wildlife laws) and the indirect use values of many benefits
associated with the conservation of protected areas and biodiversity. The analysis found that project’s
interventions in the Nam Et – Phou Louey (NEPL) National Protected Area (NPA) could have a net present
value (NPV) as high as US$8.3 billion over a 10-year period. This was based on benefits derived from
biodiversity conservation, consumption uses, including non-timber forest products (NTFPs) and ecotourism,
watershed protection, and carbon sequestration. For improved wildlife law enforcement, illegal wildlife trade in
Southeast Asia was estimated to be within the range of US$2.6 to $US3 billion, with simulations for project
interventions conservatively indicating benefit-cost ratios above 1, and in some cases reaching above 40,
showing very high benefits compared to the investment costs.

The economic analysis was refined in 2015, when the project received Additional Financing. The analysis was
based on a literature review and estimated that the NPV of ecosystem services provided by the additional
400,000 hectares of protected area was to be approximately US$3.8 billion over 10 years. The total NPV of
ecosystem services provided under the combined project area of 1,258,000 hectares of NPA was, therefore, to
be approximately $12 billion over a 10-year period. The AF document did not state what discount rates the
financial analyses used.

At closing, the project did not use the same economic analysis approach as in the Additional Financing. Given
the lack of actual data, the ICR provided an ex-post cost-benefit analysis to demonstrate that the project’s
capacity-building and livelihood benefits are likely to exceed the project costs.

Operational efficiency:

The project’s implementation period was extended three times by a total of 24 months to allow for the
completion of project activities, which had been delayed due to multiple reorganizations/restructurings of SDAs
by MAF and MONRE, insufficient capacity at the EPF, and the Covid-19 pandemic.

Given the lack of traditional economic analysis at closing, which could be compared to the economic analysis
conducted at the AF stage due to data constraints, coupled with the relative shortcomings in operational
efficiency, the project’s efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Lao Environment & Social Project (P128393)




                              Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objective is High given its alignment with the World Bank’s most recent Country Partnership
Framework (FY22-26) and the country’s needs and priorities. Efficacy is Substantial with moderate
shortcomings and Efficiency is Modest. Overall, the project’s outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project’s risks to development outcomes can be classified into the following categories:

Economic: According to the ICR (para. 105) the current macroeconomic situation in Lao with high inflation
might negatively impact the sustainable use of natural resources. Also, as a result of high financing needs
and limited financing options, low foreign exchange reserves, and depreciation pressures, the government
faces solvency and liquidity challenges. These circumstances might present a significant challenge to
addressing continued encroachment and land use change pressures to convert forest lands for other
economic uses and protect the wildlife.

Government commitment/financing: The EPF and MONRE have been working on identifying financing
sources, ensuring continued EPF capacity building, and implementing key activities related to climate
change and environmental management; a firm government commitment is still needed. The World Bank is
continuing its engagement in Lao with the Lao Landscape and Livelihood Project (P170559, financing
amount US$50 million), which aims to further enhance the investigative capabilities of provincial agencies,
improve cross-border coordination, and increase public awareness and education. However, despite this
follow-on project, the lack of government budget remains a risk for the long-term sustainability of project
outcomes.

Technical: According to the ICR (para. 104) the project was able to build capacity within the EPF. However,
there is a risk that capacity development will not continue, or capacity built will not be sustainable after
external financial support has ended.




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Lao Environment & Social Project (P128393)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the PAD (p. 36) the project was built on the First Lao Environment and Social Project
  (LENS1) as well as the Nam Theun 2 Hydropower Project (NT2) which demonstrated the effectiveness of
  a demand-driven subgrant model with EPF as the main implementing agency in raising capacity at the
  national, provincial, and district levels. Also, implementation experience from LENS1 emphasized that
  medium size subgrants were more efficient than small grants due to lower transaction costs and broader
  impacts as well as institutional capacity being a key limitation in effective environment management (ICR
  para. 76).

  According to the PAD (p. 9) the World Bank team identified relevant risks and rated the following as High:
  i) stakeholder risk since not all tranches of society might be ready for new wildlife and enhanced PA
  management regulations; ii) social and environmental risk related to insufficient consultation of, or
  participation by, local communities in park management, fisheries and river basin management leading to
  further marginalization and antagonism; and iii) delivery monitoring and sustainability due to lack of
  experienced staff in MONRE, WMPA, NEPL MU, and MAF to ensure effective monitoring and evaluation.

  The project tried to mitigate these risks by developing a Community Engagement Framework (CEF) (an
  approach to partner with communities), an Environment and Social Management Framework, and a
  Resettlement Policy Framework, as well as providing M&E training to the agencies stated
  above. Additional risks were rated Substantial including: i) insufficient capacity to implement the project
  with increased financial revenues and geographic scope; and ii) complex project design due to involving
  several government entities and wide geographic scope. The World Bank aimed to mitigate these risks
  by providing technical training. Mitigation measures were insufficient, and the project experienced
  implementation delays due to insufficient capacity at the EPF. The World Bank team did not identify the
  risk of the 2017 EPF decree changing the institutional arrangements of EPF that ended up reducing the
  independent authority of the EPF board as well as the scope of its agenda. Also, the World Bank team
  did not identify the risk of SDAs being reorganized/restructured several times by MAF and MONRE,
  resulting in implementation delays.

  The project’s Results Framework had several shortcomings (see section 9a for more details).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the World Bank team (April 9, 2024) the team conducted a total of 20 supervision missions
 throughout project implementation. Supervision was complex since the team had to supervise 47
 subprojects which were implemented through 37 Subproject Delivery Agencies (SDAs) including 19
 provincial authorities. The World Bank team also conducted regular training for SDA staff given its limited
 capacity and high staff turnover. Training areas included M&E, procurement, Financial Management, and
 other areas of project management. The team clarified that the Bank provided more detailed technical

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Lao Environment & Social Project (P128393)



 support earlier in the subproject preparation and implementation, but due to the budget constraints, later
 prioritized supervision and gradually handed over some of the subproject responsibilities to EPF as they
 had been trained for that.

 The World Bank team restructured the project for a total of five times to improve implementation. The
 project’s Results Framework was revised three times. However, when the project closed, not all M&E
 issues had been adequately addressed (see section 9b for more details).

 Overall, the Bank performance is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The original objective of the project was overly broad. When the project received AF in April 2015, the
 objective of the project was revised and became more specific. While the project focused on appropriate
 aspects of protected areas and wildlife, it was not possible to measure conservation or wildlife crime
 outcomes during the project implementation period given that the achievement of these outcomes requires
 a longer period, and they cannot be attributed solely to the project’s capacity strengthening activities.

 The selected indicators encompassed all aspects of the PDO statement. However, the Results Framework
 was overly complex and included a large number of PDO indicators (19) and intermediate outcome
 indicators (19), which were sufficiently specific and measurable. According to the ICR (para. 86) during
 project preparation, weak M&E capacity at the EPF and the SDAs was identified as a challenge. Also, the
 reporting and monitoring structure with SDAs collecting and reporting data to the EPF, which was to
 consolidate the data in semi-annual reports, was overly complex and would have required more M&E
 capacity than available. Furthermore, the project would have benefitted from conducting consistent and
 reliable Management Effectiveness Training Tool (METT) score evaluations for which it lacked capacity.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (para. 87) the project faced several M&E implementation issues. For example,
  annual and semi-annual reports were often submitted late and included inconsistencies. Also, reporting
  by SDAs often lacked key information or included outdated information, and indicators had poor accuracy
  and verification. The World Bank team tried to address these issues by conducting several trainings.
  However, issues persisted as a result of high staff turnover, limited M&E capacity and support (especially
  at the SDA level), and poor internal M&E arrangements and governance (such as SDA M&E staff not
  being accountable to EPF, making oversight more challenging). Furthermore, EPF used complex

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Lao Environment & Social Project (P128393)



  Excel sheets to manage results reporting instead of an M&E software, which made indicator
  management and verification more complicated, especially given the high staff turnover.

  In February 2018, the Results Framework was revised, and the wording of several indicators was
  improved, allowing for a better measuring of results. Also, the World Bank team provided close support
  through conducting an internal M&E governance analysis of the EPF and developing and executing an
  M&E action plan. The ICR (para. 88) stated that by 2020, the timeliness of annual reports and subproject
  briefs as well as accuracy of indicators had improved significantly as a result of a new M&E officer, M&E
  assistant and consultant which had been hired to specifically assess METT scores. The M&E team also
  supported SDAs with limited M&E capacity.

  According to the ICR (para. 91) when the project closed, there were ongoing M&E gaps such as in
  reporting on results, discrepancies and inconsistencies in EPF’s final implementation progress report and
  its post-closing project completion report as well as in some of the SDA subproject reports.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (para. 89) M&E data were used to inform decision making. Due to the demand-
  driven subproject model, new subprojects were designed and implemented based on lessons learned
  from ongoing subprojects. Also, M&E data allowed for the correction of ongoing subprojects.

  Despite the shortcomings in the M&E design and implementation, there is sufficient M&E data to
  substantiate a Substantial Efficacy rating (and thus also the Moderately Satisfactory outcome rating).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the World Bank’s safeguard policies Environmental
   Assessment (OP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP 4.04), Forests (OP 4.36), Pest Management (OP 4.09),
   Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11), Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) and Indigenous Peoples (OP
   4.10). According to the ICR (para. 93) the project prepared an Environmental and Social Management
   Framework (ESMF), a Community Engagement Framework (CEF), and a Resettlement Framework. The
   project prepared a negative list for screening project investments, excluding activities that could pose
   significant potential negative environmental and/or social impacts and risks. This negative list was
   incorporated into the project implementation manual (PIM), ESMF, and CEF.

   Also, the project prepared subproject-specific Environmental and Social Assessments (ESAs) and
   Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs). All subproject proposals were screened and
   approved by the World Bank to ensure that they met the eligibility criteria. In addition, a Pest Management
   Plan was included in the ESMF, providing screening procedures as well as a negative list to prevent the use



                                                                                                  Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Lao Environment & Social Project (P128393)



   of pesticides. No incidents or complaints on environmental risks and impacts were reported during
   implementation.

   When the project received AF in April 2015, the safeguard policy on Projects on International Waterways
   (OP 7.50) was also triggered because a few of the protected area subprojects possibly were to finance
   village-level investment such as small rural water supply and small scale irrigation pumped from rivers that
   were tributaries to the Mekong River, an international waterway.

   When the project closed, the project’s compliance with all safeguards was rated Satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement:

   According to the ICR (para. 96) the World Bank assessed the counterpart’s procurement capacity during
   project appraisal. Based on this assessment, recommendations for local and international consultants were
   included in the procurement plan. Also, the World Bank team provided regular procurement training.
   However, the project experienced delays in processing procurement in the STEP system and errors in
   consultants’ selections which required corrective measures. When the project closed, procurement was
   rated Satisfactory.

   Financial Management:

   According to the ICR (para. 97) the project experienced several financial management (FM) related issues
   due to a high turnover of FM staff and lack of capacity resulting in the need to conduct frequent trainings.
   The large number of subprojects and SDAs often needed close reviews and assistance by the World Bank
   team due to limited FM capacity. The project also encountered FM software challenges which could only
   be fully resolved during the last phase of project implementation. The external auditor’s opinions were
   unqualified. When the project closed, FM was rated Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Second Lao Environment & Social Project (P128393)



                                  Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
                                  Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                    Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 38-39) included several lessons learned which were adapted by IEG:

        A programmatic approach in the natural resource sector in low-capacity environments
         can build capacity over time and contribute to sustained and amplified development
         achievements. This project made significant progress in building capacity and improving the
         quality of environmental management systems. However, these project results require
         continuous financing and capacity-building support through a strategic programmatic
         approach to ensure the achievement of the long-term goals of improved conservation,
         biodiversity protection, enhancement of ecosystem services, and reduced wildlife trafficking.
        Designing a robust and realistic M&E framework, and strengthened efforts on capacity
         building of clients can improve monitoring of complex projects implemented in low-
         capacity environments. This project consisted of a large number of sub-projects. Due to
         the weak capacity of SDAs and the complex M&E framework, often did not report on their
         indicators in a robust and timely manner. As a result, EPF found it challenging to aggregate
         and report all indicators.
        Projects addressing very limited capacity across a range of national and sub-national
         institutions simultaneously can allow for taking advantage of synergies. In this project,
         strengthening the capacity of various entities at different levels across the country allowed for
         entities to collaborate, support, and learn from another.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation, was internally consistent,
and sufficiently critical of possible sustainability issues. The Theory of Change was well developed, and the ICR
provided adequate evidence to justify the results. The lessons learned were useful for future projects in this
area.

However, while the necessary material was covered in the report, the ICR lacked conciseness. The main body
of the review is 35 pages, much above the OPCS recommended length of 15, and a good proportion of the

                                                                                                      Page 18 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Lao Environment & Social Project (P128393)



material could have been communicated with a streamlined approach. The ICR provided a cost-benefit analysis
but did not include an adequate economic analysis comparable to the one conducted during the AF stage and
did not articulate the drivers behind this approach. Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated as Modest.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                              Page 19 of 19
