     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Himachal PFM Capacity Building Program (P156687)



                                                                               Report Number : ICRR0023900

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Program Name
 P156687                                  Himachal PFM Capacity Building Program

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                    Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)              Total Program Cost (USD)
 IBRD-87530                               30-Sep-2022                                         36,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 17-May-2017                              30-Jun-2023

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          36,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           36,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                       36,000,000.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Deryck R. Brown            Vandana Chandra             Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Program Development Objective (PDO) was "to improve the efficiency of public expenditure management
   and tax administration in Himachal Pradesh," (Loan Agreement dated May 31, 2017).

   The Program supported the public financial management (PFM) reform program of the Government of
   Himachal Pradesh (GoHP) and contributed to enhancing the efficiency of selected departments in GoHP. The
   specific departments targeted were the FD and the Excise and Taxation Department (ETD). Other
   departments also benefitted including the Directorate of Treasuries and Accounts (DoTA), the Department

                                                                                                Page 1 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Himachal PFM Capacity Building Program (P156687)



   of Irrigation and Public Health (IPH - also referred to as the Jal Shakti Vibhag or JSV), the Department of
   Information Technology (DIT), and departments that conduct procurement.

   Although the PforR supported the GoHP's PFM Reform program, GoHP’s program was not documented in
   any strategy, policy or program document. Instead, the PAD noted that "the Program objectives are closely
   aligned with the key development goals of the GoHP," (PAD, p.5) and were based on "priority areas identified
   by the GoHP, which were articulated in various stakeholder workshops during Program preparation," (PAD,
   p.6) and as "articulated in this PforR operation," (PAD, p.11). It is notable that the government’s program
   (small 'p') and the Bank's Program (big 'P') were identical (footnote 7 on p.12 of the PAD).

   For the purposes of this ICRR, the PDO is disaggregated as follows:

         PDO1: To improve the efficiency of public expenditure management; and
         PDO2: To improve the efficiency of tax administration.



b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during
   implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   According to the Program description in the PAD (Annex 1), the Program had three (3) components
   (described as Results Areas or RAs), and ten (10) sub-components. For clarity, IEG is labelling the RAs as
   Components 1-3 (PAD, Annex 1).

   Component 1: Improving efficiency of the Finance Department (FD) in an enhanced control
   environment. This component aimed at contributing towards strengthening budget credibility, effective
   PFM operations, and enhancing governance, financial controls and accountability by strengthening the
   treasury system, and establishing and/or upgrading enabling IT systems.

         Sub-component 1.1: Strengthening treasury functioning and implementing second-generation IFMIS
          reforms;
         Sub-component 1.2: Strengthening PFM reforms architecture; and
         Sub-component 1.3: Establishing/strengthening enabling IT systems and support.

   Component 2: Increasing efficiency and performance through better contract management. This
   component aimed at strengthening contract management in one of the major works departments, namely
   the IPH Department, and supporting the rollout of the eProcurement solution across the state.

         Sub-component 2.1: Establishing an integrated contract management system (CMS); and
         Sub-component 2.2: Rollout of eProcurement in all government departments.



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Himachal PFM Capacity Building Program (P156687)



  Component 3: Unlocking revenue potential through modernization of the Excise and Taxation
  Department (ETD). This component supported activities geared towards increasing efficiency in operations
  within ETD, including the upgrading of skills and competency levels for staff to improve their capacity and
  enhancing systems with a view to increasing revenue.

          Sub-component 3.1: Diagnostic of the institutional framework and revenue administration.
          Sub-component 3.2: Strengthening analytical skills and business intelligence (BI) capabilities.
          Sub-component 3.3: e-Governance in the excise function.
          Sub-component 3.4: Independent third-party IT audit.
          Sub-component 3.5: Hiring of personnel for addressing backlog of Value Added Tax (VAT) and
           Central Sales Tax (CST) assessments.

  Program management: Though not described as a component, the PforR also provided support for
  Program Management, including:

      1.   Operational costs incurred in connection with Program implementation.
      2.   Outstation travel, local travel, office space and per diems.
      3.   Financial audit, internal audit, procurement post review, and Independent Verification Agent (IVA).
      4.   Consultancy for management and monitoring and evaluation (M&E).



e. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Program expenditure: The total Program cost at appraisal was US$45 million. The Program cost at closing
  was estimated at US$48,780,000, equivalent to 108 percent of the original planned expenditure (ICR Annex
  3: Program Expenditure Summary). There is a discrepancy between the Financing table in the data sheet of
  the ICR and the Program Expenditure Summary in Annex 3. The former shows the Borrower’s Contribution
  as zero while the latter shows that the Borrower’s Contribution exceeded the original estimate of US$9
  million by 26 percent (see below).

  Financing: The PforR was financed with a US$36 million IBRD credit which was fully disbursed.

  Borrower contribution: In line with Government of India (GoI) guidelines, GoHP committed to providing 20
  percent of the total program costs (US$9 million). However, at closing GoHP's contribution was estimated at
  26 percent of total program costs or US$12.78 million (ICR Annex 3: Program Expenditure Summary).

  Dates: The Program was approved by the Bank's Board of Executive Directors on May 17, 2017, and
  became effective on July 11, 2017. A Mid-Term Review was conducted November 2019. The original
  closing date was September 30, 2022, but the Program was extended by nine months and closed on June
  30, 2023.

  Restructurings: While the PDO remained the same throughout, the Program was restructured three times
  with the approval of the Country Director.




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Himachal PFM Capacity Building Program (P156687)



   Restructuring No. 1: The first restructuring was approved in September 2020 and led to the revision of the
   baseline values for two of the three PDO indicators (which were also DLIs) as better data had become
   available during implementation.

   Restructuring No. 2: The second restructuring was approved in December 2021, and led to the
   modification of three annual DLI targets and relatively minor adjustments to the disbursement amounts of
   some DLIs. These changes stemmed from policy decisions taken by GoHP.

   Restructuring No. 3: The third and final restructuring was approved in September 2022, and led to the 9-
   month extension of the closing date to June 30, 2023, to compensate for delays in program implementation
   occasioned by the COVID-19 pandemic.

   DLI                        Changes made during Restructuring No. 2
                                   i. Year 2 disbursement amount reduced by US$5 million.
                                  ii. Year 4 target ‘Online submissions of monthly accounts by treasuries to
   DLI1: Electronic interface         AG’ removed.
   of IFMIS implemented in       iii. New Year 5 target ‘Treasury Quality Control function and the Himachal
   all departments.                   Pradesh State Audit Department (HPSAD) strengthened’ introduced with
                                      disbursement amount of US$1.5 million.

                                      i. Year 3 target changed from ‘Commitment Control and Debt Management
                                        Modules implemented’ to ‘Medium-term debt management strategy
   DLI2: Internal controls of           formulated, Debt Management Manual developed, and Debt Management
   the FD strengthened.                 Module implemented.’ The disbursement allocation increased from US$1
                                        million to US$2 million.

   DLI8: e-Governance                 i. Reference to Himachal Pradesh Breweries Ltd. Removed due to winding
   application for excise               up of the institution by the GoHP.
   function implemented.




3. Relevance   TBL




a. Relevance of Objectives      New




  Rationale
  Program contribution to cooperative federalism. The PDO was relevant at appraisal both in the broader
  country context as well as the more specific context of the state of Himachal Pradesh (HP). As a federal
  system, the PFM framework at the state level in India derives from the national constitution and is guided by
  central government policies and procedures. Policy changes within India following the recommendations of
  the 14th Finance Commission signaled a fundamental shift in relations between the central and subnational

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Himachal PFM Capacity Building Program (P156687)



governments, with a move towards increased fiscal devolution. The significant increase in transaction
volumes and the low level of automation in critical government functions made PFM reforms assume greater
importance in a context in which subnational/state-level governments would be expected to up their game in
terms of better planning, revenue collection, multi-year budgeting, resource allocation, managing fiscal risks
and public expenditure management, as well as enhanced transparency and accountability to citizens. As
stated in the PAD (p.3, para.9), "for cooperative federalism to be effective, robust PFM systems would have
to be designed at the subnational level to enhance efficiency and fiscal performance."

Responsive to the State's changing fiscal situation and ongoing reform initiative. The state of HP has
the status of a 'Special Category' state within India in recognition of its particular development challenges
and constraints (India has 'General Category' and 'Special Category' states). A major constraint is the state's
weak capacity to generate sufficient fiscal revenues to finance its priorities, as reflected in the substantial
increase in both its expenditure and deficits. These features made HP eligible for special grants and
incentives from the central government. However, due to the reduction in grants consequent upon the
recommendations of the 14th Finance Commission, GoHP was estimated to lose significant fiscal transfers
from central government. The state's compliance with the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management
(FRBM) legislation had also slipped. GoHP's goal was to improve the overall governance environment and to
further its ongoing reform initiatives including PFM reforms.

Bank's Country Partnership Strategy. The Program was well-aligned with the Bank's Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS, 2013-2017), in which governance was defined as a cross-cutting theme with an emphasis on
e-governance, public procurement and financial management reform. While the PforR Program was relevant
at approval in 2017, it is less clear whether it was still relevant for the next Country Partnership Framework
(CPF) covering the period FY2018-FY2022, as well as any subsequent country strategies. The PforR
objectives were consistent with at least two of the "approaches for smarter engagement" outlined in the CPF
FY2018-22: (a) 'Engaging a federal India' and (b) 'Strengthening public sector institutions'. The former
approach called for a "states at the center" focus and the development of strategic partnerships at the state
level (India CPF FY2018-22, p.24). The latter approach included, inter alia, support for core capability
including lending and technical assistance to (i) strengthen PFM and procurement systems, primarily at the
state level; (ii) improve debt management practices at national and state levels; (iii) develop accountability
mechanisms, including support for digital platforms to remove discretion for routine interactions between
government, businesses and citizens, as well as enabling citizen engagement channels; and (iv)
strengthen planning, budgeting, and M&E at state levels. All these approaches were to be supported through
use of e-governance tools to modernize operations and improve performance.

Alignment with sector strategy. The Program objectives were also aligned with the Bank's previous
engagement and sector work in HP which dated back several years. The Bank had produced an Economic
Report in 2007 that included public finance and other fiscal issues; a PEFA assessment published in 2009;
and a non-lending technical assistance (NLTA) between 2014 and 2015 that aimed to assist the GoHP in
improving financial management in key state-level agencies, strengthening performance of the HP
Treasuries and benchmarking them with other states in the country, and improving contract management in
key departments, namely, the Public Works Department (PWD) and IPH Department. Thus, the PforR
operation was the next generation of GoHP's PFM reforms.

State capacity and adequacy of the PforR instrument. Given the challenges prevailing in HP, designing
the Program around three "pillars" (as illustrated in Figure 1 of the PAD) which were the same as the three
RAs was appropriate as they addressed the key underlying constraints and challenges confronting GoHP.
The three PDO-level indicators and targets, as well as the DLIs, were considered adequate outcome

                                                                                                 Page 5 of 26
                              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                              Himachal PFM Capacity Building Program (P156687)



                       measures. While the Program’s Theory of Change (ToC) and the results chain were not identical, they both
                       present a credible and logical flow of activities (inputs) to intermediate-level outcomes and on to final
                       outcomes. For example, it was not as if the IFMIS was being introduced under the PforR for the first
                       time; IFMIS reforms began in 1998 and were ongoing for almost 20 years when the Bank's PforR operation
                       materialized. The challenge was to implement the IFMIS system throughout the GoHP. After 20 years, it was
                       apparent that a traditional, input-based investment project would not have motivated and energized the
                       GoHP to achieve the desired outcomes. Thus, the choice of the PforR instrument was driven mainly by the
                       desire to incentivize what was essentially a change management process by focusing on outputs and
                       outcomes. It was also a logical next phase to the Bank's prior engagements with GoHP, making the PforR
                       the culmination of several years of engagement, with each phase building upon the previous phases.

                       Based on the above, the relevance of objectives is High.


       Rating Relevance TBL




                       Rating
                       High


b. Relevance of DLIs                           New




DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                DLI 1
                DLI
                Electronic interface of IFMIS implemented in all departments: (Appraisal: USD$8 million; Actual: USD$7
                million).

                Rationale
                DLI #1 contributed to PDO 1 by improving the efficiency of the FD by moving transactions processing from a
                manual of bills from departments (through 4,700 Drawing and Disbursing Officers [DDOs]) to Treasuries
                and manual submission to the AG to an electronic system. This was to be measured by the percentage of
                users DDOs to whom the IFMIS electronic interface was extended, training, coverage of the Letters of Credit
                (LoC), and online submission of monthly accounts by treasuries to the Accountant-General (later removed
                and replaced by a new Year 5 target). The coverage of the rollout to all DDOs including DDOs of all three
                LoC departments and online submission of monthly accounts by Treasuries to the AG progressed from 30
                percent in the first year to 65 percent in year 2 and 100 percent in year 3. The original disbursement allocated
                to this DLI was USD8 million, but this was reduced by USD1 million after adjustments were made to the
                annual targets at the second restructuring.

                Achieving this outcome would improve efficiency in the FD and other departments by ensuring that the
                previously partially implemented IFMIS, which had been in place for more than 20 years, would be adopted
                and implemented across all departments of the GoHP, eliminating the need for manual transactions. This, in
                turn, would contribute to the achievement of PDO 1 (improve efficiency of public expenditure management)
                by narrowing the occurrence of budget variance in the state's expenditure.

                This DLI is rated High.



                                                                                                                    Page 6 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Himachal PFM Capacity Building Program (P156687)




Rating
High

DLI 2
DLI
Internal controls of the FD strengthened: (Appraisal: USD$5 million; Actual: USD$6 million).

Rationale
Strengthening internal controls in the FD was an essential aspect of improving its efficiency. Specifically, DLI
#2, which was linked to PDO 1, aimed to reduce the variance between what was approved in the budget and
what was recorded as the actual expenditure in six large departments in the GoHP from 44 to 15 percent. As
the internal controls were weak because specific financial management functions were still manual, DLI#2
entailed revising treasury rules manuals (for DDOs, treasuries staff) adopted and made operational,
automating the budget preparation process and rolling it out to cover 100% of the plan/scheme budget,
implementing the commitment control and debt management modules of the IFMIS (inclusive of regular
reporting on the state's contractual obligations and debt position), interfacing with Reserve Bank of India
(RBIs) e-Kuber operational and biometric authentications for all IFMIS users and ensuring full electronic
exchange of data and account reconciliations.

The Year 3 target was modified during the second restructuring and the disbursement allocation increased by
USD$1 million.

This DLI was achieved and is rated High.



Rating
High

DLI 3
DLI
Increased transparency and citizen engagement: (Appraisal: USD$3 million; Actual: USD$3 million).

Rationale
DLI #3 contributed to PDO 1 and potentially to PDO 2. Before the Program, there was nascent citizen
engagement on the budget, no disclosure of contract information, and fiscal information was only available
through standard reports. The DLI sought to improve and scale up citizen engagement and participation
around the budget process through better disclosure of fiscal and public expenditure information in a user-
friendly format including accepting off-line feedback on the budget; stakeholder consultations to solicit
feedback and inputs; real-time disclosure of procurement opportunities and contracts awarded through the e-
Procurement system, as well as real-time information on the progress of large IPH works to be posted on the
new Jal Shakti Vibhag (JSV) system and GoHP website. In the last year, BI tools (on treasury systems) were
to be rolled out for citizens to access key fiscal information.

As designed, while DLI#3 was appropriately focused on eliciting citizen engagement, during the span of the
Program, it did not seek to employ any surveys of citizens in HP to measure their perceptions of the GoHP's

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Himachal PFM Capacity Building Program (P156687)



efforts, the new measures introduced and their level of satisfaction with GoHP's responsiveness to the
feedback from citizens. It is possible that even though the fiscal and public expenditure data were packaged
and published in a user-friendly format, few citizens accessed it; that the inputs from the consultations held to
solicit feedback were not used; and the procurement information that was published was not used by the
citizens to monitor and hold the GoHP accountable. Simply making the information available or holding
stakeholder consultations does not automatically lead to greater transparency and citizen engagement.

The relevance of this DLI is rated as Modest.



Rating
Modest

DLI 4
DLI
Increased value of transactions processed through the e-Procurement system: Appraisal: USD$5 million;
Actual: USD$5 million).

Rationale
DLI #4, linked to PDO 1, aimed at increasing the coverage and value of procurements done through the e-
Procurement system by 90 percent, including at least 20 departments. Before the start of the Program, the
software was implemented in only 5 departments and 15 parastatals with sporadic usage of the six modules.
DLI#4 required increased usage of all modules of the e-Procurement across state departments in GoHP, and
replacing manual processes with a comprehensive automated system. These were to enable enhanced
accountability and transparency, achieve better value for money in public procurement, as well as strengthen
contract management. It would ultimately contribute to improving the efficiency of public expenditure
management. The DLI does not call for 100 percent of procurement transactions to be processed through the
e-Procurement system, nor does it specifically call for an increasing share of high-value contracts to be
handled through the system. The aim was to increase the value of transactions processed through the system
by 30 percent over the baseline in year 1, by 60 percent by year 3 and to 90 percent by the end of the
Program.

The DLI is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 5
DLI
Contract management system (CMS) in the IPH implemented (Appraisal: USD$3.91 million; Actual: USD$3.91
million).

Rationale


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Himachal PFM Capacity Building Program (P156687)



DLI #5 pertained to the customization and progressive rollout of the CMS across all divisions of the IPH
Department during the implementation of the Program. Prior to the Program, it was used in 17 divisions but its
usage was irregular. The Program measured the complete rollout of all 14 modules on CMS in all divisions
and head office of the IPH Department, discontinuation of the manual contract management and accounting
system, and the submission of monthly accounts to the Accountant-General via the CMS. The Program
aimed for 100 percent implementation of the CMS. It was associated with PDO 1.

This DLI is rated High.



Rating
High

DLI 6
DLI
Backlog of pending VAT/GST assessments reduced by 100 percent over the period of the Program: (Appraisal:
USD$4 million; Actual:USD$4 million).

Rationale
This DLI #6 was linked to PDO 2 and supported the GoHP's goal of progressively clearing the entire backlog
of pending assessments (VAT and CST) totaling 294,000 (2011/12–2015/16) and completion of 90 percent of
in-year assessments within one year by the end of the Program. It entailed institutional reforms in the Excise
and Taxation Department (ETD), including training, for better revenue management and clearing the backlog
of assessments. The ability to clear the huge backlog and become current on 90 percent of all current
assessments would be a substantial step towards improving the efficiency of tax administration in HP as the
ETD would be able to focus on efficiency in managing current assessments and not have to devote resources
to work carried over from previous years.



Rating
High

DLI 7
DLI
Institutional performance of the ETD improved: (Appraisal: USD$3 million; Actual: USD$3 million.

Rationale
Prior to the Program, there were no specialized units, and the revenue recovery process was weak. Given the
importance of increasing revenue, DLI #7 sought to strengthen ETD which was the GoHP's main revenue
collection arm and contribute to PDO 2. The institutional reforms in the ETD, including recruitment of new
staff, training, strengthening the Economic Intelligence Unit (EIU) and overall analytical capabilities of the
ETD, creating a service tax specialization, and strengthening the audit function would contribute to the
achievement of this DLI. Progress was measured by demonstrating that the audit system was strengthened
(eg. timeliness of audit reports) by year 4 of the Program. A fully functional EIU was integrated within the ETD
by year 2 of the Program, and a formal service tax specialization was created in the ETD by year 3. It would

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 26
                            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                            Himachal PFM Capacity Building Program (P156687)



            take time to build up the expertise and acumen of the new functional units before their effectiveness could be
            fully observable and verifiable. The DLI is rated Substantial.



            Rating
            Substantial

            DLI 8
            DLI
            e-Governance application for excise function implemented: (Appraisal: USD$4 million; Actual: USD$4 million).

            Rationale
            As prior to the Program, there were no e-Governance applications available for the excise function, DLI #8
            which was linked to PDO 2, focused on digitizing the excise functions within ETD, including a software
            package for Himachal Pradesh Beverages Limited (HPBL). The specific reference to HPBL was removed
            during the second restructuring as the company was wound up by GoHP and was no longer relevant.
            Progress was measured by verifying that the excise e-Governance system was rolled out in 100 percent of
            the offices, including issuance of at least 90 percent transport permits through the system. This led to the
            discontinuation of manual processes and covered the excise core functions across all offices of ETD and was
            achieved through the provision of necessary hardware and software, as well as staff training that were
            indicators of success.

            This DLI is rated High.



            Rating
            High


OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




            OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
            Rationale
            Both the Program's objectives and the eight DLIs were extremely relevant to the GoHP's reform priorities and
            the Bank's country strategies, at appraisal and at closing. The CPF FY18–FY22 focused on strengthening of
            public sector institutions and on the results chain in service delivery through improved systems, performance
            incentives, and coordination mechanisms. The PDO addressed the CPF’s broader goal through
            strengthening systems and institutions for public expenditure management and tax administration in the state
            of HP. The Program facilitated cross-learning from PFM reforms in other Indian states and global
            experiences, consistent with the Lighthouse India Initiative envisaged in the CPF. The PforR Program was
            also the logical next phase to the Bank's prior engagements with GoHP in PFM reforms. IFMIS reforms had
            begun as early as 1998 but were input focused and ineffective in improving efficiency in either public
            expenditure management or revenue collection. The PforR made a substantial contribution in reversing this
            situation.



                                                                                                             Page 10 of 26
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Himachal PFM Capacity Building Program (P156687)



               The PDO continued to be relevant and consistent with the GoI’s and GoHP’s reform priorities through the life
               of the Program. In its report for 2021–26, the 15th Finance Commission identified the need to address reform
               priorities in a PFM framework at the central and state levels for a future fiscal architecture guided by the
               principles of equity, efficiency, and transparency. The PDO and DLIs nurtured GoHP institutional capacity to
               prepare it for the new fiscal architecture by building capacity, digitalization and institutional strengthening.

               The eight DLIs reflected measurable progress towards the broader outcome of government’s reform priorities
               by providing incentives to strengthen PFM systems with a shift to monitor outputs and outcomes. All DLIs
               were clearly defined, well aligned with the PDO, and provided appropriate incentives to trigger action and
               performance. They improved PFM efficiency mainly by facilitating its transition from manual to electronic
               processing, clearing backlogs and building human and institutional capacity to sustain PFM reforms over the
               long term.

               The overall relevance rating is Substantial.



               Rating
               Substantial



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               PDO1: To improve the efficiency of public expenditure management.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change: The theory of change (ToC) underlying PFM was addressed through two Results Areas
               (RAs): 1) improving efficiency of the FD in an enhanced control environment; and 2) increasing efficiency and
               performance through better contract management (effectively improving the public procurement function
               since procurement accounts for a large share of public expenditure). By transitioning from a manually
               implemented system to a modern electronically-operated one across all government departments, and
               building enhanced personnel capacity in the FD, the Program would help to reduce the variance between
               budgetary allocations made through the GoHP’s annual budget process and actual expenditures, thus
               improving the budgetary systems’ credibility, and enhancing the efficiency of the overall PFM system. This
               was to be achieved by rolling out the IFMIS and mandating its use across all GoHP departments. The
               discontinuation of manually operated systems and establishment of electronic ones enhanced internal
               controls and strengthening of the PFM was achieved through updated manuals, capacity building, and overall
               better trained staff. Similar efficiency improvements were implemented in contract management by rolling out
               the e-Procurement and contract management systems (CMS) systems and ensuring their adoption and
               usage across all departments, but particularly the IPH which dealt with the largest share of contracts as well
               as the largest contracts in terms of value.



                                                                                                                 Page 11 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Himachal PFM Capacity Building Program (P156687)



Key outputs:

      Complete rollout of the HP IFMIS (referred to as HIMKOSHA) across all departments. The HIMKOSH
         was live at all 107 Treasury offices and all 5,500 plus expenditure points, with end-to-end processing
         of expenditure bills including 2.5 million receipt and almost a million payment transactions. Training
         was conducted on the IFMIS, the use of the software, Treasury rules and a range of other related
         areas to build capacity among officials to make use of the system (DLI-1).
        Strengthening of the FD's internal controls (DLI-2).
        The formalization of citizen engagement through stakeholder consultations, access to pertinent budget
         information and procurement data (eg. on award of contracts) opened GoHP up to greater scrutiny
         and made officials more conscious of the need to comply with the new systems and procedures (DLI-
         3).
        Six modules of the e-Procurement software were implemented and over 100 state agencies
         (departments, corporations, boards and companies) were onboarded and receiving training in the use
         of the system (DLI-4).
        Implementation of the CMS in the IPH Department which, together with PWD, account for most of the
         procurement contracts (DLI-5).

Intermediate indicators and outcomes

There were six intermediate results indicators (4 for RA1, 1 for RA2 and 1 that applies to both). These
prompted activities that measured GoHP’s progress towards the achievement of the DLIs, and contribution to
the broader outcome (PDO1). Some of the IRIs overlapped with the DLIs.

IRI-1: Strengthening PFM in the state by provision of comprehensive and wide-ranging training. Prior to the
PforR Program (baseline), training was deemed to be neither strategic nor planned. The original target
was for FD to carry out of a training needs assessment and development of a training plan, and the provision
of adequate resources to deliver the training to all stakeholders in accordance with the plan. Actual achieved
at completion: At completion in June 2023, regular training was being conducted on IFMIS, GST, gender
issues, Treasury Rules, usage of application software, NPS, etc. The IRI target was not a number but a
result and ongoing process. The training needs were identified in consultation with senior administrators, staff
of various departments and external stakeholders. The training was based on a training plan and was
informed by a Training Needs Assessment. (Achieved - Substantial)

IRI-2: Strengthening components of the PFM cycle through analytical studies of the core FD functions.
Baseline: The last study conducted to refine the core functions of the FD was during the PEFA in 2009.
Target: Studies conducted, and recommendations made to GoHP on funds, debt, revenue and expenditure
management. Actual achieved at completion: Debt Management Performance Assessment (DeMPA)
completed, and recommendations translated into DLI-2. Action taken by GoHP on expenditure management
in terms of scheme rationalization and consolidation. A Procurement Assessment (MAPS) was also
commissioned during the Program period. The IRI target was not a number but a result and ongoing process.
(Achieved - Substantial)

Note: While the IRI2 focuses on “analytical studies," it does not specify who would do the studies. The ICR
suggests that only one study was implemented (the DeMPA) and was done by the Bank and not the FD. The
MAPS was "commissioned" and is also a World Bank analytical product.



                                                                                                 Page 12 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Himachal PFM Capacity Building Program (P156687)



IRI-3: Electronic interface of IMFIS implemented in all departments. Baseline: Manual submission of bills
from departments (via 4,700 DDOs) to treasuries and manual submission to the Accountant General.
Original target: Rollout to all DDOs for all 3 LoC departments and online submissions of monthly accounts
by treasuries to the Accountant General. Revised target: Treasury inspection function and the HP State
Audit Department (HPSAD) strengthened. Actual achieved at completion: Rollout to all DDOs completed.
Treasury inspection software was rolled out and the SOP was approved. The Audit Code was finalized and
the Audit Management System was developed. (Achieved - Substantial)

IRI-4: Internal controls in the FD strengthened. Baseline: Weak internal controls; specific FM functions were
still manual. Target: Revised Treasury rules/manuals were adopted and made operational, and specific
manual processes were automated. Actual achieved at completion: Revised Treasury rules were notified
and published on FD website. The online budget preparation process was used for preparing annual budgets.
The debt management module was implemented including coverage of guarantees – the process has
changed from manual to automated, improving internal controls, facilitating analysis and generating prompts.
This streamlined the process and increased transparency. (Achieved - Substantial)

IRI-5: Increased transparency and citizen engagement. Baseline: Nascent citizen engagement on budget; no
disclosure of contract information; fiscal information only through standard reports. Target: Scaling up citizen
engagement on the budget process; disclosure of (a) contract award and procurement opportunities through
e-Procurement; and (b) progress on large contracts through new IPH system. Actual achieved at
completion: FD added more reports - including visualization tools - over time on the public domain. Citizen
participation (by citizens, industry groups, tax practitioners) in the budget process was ensured in 3 annual
budgets (2021, 2022, 2023). (Achieved - Substantial)

IRI-6: CMS in IPH Department implemented. Baseline: CMS implemented in 17 percent of the divisions
within the IPH Department. Target: CMS implemented in 60 percent of the divisions. Actual achieved
at completion: the rollout was complete in 60 percent of IPH divisions and monthly accounts were being
generated from the CMS. The Legacy system was discontinued. (Achieved - Substantial)

PDO 1 Results Indicators

PDO1 had two RAs:

RA-1: Improving the efficiency of the FD in an enhanced control environment (i.e. the management of the
budgetary process) and

      RA-1 indicator: Reduce variance between originally approved budget to expenditure.



Baseline: The variance between the originally approved budget to expenditure outturns of the six largest
departments was 19 percent in FY 2015 – 16.

Target: Variance between originally approved budget to expenditure outturns of six large departments
reduced to 15 % by June 2022.

Actual Achieved at Completion: 15 percent in June 2022. The ICR reports that GoHP has achieved and
maintained the target until Program closure. However, by PEFA standards, a variance in excess of 5 percent

                                                                                                 Page 13 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Himachal PFM Capacity Building Program (P156687)



is considered on the higher side, making 19 percent exceptionally high. Reducing this variance by 4
percentage points - from 19 to 15 percent - while not insignificant, does not appear to be a particularly
ambitious target or achievement over a period of 6 years. (Substantial)

RA-2: improving the public procurement and contract management process. The PDO indicators for these
two sub-objectives were, respectively:

      RA-2 indicator: Increased value of transactions processed through the e-Procurement system.

Baseline: Software implemented in 5 departments and 15 parastatals with sporadic usage (of the six
modules) and value of transactions processed at INR 24.41 billion for value of tenders uploaded and INR 1.88
billion for value of contracts awarded.

Target: Increased in value of transaction processed through the eProcurement system by 90% over baseline.

Actual Achieved at Completion: Value of transactions processed through the e-Procurement system
increased by 90% over baseline. The target was achieved in advance and was sustained in 2021–22 and
until Project closure. (Substantial)

Both PDO-level result indicators for PDO1 were achieved. (Substantial)

Rollout of e-Procurement was a notable achievement under the Program, with the related DLI (DLI 4)
achieved in Year 1 (May 2018) instead of Year 5 as originally planned, paving the way for advance
achievement of the DLI targets. More than 100 departments, corporations, boards, and companies were
onboarded and training imparted. The value threshold of 90 percent over the baseline for tenders processed
and contracts awarded was sustained throughout the Program period with the number of tenders published
increasing 2.5 times by the end of the Program period. For FY2022–23, the value of tenders processed
through e-Procurement covered the entire public procurement universe in the state except procurements
valued less than INR 0.5 million. The outcomes are starting to be reflected in select key performance
indicators.

The CMS implemented in JSV (under DLI 5) covered the downstream function of contract management in
FY2023–24 from contract award till final payment. Since go-live in FY2020–21, JSV has officially transitioned
to electronic maintenance of registers and documents including accounting records covering 100 percent of
works executed. Even in remote locations, where connectivity is poor at times, officials update the CMS at
the nearest division office. As of August 2023, a total of 114,000 work awards (annual average of 35,000) and
INR 29.56 billion worth of work bills (annual average of INR 12 billion) were processed on the CMS. JSV
officials use system-generated reports for decision-making and administrative actions. The GoHP has now
integrated the CMS with the core IFMIS, ensuring seamless electronic processing of work bills. The CMS can
potentially be rolled out in all GoHP departments handling works expenditure.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Himachal PFM Capacity Building Program (P156687)




Objective
To improve the efficiency of tax administration.

Rationale
Theory of Change

The Program would achieve the PDO of improving the efficiency of tax administration mainly by enhancing
the revenue potential of the Excise and Taxation Department (ETD) through RA3 focused on reducing the
huge backlog of pending VAT/CST assessments (DLI-6). This would also include making current the in-year
tax filings. This would be achieved by restructuring the ETD, recruiting, and training personnel, particularly
additional specialized staff (DLI-7), strengthening ETD's audit systems and rolling out a new e-Governance
system (DLI-8). ETD would leverage a risk-based approach to select cases for assessment and use data
analytics to improve tax compliance and performance incentives linked to collection targets and three Legacy
Cases Resolution Schemes. In short, ETD embraced technology, employed modern techniques, and hired
additional staff with new skills who were incentivized to perform. The ultimate outcome sought was the full
automation of core business processes and improved performance of the ETD, which would optimize the
potential for revenue collection.

Key Outputs

        Backlog of VAT and CST cases reduced by 100 percent over 4 years.
        90 percent of in-year assessments are completed within current year.
        Economic Intelligence Unit (EIU) is established within ETD.
        Specialization for service tax experts is created within ETD.
        Excise e-Governance system designed and rolled out in 100 percent of offices.

Intermediate indicators and outcomes

Apart from the three DLIs (DLIs 6-8), there were four IRIs. The PDO indicator RA-3 was identical to DLI-6 and
two of the IRIs were identical to DLIs-7 and DLI-8. All targets were successfully achieved.

IRI-7: Institutional strengthening and modernization of the ETD. Baseline: Weak institutional and
organizational structure and obsolete e-applications. Target: Implementation of all accepted short and
medium-term recommendations, including optimizing the assessment function. Actual achieved at
completion: New specializations were created for the EIU, Audit Unit and Service Tax Unit.
These units were established and staffed, and became fully functional providing analysis, audit findings and
advice respectively. The department was reorganized based on functional specializations. (Achieved -
Substantial)

IRI-8: Enhanced capacity of officials implementing GST by providing training that was not covered by the
sovereign function. Baseline: GST rollout training to be imparted and systematic training instituted for the
department. Target: Field-level staff of the ETD trained in functional aspects of GST. Additionally, training
and communication are provided to dealers. Actual achieved at completion: An audit training module was
prepared and approximately 1,000 tax inspectors were trained in tax audit. (Achieved - Substantial)

IRI-9: e-Governance application for excise function implemented (same as DLI-8). Baseline: No e-
Governance application for excise function. Target: Excise e-Governance system rolled out in 100 percent of


                                                                                                Page 15 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Himachal PFM Capacity Building Program (P156687)



the offices, including issuance of at least 90 percent transport permits through the system. Actual achieved
at completion: The e-Governance system was rolled out with identified licenses onboarded. The system
went live in April/May 2023 and earlier manual systems were discontinued. (Achieved - Substantial)

IRI-10: Institutional performance of ETD improved (same as DLI-7). Baseline: No specialized unit; recovery
process was weak. Target: Audit functions, service tax specialization, EIU functioning as an integral part of
ETD. Actual achieved at completion: Specialized units were set up and operating. However, it was difficult
to measure whether the institutional performance of ETD was indeed improved. (Modest - Modest)

IRI- 7, 8 and 10 did not have any metrics to measure their impact. They were process indicators that included
establishments of new units or functions, and staff training that were necessary for unlocking the revenue
potential of ETD but could not be measured in terms of their material contribution. IRI-10 (Institutional
performance of the ETD improved) is an outcome and not an indicator (it is also DLI-7). It is not possible to
measure whether the institutional performance of ETD has indeed improved. The same comment applies to
the targets related with organizational features and procedures (creation of an audit function, service tax
specialization, functioning EIU, development of a tax manual) which make their contribution to the
performance of the ETD difficult to gauge.

PDO 2 Results Indicators

PDO 2 had one RA-3: Unlocking revenue potential through modernization of the ETD.

RA-3 indicator: Backlog of pending VAT/CST assessments reduced.

Baseline: Pending tax assessments (VAT and CST) from 2011/12–2015/16 are 294,000.

Target: Backlog reduced by 100% over baseline and 90% of in-year of return filing.

Actual Achieved at Completion: The entire backlog of over 300,000 cases in 2015/16 was reduced in
addition to clearing 90 percent of the current cases within a year of the returns being filed (DLI-6). In the
process, the state recovered INR2.57 billion of taxes owed. (Substantial)

Improving the Efficiency of Tax Administration was achieved through the dual target of reducing the backlog
of VAT and CST cases (DLI-6) and disposing of 90 percent of all new cases within one year of return filing
resulting in boosting the state’s revenues. Under DLI-7, institutional strengthening in GoHP’s tax
administration prepared it for the GST regime and improved its overall effectiveness. The ETD emerged as a
more goal-oriented entity with specialized units for tax enforcement, a 24x7 helpdesk, and a Central
Registration Unit. As a result, the monthly/quarterly GSTR1 returns filed increased from 460,000 in FY2019–
20 to 770,000 in FY2022–23. The development of the tax audit manual and staff training in modern tax audit
procedures has empowered a data analytics team to identify potential revenue recovery cases and alert ETD
field offices. During the Program period, 5,195 cases of suspected revenue leakages amounting to INR 11
billion were detected. Tax recovered stood at INR 1.70 billion.

Revenues from excise on liquor constituted 55 percent of total revenues of the ETD in FY2021–22. Under
DLI-8, the implementation of the e-Governance system automated the excise function covering key
processes, such as excise license issue and management, registration of labels, goods movement, filing of
stock and other returns, and collection of fees. The system’s roll out also covered 2,229 licensees and
implemented ICT hardware-based ‘Track and Trace’ facility for effective monitoring of the liquor supply chain.

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Himachal PFM Capacity Building Program (P156687)



Since go-live in April 2023, all permits and passes are generated electronically. The streamlining and
automation of processes has reduced the footfall at ETD offices and increased transparency. The ETD
expects collections from liquor licenses to increase by 17 percent in FY2023–24 compared to FY2022–23.



Rating
Substantial




OVERALL EFFICACY
Rationale
The Program met both objectives: improving the efficiency of (a) public expenditure management, and (b) tax
administration. While two of the eight DLIs contributed to strengthening expenditure management, three DLIs
contributed to improving tax administration. The remaining three DLIs contributed to strengthening the overall
PFM architecture of the state. All PDO indicators, DLI and IRI targets were met, and the Program was fully
disbursed at closing. Notably, GoHP's contribution exceeded the original estimate.

The key achievements in improving the expenditure efficiency of the GoHP to support PDO1 were: (1) a
complete rollout of HIMKOSH (the state IFMIS) that is presently live at all 107 Treasury offices and all 5,500
plus expenditure points with end-to-end electronic processing of all GoHP receipts and payments. The
HIMKOSH boasts of secure biometric login, paperless transactions, is fully integrated with the central bank’s
systems and has a reporting module employing business intelligence tools. (ii) Development of a Debt
Management Manual, a medium-term debt management strategy, and a debt management module of
HIMKOSH. (iii) Better cash and debt management contributed to a 1.3 percent decline in GoHP’s interest
payments as a percentage of total expenditure between FY2017– FY2022. (iv) Due to the early rollout of e-
Procurement in Year 1, for FY2022–23, the value of tenders processed through e-Procurement covered the
entire public procurement universe in the state except procurements valued less than INR 0.5 million. The
CMS implemented in JSV applied to contract management for 100 percent of works executed in FY2023–24.
Officials update the CMS at the nearest division office in remote locations and use system-generated reports
for decision-making. (iv) The GoHP has now integrated the CMS with the core IFMIS, ensuring seamless
electronic processing of work bills. The CMS can potentially be rolled out in all GoHP departments handling
works expenditure. (v) Digitization of the budget preparation process - aggregation of budget proposals and
distribution of approved budget allocations till the last expenditure point. (vi) GoHP established a process and
a portal for collecting citizens’ feedback on the annual state budget.[1] (vii) eBhugtan, a mobile app developed
as part of the IFMIS, provides alerts about any payment received from the GoHP to contractors, employees,
and citizens receiving old-age pension. (ix) The development of standard operating procedures (SOPs) and
software has improved the effectiveness of the treasury quality control function through better internal
controls and audits. The new Audit Code and audit software are now used for most audits.

The notable achievements for improving the efficiency of tax administration (PDO2) include: (i) reducing the
backlog of VAT and CST cases and processing 90 percent of all new cases within one year of return filing
resulting in boosting the state’s revenues. (ii) Institutional strengthening in GoHP’s tax administration
prepared it for the GST regime. (iii) The ETD emerged as a more goal-oriented entity with specialized units
for tax enforcement, a 24x7 helpdesk, and a Central Registration Unit. As a result, the monthly/quarterly

                                                                                                  Page 17 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Himachal PFM Capacity Building Program (P156687)



 GSTR1 returns filed increased from 460,000 in FY2019–20 to 770,000 in FY2022–23; (iv) The development
 of a modern tax audit system empowered ETD officials to identify potential revenue recovery cases and follow
 through. (v) The implementation of the e-Governance system automated the excise function pertaining to
 excise on liquor covering key processes, such as excise license issue and management and using the ‘Track
 and Trace’ facility for effective monitoring of the liquor supply chain. The streamlining and automation of
 processes has reduced the footfall at ETD offices and increased transparency. The ETD expects collections
 from liquor licenses to increase by 17 percent in FY2023–24 compared to FY2022–23.

 The Program strengthened GoHP ‘s institutional capacity building in several ways: (i) Staff training became
 an integral element across Program activities (IFMIS implementation, rollout of e-Procurement and CMS, data
 analytics for tax administration, and GST preparedness) with special training for women. The training
 programs included gender aspects, Program financial management, IT security, green buildings, and
 Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs), and were conducted through face-to-face learning,
 and e-Learning modules. Manuals, guides and SOPs developed under the Program serve the Treasury
 Officers and Treasury Quality Control, Audit process, IT Security, and Debt Management. The Program also
 produced deep-rooted behavioral and systemic changes such as integrating technology considerations in
 governance reforms from the beginning. The Program experience instilled in the GoHP the confidence to
 implement technology-intensive projects and views the IFMIS, e-Procurement, and CMS as building blocks
 for developing future governance initiatives.




 [1] https://ebudget.hp.nic.in/bshp.



 Rating
 Substantial


5. Outcome

The relevance of the Program's objectives was High. They strongly aligned with the country context and the
PFM Reform goals of the GoHP, as well as the Bank's CPS, 2013-2017 and its CPF FY18-FY22), and directly
supported the GoHP's efforts to improve the capacity of the FD and ETD, the two main departments responsible
for fiscal management and tax administration, respectively. The DLIs were also highly relevant. All eight DLIs,
three PDO indicators and ten IRIs were achieved and their Efficacy is rated Substantial. Therefore, the overall
Program Outcome is rated Satisfactory.


    Outcome Rating
    Satisfactory


6. Risk to Development Outcome


                                                                                                 Page 18 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Himachal PFM Capacity Building Program (P156687)




The PforR operation succeeded in embedding new systems and processes in the GoHP. Specifically, the
major digitalization initiatives undertaken under the Program - the IFMIS in FD, the CMS in IPH/JSV, the e-
Procurement system across GoHP and the e-Governance in ETD - have replaced manual systems and
GoHP’s legacy systems was discontinued. This implies that a reversal to previously-existing systems will be
difficult, and any business done outside of these systems should be the exception, not the norm. The main
foreseeable challenge is the ability and willingness of GoHP to maintain and update the new systems as and
when required. Often, digital systems installed with the support of World Bank financing are allowed to fall
into disrepair in the absence of external resources.

Barring some major catastrophe, new cadres of staff employed to perform key functions (eg. audit,
procurement) and the staff trained in the use of the new systems are likely to remain employed by the GoHP
into the future, making it difficult to roll back the progress achieved.

Nevertheless, the ICR does point to increasing fiscal pressures on account of both internal and external
factors that can threaten to undermine the progress mad. Therefore, the IEG rates the risk to development
outcome as Moderate.




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The PforR operation was the culmination of several years of engagement with GoHP. PFM reforms in HP
  began in 1998 and have been ongoing for over 20 years. Ten years before the Program was approved,
  the Bank team had prepared an Economic Report that raised some of the PFM issues affecting GoHP.
  A PEFA assessment was carried out in 2008/09 and the Bank delivered an NLTA for a period of two
  years (from January 2014 to December 2015), during which time it worked very closely with the FD,
  DoTA and IPH/JSV. This enabled the Bank team to develop both a deeper understanding of the issues
  and challenges confronting GoHP as well as forge a close working relationship with the client. The
  Program thus drew and built upon prior Bank experience with PFM in HP, and was designed
  collaboratively.

  The Program was the first PFM reform operation in India to employ the PforR instrument. The decision to
  use the PforR instrument was informed by an understanding that an appropriately incentivized change
  management approach was required and that a traditional investment project would not be able to
  achieve these objectives. The DLIs were carefully crafted with the FD and other relevant departments to
  ensure they were realistic and achievable, and the implementation arrangements kept relatively simple to
  avoid unnecessary complication and delays.

  The Bank preparation team comprised a range of relevant skills including a local Task Team Leader
  (TTL) who had led the NLTA that preceded the operation. The TTL therefore had a first-hand
  understanding of the problems to be addressed and had built up credibility and trust with GoHP officials.
  The team also consulted extensively with other Bank staff who had direct experience in Mozambique and
  Bangladesh where other successful PFM reform PforR operations had been or were being implemented,
  thus ensuring the sourcing of knowledge and good practice to inform the design of the Program.


                                                                                                 Page 19 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Himachal PFM Capacity Building Program (P156687)



  The IEG assessment of Bank performance on quality-of-entry is Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 A core group of the task team and, most importantly, the TTL remained engaged throughout the life of the
 Program. One of the shortcomings sometimes observed in Bank projects and programs is the change of
 TTLs and team members that can be disruptive as new TTLs take time to become familiar with the
 program and the client. In this case, perhaps because it was a subnational program and the majority of
 team members were local staff, there were no significant changes. The team carried out regular
 implementation as well as technical support missions during which they did trouble-shooting. At least four
 Implementation Support Missions (ISMs) were done virtually due to the pandemic. At the end of each
 mission, several potential problems were discussed including debriefings with the Additional Chief
 Secretary and other relevant heads of department. The ICR also reports that workshops were organized
 with relevant departments to brainstorm on specific topics such as public works management systems,
 PEFA, IFMIS and initiatives to clear the backlog of tax cases, as well as virtual interactions during the
 COVID-19 pandemic to address disruptions and uncertainties caused by the lock-down. Moreover, the
 team shared knowledge and experience with PFM reforms elsewhere with their counterparts, provided
 short notes and brought outside expertise to interact with GoHP officials. This points to a high level of
 proactivity and commitment by the team to the success of the Program. Eleven ISRs were filed after each
 ISM during the life of the Program. Three restructurings occurred when it was necessary to adapt to
 changes in circumstances, including an extension to the closing date. Aide Memoires accompanied by
 Management Letters were prepared and sent to the Additional Chief Secretary after the ISMs.

 As intended with the PforR instrument, the Program relied on country (or in this case state) systems for
 fiduciary as well as environmental and social compliance and oversight. Fiduciary performance was
 adequate for the most part, except for a period when there were delays in the submission of audited
 financial statements caused by tardiness on the part of the federal government and not the GoHP.

 Overall, the quality of supervision is assessed as Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization



                                                                                                  Page 20 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Himachal PFM Capacity Building Program (P156687)



a. M&E Design
 The PAD laid out the M&E design for the Program (p.16). A comprehensive Results Framework (RF)
 spelling out the PDO and intermediate-level results indicators was developed jointly with the participating
 departments in GoHP. All three PDO indicators were devised as DLIs to build in financial incentives within
 the PforR Program for the GoHP to pursue its larger PFM reform agenda. The RF provided the
 baselines, target values, frequency of data collection, data sources, data collection methods, and
 responsible institutions in commendable detail. Some baselines and targets were later modified during
 implementation when the data became available or circumstances changed. At the very outset, therefore,
 the participating institutions understood which results they were responsible for and what data they were
 expected to collect to demonstrate achievement of those results.

 In keeping with the use of the PforR instrument, the M&E function relied on country (or, in this case, state)
 systems. The PFM Reforms Division (PRD) of the FD of the GoHP was responsible for tracking and
 reporting on activities and results - collecting and collating data from the stakeholder departments, and
 preparing and submitting semi-annual reports to the Bank. The e-Governance, e-Procurement and CMS
 systems to be installed and activated under the Program would, in effect, generate the data required to
 show progress. DLI verification was contracted out to an Independent Verification Agent (IVA), who was
 responsible for certifying the achievement of results in line with the verification protocols and PforR
 guidelines.

 Overall, the design of the M&E system was well designed and appropriate.



b. M&E Implementation
  Based on the ICR, the M&E arrangements worked well during implementation. The PRD collected,
  collated and analyzed the data, and produced/submitted their reports on time, and these were used by
  both the FD and Bank team to gauge progress and identify potential problems or delays. Regular
  meetings were held to review progress. In all, 16 review meetings were held under the leadership of the
  Additional Chief Secretary (Finance) with active participation from heads of other implementing
  departments. Periodic meetings were held with the IVA to apprise them of the progress and upcoming
  DLI verification tasks. This resulted in fewer feedback loops and quick turnaround of verification reports,
  thus helping in faster disbursements. Program monitoring by the World Bank was undertaken over 11
  formal half-yearly ISMs as well as several technical missions in the intervening periods during which they
  held discussions with the implementing departments. This afforded the Bank team the opportunity to
  interrogate the reports, raise issues and address problems before or as they emerged. DLIs achievement
  was also carefully monitored as this was tied to disbursements, and corrective action taken if/when it was
  found that the DLIs were off-track.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E system put in place informed operational decisions. Key outcomes of each ISM were captured
  in wrap-up meeting presentations, Aide Memoires, and Implementation Status and Results Reports
  (ISRs). The World Bank’s Management Letter to the Chief Secretary of the GoHP that accompanied
  each Aide Memoire highlighted two to three key action points for immediate attention. DLI achievement
  was monitored closely, and corrective action was initiated when progress was found to be weak. For
  instance, when the Department of IT was found to be lacking in terms of convening power and

                                                                                                    Page 21 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Himachal PFM Capacity Building Program (P156687)



  administrative bandwidth to lead the e-Procurement rollout under DLI 4, the World Bank team brought
  this to the attention of the senior leadership at the GoHP. The responsibility was shifted to the FD, after
  which the DLI results were achieved quickly. Program implementation status, achievements, and key
  issues were placed for discussion at the Tripartite Portfolio Review Meetings.[1] The GoHP has
  documented its success story of IFMIS reform and placed it on the project page of the FD’s website.[2]

  The Bank team utilized the output of the semi-annual reports and its discussions with GoHP officials in
  the preparation of its ISRs and Aide Memoires. These not only informed discussions at the level of the
  FD, but also the higher levels of the GoHP.



  [1] Meetings held between GoI, implementing agencies, and the World Bank.

  [2] https://himachal.nic.in/index1.php?lang=1&dpt_id=1&level=0&linkid=3794&lid=11673.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

9. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Risk was assessed as Moderate at the outset and, based on the ISRs, remained
   so throughout implementation. The Program contemplated some civil works (construction and upgrade of
   Treasury and sub-Treasury offices) that were not expected to cause any adverse impact. The
   Environmental and Social Safeguards Assessment (ESSA) yielded a few recommendations that were
   incorporated into the Program Action Plan (PAP). Specifically, these related to:

   Environmental

       1.   Exclusion of high-risk activities;
       2.   Screening and preparation of site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans;
       3.   Orientation for Public Works Department engineers and contractors;
       4.   Green Building Certification for buildings to be constructed; and
       5.   e-Waste disposal/management.

   Social

       1.   Screening for land identified for construction to rule out any social impact;
       2.   Ensuring basic amenities for construction workers as well as a grievance redress mechanism;
       3.   Addressing the needs of women and differently-abled people in building design and construction;
       4.   Ensuring public safety; and
       5.   Establishing a mechanism for labor law-related compliance.



                                                                                                     Page 22 of 26
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Himachal PFM Capacity Building Program (P156687)



The ICR (p.26) reports that the Program complied with all recommendations and measures outlined in the
ESSA and PAP, respectively, as well as advice offered during ISMs.

It is worth noting that the ICR points to the construction of 28 new Treasury buildings and the
renovation/refurbishment of 73 existing buildings under the Program as part of the strengthening of
Treasury infrastructure. Six of the newly-constructed buildings were built in accordance with the parameters

Environmental and Social Risk was assessed as Moderate at the outset and, based on the ISRs, remained
so throughout implementation. The Program contemplated some civil works (construction and upgrade of
Treasury and sub-Treasury offices) that were not expected to cause any adverse impact. The
Environmental and Social Safeguards Assessment (ESSA) yielded a few recommendations that were
incorporated into the Program Action Plan (PAP). Specifically, these related to:

Environmental

    1.   Exclusion of high-risk activities;
    2.   Screening and preparation of site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans;
    3.   Orientation for Public Works Department engineers and contractors;
    4.   Green Building Certification for buildings to be constructed; and
    5.   e-Waste disposal/management.

Social

    1.   Screening for land identified for construction to rule out any social impact;
    2.   Ensuring basic amenities for construction workers as well as a grievance redress mechanism;
    3.   Addressing the needs of women and differently-abled people in building design and construction;
    4.   Ensuring public safety; and
    5.   Establishing a mechanism for labor law-related compliance.

The ICR (p.26) reports that the Program complied with all recommendations and measures outlined in the
ESSA and PAP, respectively, as well as advice offered during ISMs.

It is worth noting that the ICR points to the construction of 28 new Treasury buildings and the
renovation/refurbishment of 73 existing buildings under the Program as part of the strengthening of
Treasury infrastructure. Six of the newly-constructed buildings were built in accordance with the
parameters of the Simple Versatile Affordable Green Rating for Integrated Habitat Assessment
(SVAGRIHA), an affordable rating system for small buildings in India, and have received Green
Building Certification.

The GoHP had a functional grievance redress mechanism (GRM) that received grievances through three
channels, which were also available to this Program: (a) the e-Samadhan portal (https://esamadhan.nic.in/),
(b) the Chief Minister’s grievance portal (https://cmsankalp.hp.gov.in/), and (c) the Centralized Public
Grievance Redress and Monitoring System of the GoI (https://pgportal.gov.in/). No complaints were
received under the Program. The department also conducted gender sensitization training for all its staff
and constituted Internal Complaint Committees as per the Protection of Women from Sexual Harassment
Act, 2013 in all the District Treasury Offices and at the directorate level. No complaints have been reported
(August 2023).


                                                                                               Page 23 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Himachal PFM Capacity Building Program (P156687)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Fiduciary Risks were assessed as Moderate by the task team at the outset. The Fiduciary Systems
   Assessment (FSA) covered financial management, procurement, and fraud and corruption risks associated
   with the Program. The fiduciary risks and proposed mitigation measures are laid out in Annex 8 of the PAD
   (p.80).

   Financial Management (FM). In keeping with the use of the PforR instrument, the FM arrangements relied
   on country (or, in this case, state) systems. The FD, as the main implementing agency, was responsible for
   budgeting, accounting and funds management. The FSA found that there were adequate arrangements in
   place to safeguard Program finances. The ICR (p.26) reports that the FM arrangements under the Program
   performed adequately.

   Overall performance on FM was rated Satisfactory during the first half of the Program period but slipped to
   Moderately Satisfactory throughout the second half. The ICR (p.26) explains that this slippage was due to
   delays in conducting the Program audit by the Office of Comptroller and Auditor-General (C&AG) of India,
   occasioned by the late submission of audited financial statements by GoHP. There were no significant
   adverse audit observations reported.

   Procurement. The Program envisaged procurement consisting mainly of goods (IT equipment), services
   (consultancies) and small civil works/contractors. Six different departments or agencies were expected to
   carry out procurement under the program. It was noted that GoHP would be following financial rules as
   there was no specific law on procurement. Also, standard bidding documents were to be prepared in line
   with various procurement methods.

   There were no procurement complaints and no high-value contracts awarded in line with agreed
   procurement exclusions. Unfortunately, despite this being recommended, the C&AG did not include a
   review of the procurement process in the Program audit. Nevertheless, procurement performance was
   rated Satisfactory throughout the Program period.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   Gender. Although the Program's activities were gender-neutral, gender sensitization training was provided
   for all FD staff as part of the operationalization of the grievance redress mechanism.



d. Other
   N/A



10. Ratings


                                                                                                 Page 24 of 26
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Himachal PFM Capacity Building Program (P156687)



                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                      IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


11. Lessons

The ICR presents seven lessons (p.28/29) based on the experience of this PFM capacity-building
Program in HP, two of which are worth highlighting here. Both these lessons pertain to
projects/programs that are technology-intensive:

    1. Investments in process automation ensure business continuity in times of crisis. This
       Program was IT-intensive and involved multiple DLIs directed towards automation of GoHP
       business processes. These very investments turned out to be helpful in maintaining some
       level of business continuity during the COVID-19 pandemic when lock-downs and social
       distancing made physical in-office presence challenging. When/if automation does not affect
       underlying business processes, the use of "back-up" paper files becomes imperative.
       However, where automation results in a thorough review and modification of the underlying
       business processes, there is a greater likelihood of success.
    2. Creating IT capacities up-front is a fundamental requirement in technology-intensive
       programs. While software development and implementation can be outsourced to solutions
       providers, in-house personnel with deep IT knowledge and project management skills are
       needed to ensure (a) that the right solutions are being applied and (b) that the changes will
       be sustainable.

A third lesson that can be drawn from this Program has to do with the "reform champions". The
GoHP PFM capacity building Program relied heavily on the championship of the designated nodal
officer (Additional Director Treasuries), and on the Additional Chief Secretary (Finance), who served
as chair of the steering committee. The lesson here is that it is best not to place all eggs in a single
basket. The ICR notes that there was turnover of key personnel in the participating departments;
however, the designated nodal officer provided continuity and leadership to the Program. What
would have happened in the absence of this nodal officer? Fortunately, the Additional
Chief Secretary (Finance) was also there to provide leadership and continuity. The Program was
very fortunate to have had both these senior officials throughout the implementation period.



12. Assessment Recommended?

  No



                                                                                                     Page 25 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Himachal PFM Capacity Building Program (P156687)



13. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a good overview of the Program and describes the key achievements as well as challenges.
The narrative is well-supported by evidence and analysis. For the most part, the ratings are justified and fair if
the achievement of targets are taken at face value.

There are, however, several shortcomings in the ICR. For example, the DLIs are not presented/discussed
individually in the Relevance section (Section A), where there is a single paragraph (para. 22) confirming that
the DLIs' relevance is rated High. In addition, the results indicators are reported on without question and no
time was taken to reflect on whether they really indicate results or whether the bar was set too low.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 26 of 26
