     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Myanmar SEA DRM Project (P160931)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0024133

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P160931                                  Myanmar SEA DRM Project

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Myanmar                                  Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-60800,TF-A5031                       31-Oct-2023                                           2,171,617.15

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Jun-2017                              31-Oct-2023

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                        117,000,000.00                                     1,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           4,570,357.86                                        60,274.46

 Actual                                       2,171,617.15                                        60,274.46




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan               Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   This project in Myanmar, was part of the Southeast Asia regional program on Disaster Risk Management
   (DRM) financed by the World Bank (WB). The program involved a series of projects (SOPs) in Myanmar,
   Cambodia and Lao People's Democratic Republic (Lao, PDR).

   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 15):


                                                                                                Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Myanmar SEA DRM Project (P160931)



   " To improve drainage services, and the structural performance of selected public facilities in Yangon,
   and enhance the capacity of the Government to facilitate disaster response ".

   For the purpose of this Implementation Completion and Results Report Review (ICRR), the PDOs are
   unpacked as shown below:

   PDO 1. To improve drainage services in Yangon.

   PDO 2. To improve the structural performance of selected public facilities in Yangon.

   PDO 3. To enhance the capacity of the Government to facilitate disaster response.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were five components (PAD, pages 16- 19).

   1. Strengthening financial planning for disaster resilience. The estimated cost at appraisal was
   US$20.00 million from the International Development Association (IDA) credit and US$1.00 million a trust
   fund (TF) grant. The actual cost was US$60, 274 from the TF grant. There were two sub-components:

   a. Support for Strengthening Disaster Resilience. This sub-component planned to provide technical
   assistance (TA) to strengthen the financial planning capacity of the Ministry of Planning and Finance
   (MOPF) for disaster resilience by: (i) mainstreaming disaster and climate resilience into investment planning
   and development processes; (ii) preparing a national disaster and climate risk financing strategy; and (iii)
   facilitating Myanmar's participation in the regional disaster risk pooling mechanism; and (iv) support for day-
   to-day implementation.

   b. Payment of Disaster Risk Insurance Premium. This sub-component planned to facilitate sovereign risk
   coverage (including, without limitation risk coverage) through the financing of premia for the Southeast Asia
   Disaster Risk Financing Facility (SEADRIF).

   2. Urban Flood Risk Management. The estimated cost at appraisal US$71.00 million (IDA credit). The
   actual cost was US$1.63 million. There were two sub-components:

   a. Drainage Improvements. Activities in this sub-component aimed to improve and increase the capacity of
   drainage infrastructure in selected locations in Yangon.

   b. Flood Risk Management Planning and Maintenance. Activities in this sub-component aimed at
   providing TA and maintenance equipment to build capacity for integrated flood risk management through; (i)
   developing and operationalizing an improved asset management system and improving drain maintenance;



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Myanmar SEA DRM Project (P160931)



   (ii) revising planning regulations and building codes for sustainable drainage systems; and (iii) identifying
   and preparing climate-resilient designs for drainage equipment and expansion.

   3. Safer Public Facilities and Critical Infrastructure. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$22.00
   million (IDA credit). The actual cost was US$0.25 million. There were two sub-components:

   a. Risk Reduction for Public Facilities and Infrastructure. Activities in this sub-component aimed at
   improving the structural performance of critical public facilities and infrastructure.

   b. Risk Assessment of Critical Infrastructure and Institutional Capacity Building. Activities in this sub-
   component aimed at institutional capacity building for: (i) carrying out multi-hazard of lifeline/critical
   infrastructure; and (ii) developing a digital database of building information.

   4. Project Management. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$3.00 million (IDA credit). The actual cost
   was US$0.21 million. This component planned to provide assistance for project implementation, including
   on coordination, technical matters, fiduciary management, social and environmental safeguards, monitoring
   and evaluation (M&E) and reporting.

   5. Contingent Emergency Response Component. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$0.00 million.
   The actual cost was US$0.00 million. This component aimed to provide immediate response to an eligible
   crisis or emergency, as needed. This component was not activated.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$117.00 million. The actual cost was US$2.17 million.
   The significant difference between the appraisal estimate and actual cost was due to the non-completion of
   many project activities, when the Bank paused all disbursements in accordance with OP/BP 7.30 on
   February 1, 2021, following the military takeover in Myanmar.

   Financing. The project was financed by an IDA Credit of US$116.00.million and a South East Disaster Risk
   Insurance Facility Program Multi-Donor Trust Fund (TF) Grant of US$1.00 million. US$2.11 million of the
   IDA credit and US60,724 of the TF Grant was disbursed.

   Dates. The project approved on June 15, 2017, became effective on December 14, 2017 and closed as
   scheduled on October 31, 2023.

   Changes. The project was restructured on March 12, 2020, as part of the Myanmar Active Portfolio bulk
   restructuring. This restructuring extended the timeline for submission of audit reports from six to nine
   months.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale



                                                                                                      Page 3 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Myanmar SEA DRM Project (P160931)



Country context. Myanmar ranked 2nd out of 187 countries in the 2016 Global Climate Risk Index and 9th
out of 192 countries in the Index for Risk Management (INFORM). Over the past 25 years, Myanmar had 24
disaster events (severe floods and landslides). These events affected 4 million people and caused US$4.7
billion in damages (estimated at 0.9% of GDP) and disproportionately affected the vulnerable segments of
the population.

Sector context. Myanmar is rapidly urbanizing, with concomitant demand for urban infrastructure and
public services. Much of this urban development was unplanned and inconsistent with the required
standards and regulations. Integrating risk management solutions in public investment planning was
especially needed in the growing Yangon City (a vital economic hub and the most populous city in
Myanmar) to reduce the costs of natural disasters and improve service delivery (such as urban drainage
and safer public facilities). Moreover, the Government was lacking disaster response financing instruments
to finance social protection activities in post-disaster situations. A comprehensive approach with pre and
post-disaster measures was important to the Government strategy.

Government and Yangon priorities. The project activities were well-aligned with the Government and
Yangon city priorities. The Government's "2016 Myanmar Economic Policy" articulated the need for
"establishing towns that are compatible with environmental conservation, enhancing public services,
creating more public places and protecting cultural heritage". The "2013 Strategic Urban Development Plan
for Greater Yangon" aimed to make the city more livable by conserving heritage and green spaces. The
project aimed at aiding Myanmar in fulfilling its international obligations under the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Agreement on Disaster
Management and Risk Reduction.

The PDO was well-aligned with the current Government strategy articulated in the Myanmar Sustainable
Development Plan (2018- 2030). The PDO was directly related to Strategy 3.6 "building a priority
infrastructure base that facilitated sustainable growth and economic diversification" and strategy 5.2
"increasing resilience to climate change, reducing exposure to disasters and shocks while protecting
livelihoods and facilitating a shift to a low-carbon growth pathway".

WB strategy. The project was well-aligned with the WB's 2014 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) and
the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2015 - 2017. The project activities were consistent with the
CPF pillars of : (i) capacity building of national and provincial agencies in governance and institutional
development: (ii) infrastructure and urbanization through critical infrastructure investments; and (iii) climate
change and disaster risk management through resilient investments and disaster risk financing and
insurance (DRFI).

The PDOs are relevant to the WB's CPF for 2020-2023. The project supported the CPF focus area of
"enhancing climate and disaster resilience and sustainable natural resource and environmental
management" and objective 3.1 "Strengthening the resilience of vulnerable communities against climate
and natural disaster risk". The CPF noted that the current patterns of urbanization in Myanmar (combined
with environmental degradation and climate change) were likely to heighten the risks of shocks and their
consequences.

The project was aligned with the WB's 2020 - 2025 Strategy for Fragility, Conflict and Violence (FCV)
countries. The fourth pillar of this strategy articulated the need for mitigating the spillovers of FCV (such
as forced displacement and shocks from climate and environmental change).



                                                                                                       Page 4 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Myanmar SEA DRM Project (P160931)



               Bank experience. This was the first WB project in the Yangon City Development Committee (YCDC). The
               project's financing was made possible by a subsidiary agreement between the Ministry of Planning and
               Finance (MOPF) and the YCDC to utilize the IDA credit by the Yangon regional government, an innovative
               and untested financing tool. The project activities included disaster risk financing and sectoral reforms
               aimed at increasing Myanmar's resiliency against adverse disasters. The project activities were articulated
               to provide upstream regulatory planning tools to disaster risk finance and analytics and downstream
               resilient investments in public infrastructure in Yangon City. Given the fragile country context, the scope of
               work was relatively ambitious. The relevance of PDO is rated as substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             PDO 1. To improve drainage services in Yangon.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change. The causal links between activities (inputs), outputs and outcomes were logical. The
                             intended outcomes were monitorable. The outputs of activities such as drainage improvements (through
                             improving culverts, main and interceptor drains and major outlet structures)and TA aimed at operationalizing
                             the Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) asset management system and preparing climate-
                             resilient designs for drainage equipment, were likely to help in realizing the outcome of improving drainage
                             services in Yangon. The outcomes were likely to aid in realizing the long-term outcome objective of
                             enhancing the resiliency of the Government and the population of Yangon from natural disasters. The theory
                             of change explicitly assumes that the improved drainage services are maintained by the government.

                             Outputs.

                                        TA to mitigate flood risks work was completed before the military takeover. TA related to the
                                         promotion of sustainable urban drainage systems (SUDS), originally conceived under the project, was
                                         completed by the United Kingdom Department for International Development (DFID).
                                        The activities were expected to improve drainage services through increasing the length of culverts
                                         and main interceptor drains, These activities were not completed as targeted.
                                        The project aimed at constructing five major outlet structures incorporating storm pumps. None were
                                         constructed.
                                        The SCADA system was not operationalized.

                             Outcomes.


                                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Myanmar SEA DRM Project (P160931)



The envisioned activities were expected to: (i) increase the number of people benefitting from flood
protection: and (ii) increase in area provided with improved drainage services.

      The number of poor people benefitting from improved drainage did not increase and remained at the
       baseline.
      There was no increase in area with improved drainage services.

Efficacy of this PDO is rated as negligible.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO 2. To improve the structural performance of selected public facilities in Yangon.

Rationale
Theory of change. The causal links between activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. The intended
outcomes were monitorable. The outputs of activities such as seismic retrofitting of identified public buildings
and facilities and establishing building information database were likely to help in realizing the desired
outcome of improving selected public facilities in Yangon. The theory of change explicitly assumes that the
building information database is regularly utilized and maintained by the government.

Outputs.

      A multi-Hazard Risk assessment of the Water Supply Network was completed in November 2018. This
       allowed the Yangon City Development Committee (YCDC) to identify the most vulnerable water
       supply system elements.
      None of the eight identified public buildings and facilities were retrofitted to withstand earthquakes at a
       "Life Safety" performance level (reference standards in Myanmar).
      The building information database was not established as targeted.
      There was no increase in the percentage of beneficiaries who were satisfied with the improved
       drainage services.

Outcomes.

The envisioned outputs were expected to increase the number of occupants benefitting from public facilities
strengthened to "Life Safety" performance level.

      The number of occupants benefitting from public facilities did not increase and remained as at the
       baseline.

Efficacy of this PDO is rated as negligible.


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 14
                     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                     Myanmar SEA DRM Project (P160931)




                  Rating
                  Negligible


                  OBJECTIVE 3
                  Objective
                  PDO 3. To enhance the capacity of the Government to facilitate disaster response.

                  Rationale
                  Theory of change. The causal links between activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. The intended
                  outcomes were monitorable. The outputs of activities such as capacity building for strengthening financial
                  planning for disaster resilience and payment of disaster risk insurance premium for the Southeast Asia
                  Disaster Resilience Insurance Facility (SEADRIF), were likely help the Government with the capacity to
                  access sovereign disaster risk insurance and the long-term development outcome of enhancing the resiliency
                  of Myanmar to natural disasters. The theory of change assumes that the Government regularly paid the
                  premium for disaster risk insurance.

                  Outputs.

                        A real-time flood risk monitoring platform was completed in July 2018. This platform provided the
                         Government with rapid and reliable information on impacts of floods for informed decisions during and
                         following flood events.
                        Myanmar signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) for establishing the SEADRIF in December
                         2018, with Lao PDR, Cambodia, Japan, Singapore and the SEADRIF Insurance Company and signed
                         the insurance policy with the SEADRIF Insurance Company on February 1, 2021.
                        The Ministry of Planning and Finance did not develop and adopt a strategy for building financial
                         resilience to disasters.

                  Outcomes.

                  The outputs described above were expected to ensure that Myanmar had the information and capacity to
                  access sovereign disaster risk insurance.

                        Myanmar's policy purchase agreement with SEADRIFF was cancelled on March 24, 2021 due to the
                         nonpayment of the premium following the military takeover.

                  Efficacy of this PDO is rated as negligible.



                  Rating
                  Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                                                                                                                  Page 7 of 14
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               Myanmar SEA DRM Project (P160931)



 OBJ_TBL




           OVERALL EFFICACY
           Rationale
           Overall efficacy is rated as negligible due to the significantly low achievement of targets. This is also largely
           due to the Bank pausing of all disbursements in accordance with OP/BP 7.30 on February 1, 2021, following
           the military takeover in Myanmar.



           Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
           Negligible                                                 External shock


 5. Efficiency
Economic analysis. A cost-benefit analysis was conducted at appraisal for component one to three project
activities. These activities accounted for 80% of the appraisal estimate. For component one activities, a
preliminary analysis of the portfolio of flood risk for Myanmar, Cambodia and Lao PDR showed savings in
excess of 27% for the countries. The savings were to come from catastrophe risk pooling and economies of
scale in operational costs, as compared to if the countries were to access the international reinsurance market
individually. When disaster risk insurance was provided through the regional pool, the Economic Internal Rate of
Return (EIRR) was estimated at 30%. With a 10% discount rate, the Net Present Value (NPV) was US$2.30
million on average. The benefits of drainage activities were assumed to come from benefits to road users due to
improved drainage infrastructure. The EIRR for this activity was 32.6%. With a 10% discount rate, the NPV was
US$86.88 million. The economic benefits of retrofitting public facilities were assumed to come from reduced
damages and avoiding disruption of economic activities. The EIRR was estimated at 18.2%. With a 10%
discount rate, the NPV was US$13.25. A simple average of the combined EIRR for the three activities was
26.6%.

Economic analysis was not conducted at closure, since key outputs such as civil works or insurance premium
payments, were not completed. The project supported only TA activities. This coupled with limited data
constrained quantifying the economic impact of project activities at project closure.

Administrative and Operational Issues during Implementation: Project disbursements were significantly
delayed, with only 1.8% of the loan disbursed when disbursements paused. The delays were on account of
several factors, such as: (i) continued setbacks in the SEADRIF premium payment due to the longer-than-
anticipated deliberations on operationalizing the SEADRIF insurance company; and (ii) procurement delays and
delays in preparing safeguards and impact assessment activities. The delays were exacerbated by factors over
which the project had no control, such as the military takeover on February 1, 2021 and the setbacks in the
wake of the COVID-19 pandemic restrictions.

Overall efficiency is negligible. The project generated few benefits as most project activities were not
completed.


Efficiency Rating
Negligible


                                                                                                                Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Myanmar SEA DRM Project (P160931)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      80.00
Appraisal                                                  26.60
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the Government strategy and Bank strategy is substantial. Both efficiency and
overall efficacy are negligible. Taking these ratings into account, the outcome is Highly Unsatisfactory, reflecting
severe shortcomings in the project's achievement of its objectives and in its efficiency.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Political risk. Following the military takeover in February 2021, the WB paused disbursements in
accordance with OP/BP 7.30. The ICR (para 74) notes that based on available information, violence and
crackdowns continue in Yangon. The ICR acknowledges that meaningful infrastructure is unlikely to restart in
the short term, and that WB was unable to verify the compliance with the Bank's environmental and social
safeguards.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank prepared this project based on the lessons learnt from previous Bank-financed projects in the
  Philippines, Sri Lanka and Vietnam. Lessons incorporated at design included: (i) assigning a vital role to
  the MOPF for promoting investments in risk reduction in planning and development; (ii) arranging for
  training and awareness raising by specialists, given the fragile country context: and (iii) combining
  physical investments with installing SCADA system to enable the key drainage infrastructure to be
  controlled and monitored remotely. The PAD utilized the pilot Agile program, a 2016 -2020 Bank initiative
  which aimed to reduce the project preparation time.



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Myanmar SEA DRM Project (P160931)



  As part of the regional SEADRM initiative, the project coordinated with the SEADRM projects in
  Cambodia and Lao PDR, which were also under preparation. The Bank prepared this project in close
  collaboration with other donor agencies who were financing complementary activities in Myanmar
  (including the Asian Development Bank (ADB), Japan International Coordination Agency (JICA)and the
  Italian Agency for Development Cooperation) to avoid duplication of activities.

  The preparation team identified several risks at appraisal including High risks relating to the political
  situation and governance, low institutional capacity and fiduciary risks. Even with mitigation measures,
  the project risk was rated as High at appraisal, given the fragile country context (PAD, para 48).

  The implementation arrangements made at appraisal were appropriate. The Ministry of Planning and
  Finance (MOPF) was in charge of implementing upstream national-level activities (components 1 and 5).
  The Project Management Unit (PMC) established by the Yangon City Development Committee (YCDC)
  was in charge of implementing activities in Yangon City (components two to four). The arrangements
  made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance were appropriate (discussed in section 10).

  There were moderate shortcomings at the Quality-at-Entry. One, the project activities, which included
  upstream regulatory activities at the national level and downstream activities at the Yangon City, were
  relatively ambitious, given the weak implementation capacity in the fragile country context, and two, there
  were shortcomings in M&E design (discussed in section nine).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank fielded ten implementation support missions and three technical missions focused on cultural
 heritage. Between missions, the Bank scheduled regular meetings with the implementing agencies and
 other development partners to provide appropriate technical guidance. In the wake of the restrictions
 occasioned by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Bank adapted by utilizing virtual check-ins for procurement
 and financial management. The continuity of leadership was maintained, with only one change in Task
 Team Leader (TTL) during implementation. During implementation, the Bank coordinated with DFID, which
 co financed TA activities pertaining to capacity building for the YCDC. Following the military takeover, the
 Bank paused all disbursements in accordance with OP/BP 7.30 on February 1, 2021.

 There were shortcomings in supervision. There could have been more candor in reporting progress on the
 ground. All Implementation Status Results Reports (ISRs) before the Bank paused disbursements in 2021,
 rated PDO as Satisfactory and implementation progress as either moderately satisfactory or above, even
 though only 1.8% of the loan was disbursed when disbursements paused. The ICR notes that this reflected
 the expectation that procurement of the large works contracts would commence imminently. However, with
 less than three years remaining till the closing date, it was unlikely that these major contracts would have
 been implemented and completed in time to achieve the PDO even in stable country situation. Second, the
 deficiencies in M&E were not rectified during implementation although the indicators and targets were
 envisaged to be reviewed during the Mid-Term Review (MTR) to better capture all the project



                                                                                                   Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Myanmar SEA DRM Project (P160931)



 activities. Overall Bank performance is rated as moderately unsatisfactory for the deficiencies in
 supervision.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework was logical, and the four outcome indicators (discussed in section four) were, for the
 most part, adequate for monitoring project performance. The indicators were specific, time-bound, with
 baselines and targets. The Ministry of Planning and Finance's (MOPF) Treasury Department was
 responsible for monitoring component one activities, the Project Management Unit (PMU) at the Yangon
 City Development Committee (YMDC) developed and maintained the M&E system for the project activities
 in Yangon.

 There were shortcomings in the M&E framework. Although the M&E design appropriately envisioned
 measuring the key outcome indicators (improved flood protection and occupants for public facilities) to be
 disaggregated by poverty level and gender, targets were not set for these sub-indicators. The key outcome
 indicators for component one activity were not measured sufficiently to capture the intended outcome, and
 component two activities (flood risk management planning and maintenance) were not tracked by any
 indicator.



b. M&E Implementation
  The methodology for data collection was straightforward and clearly specified, and values for almost all
  the indicators could be collated from existing departmental records or consultants' progress reports.

  The ICR (para 60) noted that although the M&E implementation was carried out as planned, albeit with
  significant delays. The regular reporting was often delayed and semiannual progress reports were
  submitted only three times, starting in August 2019 (that is, almost two years after the credit became
  effective), before the military takeover in February 2021. The survey for the baseline of project
  beneficiaries was significantly delayed and not implemented due to the COVID-19 pandemic. No
  adjustments were made to the Results Framework, although the indicators and targets were envisaged to
  be reviewed during the Mid-Term Review (MTR) to better capture all the project activities.



c. M&E Utilization


                                                                                                      Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Myanmar SEA DRM Project (P160931)



  The ICR (para 61) observed that the YCDC worked with the Bank to deliver updates on project
  implementation progress, highlighting issues affecting implementation to identify and resolve challenges.
  These reports helped to facilitate and inform discussions between the Bank and the implementing
  agencies on ongoing issues. The ICR acknowledges that there was little evidence to show that whether
  the M&E was utilized adequately to improve implementation progress.

  In sum, overall M&E is rated as Negligible. Although the M&E system as designed was generally
  sufficient to assess the achievement of the objectives, there were shortcomings with M&E
  implementation and little opportunity to utilize the M&E reports/system given the termination of the
  project.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Negligible

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under the World Bank safeguard
   policies. Four safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal (PAD, page 4): Environmental Assessment
   (OP/BP 4.01); Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); and Involuntary
   Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

   Environmental Assessment, Natural Habitats and Physical Cultural Resources. The PAD (para 74)
   noted that the negative environmental impacts were expected to be temporary and site-specific. The
   safeguards on natural habitats was triggered, as there were three threatened species of animals in Greater
   Yangon. The safeguards on physical cultural resources was triggered due to the possibility that such
   cultural resources could be found during construction. An Environmental and Social Management
   Framework (ESMF) was prepared and publicly disclosed to address these issues. The ratings for
   environmental safeguards were rated as Satisfactory before the military takeover and the subsequent pause
   in communications. However, most activities had not yet started when the Bank paused all project
   disbursements in Myanmar.

   Involuntary Resettlement. The PAD (para 71) noted that land acquisition impacts were expected to be
   minimal, as investments mainly focused on underground drainage systems. The retrofitting of existing public
   facilities was not expected to result in land acquisition, as they were located on public land free of
   encroachment. As detailed locations of investment were not known at appraisal, a Resettlement Action Plan
   (RPF) was prepared and publicly disclosed to address issues pertaining to land acquisition and
   resettlement. The performance rating for social safeguards was moderately satisfactory in October 2022
   due to the delay in completing key social inputs into the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and
   the resettlement planning process. The ICR does not provide details on whether there was land acquisition
   or resettlement.




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Myanmar SEA DRM Project (P160931)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management (FM). The Bank conducted a financial assessment of the MOPF at appraisal. The
   assessment concluded that most departments had adequate staff to manage the FM. The overall financial
   risk was, however, rated as Substantial, given the fragile country context (PAD, para 63). The ICR (para
   66) noted that following the military takeover, the Bank performed monthly desk reviews of the materials
   sent by the PMU. FM did not reveal any irregularities during implementation. The interim financial reports
   (IFRs) of acceptable quality were submitted up to March, 31, 2023. The final audited financial statement
   was due by June 30, 2024. The remaining funds for the project's designated accounts were refunded to the
   Bank in November 2023 and all expenditures incurred were documented in January 2024.

   Procurement management. The Bank conducted a procurement assessment of the MOPF at appraisal.
   The MOPF had experience with implementing Bank-financed projects. The assessment identified the risks
   associated with lack of an adequate legal framework and procedures, limited experience in international
   competitive procurement, language proficiency, delays in approval process and lack of a system for
   procurement complaints. Mitigation measures were incorporated at design. Even with the these measures,
   procurement risk was rated as substantial, given the fragile country context. The ICR (para 66) noted that
   procurement performance during implementation was rated as Satisfactory despite the delays but was
   downgraded to moderately satisfactory in 2021 after the military takeover when project procurement was
   suspended.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were no unintended impacts.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                               Highly
Outcome                                             Highly Unsatisfactory
                               Unsatisfactory
                               Moderately           Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                Shortcomings in supervision.
                               Satisfactory         Unsatisfactory
                                                                                Shortcomings in M&E
Quality of M&E                 Modest               Negligible
                                                                                implementation and utilization.
Quality of ICR                 ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Myanmar SEA DRM Project (P160931)



The ICR draws the following two main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. Careful management of the procurement process may be particularly needed in fragile
country contexts with weak implementation capacities. The procurement delays experienced in
this project demonstrated the need for simplifying the approval processes through avoiding large
contracts and instead organizing the civil works in smaller and more manageable contracts.

2. Effective coordination of development partners may raise the potential for targeted
interventions without duplication of effort. This project was prepared alongside complementary
activities financed by other development partners including the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and
DFID. The Bank's efforts to collaborate helped the project avoid duplication and achieve synergies.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear and well-written. The theory of change expounded in the text shows the clear logical links
between project activities (inputs), outputs, and desired outcomes. The text explicitly states the assumptions
underlying the theory of change. The ICR clearly acknowledges the issue with reporting progress in the
Implementation Status Results Reports. The ICR draws reasonably good lessons from the experience of
implementing this project.

Overall, the ICR quality is rated as Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 14
