     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CG-Statistics Capacity Building Project (P133731)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0024089

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P133731                                      CG-Statistics Capacity Building Project

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Congo, Republic of                           Poverty and Equity


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-88510,IDA-55000,IDA-70540               15-Jun-2019                                         35,784,053.89

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 09-Jun-2014                                  30-Sep-2023

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               4,800,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                               39,280,781.68                                              0.00

 Actual                                           35,789,653.42                                              0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Antonio M. Ollero            Donna Kaidou Jeffrey          Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. viii), the project development objective (PDO) of the
   Republic of Congo Statistics Capacity Building Project was "to (a) strengthen the National Statistical System
   (NSS) in the production and, dissemination of timely and robust statistics relevant for policies and decision
   making, and (b) promote the demand for statistical information."

   The PDO was clarified and restated at the second restructuring (in 2018): "to (a) strengthen the National
   Statistical System (NSS) in the production and dissemination of quality statistics relevant for policies

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CG-Statistics Capacity Building Project (P133731)



   and decision making, and (b) to promote the demand for statistical information." According to the
   second Project Paper (p. 6), the concept of robustness of statistics was not well-defined, while data quality
   could be more easily assessed using predefined international standards. Moreover, the term “timely”
   would be dropped because the project would finance only one round of data collection, while refocusing
   instead on building the foundation for future continuous and timely data production.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  21-Jun-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Institutional Development: Human Resources, Organizational Structure, and
   Infrastructure (at appraisal) / Improving the Institutional and Organizational Framework of the NSS (at
   second restructuring) (Appraisal: US$6.6 million; US$8.9 million at second restructuring and first additional
   financing (AF); US$12.8 million at third restructuring; US$13.1 million at the fourth restructuring and second
   AF; Actual: US$12.25 million) aimed to revise the organizational structure, strengthen the institutional
   capacity, and improve the information and communication technology infrastructure of the National System
   of Statistics (NSS), the Institut National des Statisque (National Institute of Statistics), and the Centre
   d’Application de la Statistique et de la Planification (Center for Applied Statistics and Planning).

   Component 2: Data Production, Dissemination, and Use of Statistics (at appraisal) / Improving the
   Production, Dissemination, and Use of Statistics (at second restructuring) (Appraisal: US$21.4 million
   ;US$19.5 million at second restructuring and first AF; US$13.8 million at third restructuring; US$22.7 million
   at the fourth restructuring and second AF;Actual:US$22.8 million) supported the production (including
   archiving), dissemination (through an open data portal), and use (for monitoring, knowledge, and literacy) of
   data and statistics pertaining to: demography, census cartography, human development (labor and
   employment, education, and health), household living conditions, poverty and inequality, economics,
   finance, prices, international trade, balance of payments, government finances, public debt, agriculture,
   forestry, mining, oil, and gas.

   Component 3: Project Management (Appraisal: US$5 million; US$6.3 million at third restructuring;
   US$7.2 million at the fourth restructuring and second AF; Closing: US$6.6 million) supported the project
   operating costs of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) of the Institut National des Statisque.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  CG-Statistics Capacity Building Project (P133731)



Dates. The project was approved on January 9, 2014, became effective on April 8, 2015, underwent a mid-
term review (MTR) on September 24, 2018, and closed on September 30, 2023, more than four years past
the original closing date of June 15, 2019.

Restructuring. The project was restructured four times, two of which involved AF.

      Restructuring No. 1: The first restructuring on February 3, 2017, with US$0.9 million disbursed
       (2.5 percent of the final IDA and IBRD financing of US$35.8 million), was prompted by the sharp
       decline in oil prices over 2015 and the attendant fall in government revenues, which weakened the
       assumption that Government contributions would principally fund this project. The restructuring: (a)
       tapped the IDA as the main source of financing instead, at least for ongoing activities, (b) revised the
       payment schedule for Government counterpart funds; (c) changed the percentage of expenditures to
       be financed in each category; and (d) changed the deadline for the submission of the Annual Work
       Plans (from December 31 to May 15).
      Restructuring No. 2: The second restructuring (and first AF) on June 21, 2018, with US$5.7
       million disbursed (15.9 percent of the final IDA and IBRD financing of US$35.8 million) : (a) slightly
       revised the project development objective (see Section 2.A); (b) provided AF of Euro (EUR) 20.1
       million (US$25 million equivalent) from the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
       (IBRD); and (g) increased the percentage of expenditures to be financed under the original IDA
       credit to 100 percent retroactive to January 1, 2018; (f) revised the total amount of counterpart
       funding to reflect the deposit of US$3.6 million made by the Government (instead of the US$28.2
       million initially programmed) and eliminated any further counterpart funding; (e) reallocated of funds
       between and within project components to provide funding for the construction of the new complex
       for the Institut National des Statisque and the Centre d’Application de la Statistique et de la
       Planification; (h) dropped some activities related to administrative data and institutional
       strengthening to focus on relevant priority activities; and (c) revised the results framework (for
       indicators to better capture project results); (d) extended the closing date by 22 months from June
       30, 2019 to April 30, 2021. The AF would fund new activities requested by the Government: (a) the
       construction of a new complex for the Institut National des Statistiques and the Centre d’Application
       de la Statistique et de la Planification ; (b) implementation of a general enterprise census; (c)
       introduction of performance-based payments as a means to increase motivation and performance of
       staff; (d) technical assistance to support the macroeconomic framework committee; and (e) support
       for the preparation of a National Development Plan (NDP).
      Restructuring No. 3: The third restructuring on April 14, 2021, with US$19.1 million disbursed
       (53.4 percent of the final IDA and IBRD financing of US$35.8 million): (a) cancelled activities that
       did not contribute to achieving the project development objective; (b) reallocated resources among
       the project components; (c) reallocated funds among the disbursement categories, triggered by the
       cancellation of the main activity under the Performance Based Payment; and (d) extended the
       closing date by 29 months to September 30, 2023.
      Restructuring No. 4: The fourth restructuring (and second AF) on March 30, 2022, with US$29.3
       million disbursed (81.8 percent of the final IDA and IBRD financing of US$35.8 million): (a) provided
       a second AF EUR 9 million (US$10 million equivalent) from the IDA. The AF would fill the
       funding gap in three activities: (a) the scholarship program; (b) the population and housing census;
       and (c) the national household budget survey.

Project Cost, Financing, and Borrower Contribution. The project was estimated to cost US$33 million
at appraisal -- US$4.8 million would be financed by an International Development Association credit
(covered by a Financing Agreement for SDR 3.1 million on July 7, 2014) and US$28.2 million by

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CG-Statistics Capacity Building Project (P133731)



   Government counterpart funds. The project cost, Bank financing, and Government counterpart funding
   changed from that at appraisal and approval with subsequent restructuring episodes.

         At the second restructuring (and first AF), the project was estimated to cost US$33.4 million --
           US$29.8 million would be financed by the IDA and the IBRD -- the original US$4.8 million from the
          IDA plus US$25 million in AF from the IBRD (covered by a Loan Agreement for EUR 20.1 million on
          June 21, 2018) -- and US$3.6 million by the Government.
         At the third restructuring, the project was estimated to cost US$32.9 million -- US$29.3 million would
          be financed by the IDA (US$0.5 million was cancelled) and IBRD and US$3.6 million by the
          Government.
         At the fourth restructuring (and second AF), the project was estimated to cost US$43 million --
          US$39.4 million would be financed by the IDA and IBRD (US$29.3 million plus US$10 million in AF
          from the IDA (covered by a Financing Agreement of EUR 9 million on March 30, 2022) and US$3.6
          million by the Government.

   The actual project cost was US$41.6 million -- US$35.8 million was disbursed by the IDA and IBRD --
   consisting of US$3.8 million of the revised IDA credit of US$4.3 million plus US$22.4 million of the IBRD
   loan of US$25 million (first AF) plus US$9.5 million of the IDA credit of US$10 million (second AF) -- and
   US$3.6 million by the Government.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objectives aimed to address development constraints posed by the country's weak statistical
system and were relevant to the country's development priorities and the Bank Group's country strategy.

Binding Constraints to Development. The Republic of Congo's weak statistical system was not helpful to
the country's development aspirations and was detrimental to its economic performance -- the inability of
the statistical system to provide reliable, timely, and accurate data about many aspects of the economy and
society hampered the Government's and the private sector's ability to accurately assess the country'
economic and social situation, to design strategies and craft policies that addressed pressing problems, and
to monitor and evaluate development programs. The statistical system was weak in many aspects: (a) the
country's Statistical Capacity Score -- measuring the quality of statistical practices, collection activities, and
data availability relative to benchmarks -- was 48 (out of 100) (World Bank, 2014, Bulletin Board on
Statistical Capacity); (b) the NSS, established by law in 2009 (Law No. 8-2009), was widely decentralized --
consisting of the High Commission of Statistics, the Institut National des Statistiques (National Institute of
Statistics), the statistical departments at line ministries, known as Direction des Etudes et de Planification
(Studies and Planning Departments), academic institutions, and various units of the Banque des États de
l'Afrique Centrale (Bank of Central African States); (c) the Institut National des Statistiques did not fully
exercise its role as coordinator of the NSS; (e) the NSS lacked qualified staff; and (e) all statistics for
development planning were outdated and likely inaccurate -- the last conclusive census was conducted in
1996; the results of the census in 2007 were not released; there were no complete national accounts since




                                                                                                       Page 4 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CG-Statistics Capacity Building Project (P133731)



               2009; and the last Enquête Congolaise Auprès des Ménages (Congolese Household Survey) was done in
               2011.

               Country Priorities. The project objectives were consistent with the country priorities at appraisal. The
               NDP 2012-2016 articulated a development strategy focused on five "pillars": Governance, Transformation
               of the Economy, Development of Economic and Social Infrastructures, Social Development, and "Balanced"
               Development. Turning to the "the institutional and technical arrangements for carrying out actions,
               monitoring outcomes, and assessing effects and impacts [of the NDP]," the document argues for
               "strengthening the institutional framework for implementation and monitoring," including "the
               mechanism and the statistical system used to monitor and assess the strategy and the implications for
               building the capacities of the units concerned, particularly the National Statistics Institute and
               the Directorate-General of Planning and Development."

               Bank Group Country Strategy. The project objectives were aligned with the Bank Group strategy in the
               Republic of Congo at closing. The Country Partnership Strategy for the Republic of Congo for the Period
               FY20-FY24 committed Bank Group support to the country's development strategy organized around two
               "strategic focus areas": Strengthen Economic Management to Create an Improved Climate for Private
               Sector-Led Growth and Reduce Fragility and Build Human Capital for Improved Social Inclusion. In
               implementing the partnership framework, the document asserts that "The WBG will support Congo’s
               statistical capacity and data production by helping to strengthen the NSS in producing and disseminating
               statistics for policy, decision making, and transparency. The Congolese NSS is supported through the
               Statistics Capacity Building IPF. The WBG provides technical support to: (i) a Population and Housing
               Census in 2019, which will provide demographic and social sector statistics; (ii) a Demographic and Health
               Survey (DHS); (iii) a household budget consumption survey; and (iv) economic and sector statistics through
               an enterprise census. The WBG also supports the establishment of a permanent system to monitor
               indicators for national accounts, price statistics, external trade, informal sector and agriculture, which in turn
               will strengthen NSS capacity to monitor progress on poverty reduction."


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen the NSS in the production and, dissemination of timely and robust statistics relevant for policies
                             and decision making.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. A three-pillar approach would strengthen the production and dissemination of
                             Government data and statistics. First, institutional capacity building would focus on the organizational
                             strengthening of the agencies of the NSS and emphasize human resource development, including formal

                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CG-Statistics Capacity Building Project (P133731)



education, on the job training, and mentorships of the staff in disciplines pertaining to statistics, informatics,
data science, demography, and economics. Second, technical support for data production and dissemination
would aid the development of statistical manuals and guidelines, the conduct of major surveys, including
the Cinquième Recensement Général de la Population et de l’Habitation and the Enquête Harmonisée sur les
Conditions de Vie des Ménages, the production of economic, financial, social, and sector statistics, and the
dissemination of data products through an open data portal. Third, infrastructure spending would provide a
building and equipment for the Institut National des Statisques and the Centre d’Application de la Statistique
et de la Planification and support these agencies with the necessary information and communications
technology (ICT) infrastructure to perform their functions. Improvements in institutional capacity would be
evidenced by an increase in the number of staff with formal degrees in statistics, informatics, and
demography; in data production, by an increase in the proportion of data and statistical products published by
the Institut National des Statisques that followed international standards; and in data dissemination, by an
increase in the proportion statistical output available to users through the open data portal.

Outputs. The project achieved the targets for five of the eight output indicators defined at appraisal.

      The institutional capacity assessment was completed for the staff of the Institut National des
         Statisques (National Institute of Statistics) and fourteen identified Direction des Etudes et de
         Planification (Studies and Planning Departments), achieving the target. The project supported the
         assessment of the Institut National des Statisques and the review of the technical partnership between
         the Institut National des Statisques and line ministries. The evaluations allowed the Institut National
         des Statisques to strengthen the capacities of the Direction des Etudes et de Planification to produce
         statistical yearbooks for the sector ministries.
        The share of sector statistical agencies that produced statistical information that were endorsed
         as official statistics by the Institut National des Statisques increased from 30 percent in the baseline
         to 66.7 percent by closing, partially achieving the target of 80 percent. Sixteen of the twenty four
         agencies producing statistics -- 12 of the 18 Direction des Etudes et de Planification, two of the three
         research centers, and two the three technical and financial partners of the Banque des États de
         l'Afrique Centrale (Bank of Central African States) -- produced statistical information endorsed
         as official statistics by the Institut National des Statisques.
        The African Chart of Statistics and the Code of Conduct were widely disseminated to the public,
         achieving the target. The principles of official statistics contained in the African Charter were widely
         disseminated by the Institut National des Statisques during Annual African Statistics Day in 2016,
         2019, 2020, and 2022.
        The execution rate of the activities under the project in the strategic Human Resource Plan was 0
         percent by closing, failing to achieve either the revised target of 100 percent or the original target of
         50 percent. Although the project supported the development of the Institut National des Statisques
         Human Resource Training Plan, the implementation of the plan proved difficult due to the lack of time
         and resources.
        A functional web-based data portal enabling access to the NSS data was developed and deployed --
         https://ins-congo-cg -- meeting the target. The Institut National des Statisques portal was made part
         of the Open Data Initiative of the African Development Bank, which collaborated with L'Observatoire
         Economique et Statistique d'Afrique Subsaharienne (AFRISTAT) to provide member countries with the
         facility to house the data.

There was no data, through closing, for the other output indicators.


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CG-Statistics Capacity Building Project (P133731)




      The percentage of staff with competences in core areas of statistics -- the baseline value was 45
       percent, and the target, 80 percent.
      The Institut National des Statistique has office spaces furnished with desks, chairs, computers, and
       operational Internet links by December 2015 -- these were not available in the baseline.
      The execution rate of the Information System Strategic Plan -- the baseline value was 0 percent, the
       target, 55 percent.

Outcomes. The project achieved the targets for two of the three outcome indicators defined at appraisal.

      The share of statistical products completed and published by the Institut National des Statisques that
       followed international standards rose from 25 percent in the baseline to 85.3 percent by closing,
       exceeding the target of 70 percent. According to the ICR, the following surveys, studies, and reports
       followed international standards: (a) three Enquête Congolaise Auprès des Ménages (Congolese
       Household Surveys); (b) five COVID-19 pandemic socio-economic effects surveys; (c) the Cinquième
       Recensement Général de la Population et de l’Habitation (Fifth Population and Housing Census)
       enumeration report, post-census results, and cartography report; (d) the Recensement Général des
       Entreprises du Congo (General Congolese Enterprise Census) identification report, principal results,
       and thematic analysis; (e) the survey of the informal sector; and (f) three Harmonized Index of
       Consumer Prices series. These products are available at the website of the Institut National des
       Statisques (https://ins-congo-cg).
      The share of statistical output available to users through the open data portal reached 72.1 percent by
       closing, exceeding the target of 60 percent. According to the ICR, the following data were available in
       the open data portal of the Institut National des Statisques (http://rcongo.opendataforafrica.org/): (a)
       the Enquête Congolaise Auprès des Ménages 1 et 2 (Congolese Household Survey 1 and 2); (b) the
       report on the household survey, with multiple indicators, (c) two Demographic and Health Surveys,
       with one deep dive report; (d) the Population Census data reports for 1984, 1996, and 2007; (d) the
       baseline survey on the use of integrated health centers; (e) the indicators from the seroprevalence
       survey of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS); (f) the baseline survey of the Agricultural
       Development and Rehabilitation of Rural Roads Project, and (f) various bulletins on the project.

There was no data, through closing, for the other outcome indicator.

      The Statistical Capacity Score -- the baseline value was 50, and the target, 70.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To strengthen the NSS in the production and dissemination of quality statistics relevant for policies and
decision making.

Revised Rationale


                                                                                                  Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CG-Statistics Capacity Building Project (P133731)



Theory of Change. The results chain remained unchanged. Only the composition of inputs changed: on
institutional development -- with the introduction of performance based pay for staff; on data production -- with
the conduct of the Recensement Général des Entreprises du Congo; and on infrastructure development --
with the construction of a completely new building for the Institut National des Statisque and the Centre
d’Application de la Statistique et de la Planification

Outputs. In addition to meeting the targets for five output indicators originally defined at appraisal (see
Objective 1) and retained at the second restructuring, the project achieved the targets for three output
indicators added during the second restructuring.

        The Institut National des Statisque - Centre d’Application de la Statistique et de la Planification
         (Center for Applied Statistics and Planning) complex was built and was operational by closing,
         achieving the target. Staff of the Institut National des Statisque started work, and faculty and students
         of the Centre d’Application de la Statistique et de la Planification, started school for academic year
         2023-24, at the complex in September 2023.
        The new Institut National des Statisque - Centre d’Application de la Statistique et de la
         Planification complex was only partially equipped and furnished by closing, partially achieving the
         target that it be fully equipped and furnished. The complex lacked a fully installed data center, some
         office partitioning, and some furniture because of budgetary shortfalls.
        The number of knowledge products on economic development issues produced with NSS data and
         disseminated to large audiences, rose from two in the baseline to nine by closing, partially achieving
         the target of ten. Four national accounts, three economic outlooks, and three commerce bulletins were
         produced and disseminated to large audiences.

Outcomes. In addition to meeting the targets for two outcome indicators originally defined at appraisal (see
Objective 1) and retained at the second restructuring, the project achieved the target for another outcome
indicator added at the second restructuring. There was also no data, through closing for the other outcome
indicator defined at appraisal and retained at the second restructuring (see Objective 1).

        The number of NSS staff with formal degree in statistics, informatics, or demography increased from
         40 in the baseline to 88 by closing, exceeding the target of 60. The additional 48 staff members
         consisted of: four statistics technicians, 9 statistics engineers, 12 statistics economists, 12 statistical
         application engineers, 10 demographers, and one data science and big data specialist.



Revised Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To strengthen the NSS in the production and dissemination of quality statistics relevant for policies and
decision making.

Revised Rationale


                                                                                                        Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CG-Statistics Capacity Building Project (P133731)



Theory of Change. The results chain remained unchanged. Only the composition of inputs varied: on
institutional development -- with the cancellation of staff mentorship, and the cancellation of performance-
based pay; on data production -- with the transfer of education and health data production to another Bank
operation.

Outputs. In addition to meeting the targets for eight output indicators defined at the second
restructuring (see Objective 1 - Revision 1), the project partially achieved the target for the output indicator
added at the third restructuring.

        The number of trained students who passed the admissions exams to regional statistics schools was
         17 percent by closing, exceeding the target of 15 percent. However, the target that at least ten
         percent of the candidates prepared to take the competitive exams were women was not met.

Outcomes. The project met the targets for three of the four outcome targets defined at the second
restructuring and retained at the third restructuring (see Objective 1 - Revision 1). There was also no data,
through closing for the other outcome indicator defined at appraisal and retained at the third restructuring (see
Objective 1 - Revision 1).



Revised Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 3
Revised Objective
To strengthen the NSS in the production and dissemination of quality statistics relevant for policies and
decision making.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change. The results chain remained unchanged. The composition of inputs remained unchanged
from the third restructuring.

Outputs. In addition to meeting the targets for the nine output indicators defined at the third
restructuring (see Objective 1 - Revision 2) and retained at the fourth restructuring, the project achieved the
target for a tenth output indicator added at the fourth restructuring.

        Data that were useful to identify people affected by climate change were collected through a
         population census or through a household budget survey, meeting the target.

Outcomes. While meeting the targets for the three outcome indicators defined at the third restructuring (see
Objective 1 - Revision 2) and retained at the fourth restructuring, the project failed to achieve the target for a
fourth outcome indicator added at the fourth restructuring.

        The number of United Nations Statistics Division Minimum List Gender Indicators that were available
         using data collected within the past five years was one, failing to meet the target of 35. According to
         the ICR: (a) one indicator -- the number and proportion of children aged 5-17 years who were
         engaged in child labor, by age, and by gender -- was available in the website of the Institut National

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CG-Statistics Capacity Building Project (P133731)



           des Statisques; and (b) ten other indicators were collected through the Enquête Harmonisée sur les
           Conditions de Vie des Ménages (Harmonized Survey on Household Living Conditions) but were not
           yet available at the website of the Institut National des Statisques.



Revised Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To promote the demand for statistical information.

Rationale
Theory of Change. A public outreach program by the Institut des Statistique and other agencies of the NSS
aimed at key users of data and statistics would build up demand by these consumers of information for the
products and services of the NSS. The key stakeholders would include Government policy makers and
bureaucrats, politicians, business enterprises, non-governmental organizations, international institutions,
scholars, researchers, and educators at academic institutions, the media, and the general public. This focus
on the demand side for data and statistics would complement the effort to strengthen data and statistical
production and dissemination, which comprised project interventions on the supply side. The achievement of
the objective would be evidenced by some measure of user satisfaction with the data and statistics produced
by the NSS following the innovations supported by this project.

Outputs. The project achieved the target for one of six output indicators defined at appraisal.

        The number of outreach thematic activities to key stakeholders, such as the media, politicians,
           policy makers, and academia, rose from the original one in the baseline to 11 by closing, exceeding
           the original target of three. The project conducted several outreach and dissemination events with at
           least 122 key stakeholders during the launch of statistical products.

There was no data, through closing, for the other five output indicators.

        A continuous survey program is designed and implemented -- there was no survey program in the
           baseline; the target was to have a continuous survey program.
          The proportion of beneficiaries who implement at least 60 percent of their annual release calendar
           activities -- the target was 80 percent.
          The Institut National des Statisques has in place a functional communications team -- there was no
           functional team in the baseline; the target was to have one.
          A code of conduct based on NSS core values is developed and disseminated -- no code of conduct
           was developed or disseminated in the baseline.
          The three best-performing project beneficiaries are nominated and rewarded in each category of the
           Data Quality Assessment Framework -- there were no nominations or rewards in the baseline.

Outcomes. The project partially achieved the target for one of two outcome indicators defined at appraisal.


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CG-Statistics Capacity Building Project (P133731)




      The User Satisfaction Index reached 63.7 at closing, partially achieving the target of 75. The project
       conducted two user satisfaction surveys -- the first in 2019 and the second in 2022 -- and focused on
       public agencies, private entities, and international organizations.

There was no data, through closing, for the other outcome indicator.

      The number of quote of statistics in the media -- there were five in the baseline; the target was 25.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To promote the demand for statistical information.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change. The results chain remained unchanged.

Outputs. The project achieved the target for one output indicator defined at appraisal (see Objective 2) and
retained at the second restructuring.

Outcomes. The project achieved the target for one outcome indicator defined at appraisal (see Objective 2)
and retained at the second restructuring.

There was no data, through closing, for the other outcome indicator added at the second restructuring.

      The annual growth rate of the number of hits on the Institut National des Statisques website -- the
       target was eight percent.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To promote the demand for statistical information.

Revised Rationale
Outputs. The project achieved the target for one output indicator defined at appraisal (see Objective 2) and
retained at the third restructuring.




                                                                                                  Page 11 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                CG-Statistics Capacity Building Project (P133731)



                            Outcomes. The project achieved the target for one outcome indicator defined at appraisal (see Objective 2)
                            and retained at the third restructuring.

                            There was no data, through closing, for the other outcome indicator added at the third restructuring.

                                   The annual growth rate of the number of hits on the Institut National des Statisques website -- the
                                     target was eight percent.



                            Revised Rating
                            Modest


                            OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 3
                            Revised Objective
                            To promote the demand for statistical information.

                            Revised Rationale
                            Theory of Change. The results chain remained unchanged.

                            Outputs. The project achieved the target for one output indicator defined at appraisal (see Objective 2) and
                            retained the fourth restructuring.

                            Outcomes. The project partially achieved the target for the outcome indicator added at the fourth
                            restructuring.

                                   The User Satisfaction Index reached 63.7 at closing, partially achieving the target of 75. The project
                                     conducted two user satisfaction surveys -- the first in 2019 and the second in 2022 -- focused on
                                     public agencies, private entities, and international organizations.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy of the original objective is rated modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                     Insufficient evidence

                                                                                                                              Page 12 of 21
              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
              CG-Statistics Capacity Building Project (P133731)



 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         The overall efficacy of the Revision 1 is rated substantial.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR2_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 2
         Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rationale
         The overall efficacy of Revision 2 is rated substantial.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR3_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 3
         Overall Efficacy Revision 3 Rationale
         The overall efficacy of Revision 3 is rated high.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 3 Rating
         High



 5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency. There was no systematic analysis done of the economic efficiency of the project either
at appraisal or at closing.

              The Project Appraisal Document claimed that "statistics was a public good; affected a wide range of
                economic, financial, and social domains; and presented positive externalities for many economic
                agents." Better data production and analysis would: (a) inform public debate on matters of economic,
                financial, and social concern; and (b) lead to better targeting of public policies and more efficient use of
                public resources. The document, however, admitted that measuring the economic benefit of the project
                was a challenge, and did not calculate any economic or financial rate of return. Rather, the PAD simply
                asserted that "Looking at all other alternatives to address the weakness of Republic of Congo statistical
                system, the proposed project was the least costly option," shifting from a cost-benefit to a cost-
                effectiveness paradigm that it however did not elaborate.


                                                                                                               Page 13 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CG-Statistics Capacity Building Project (P133731)



      Like the PAD, the ICR argued that the project outputs were not amenable to a detailed cost-benefit
       analysis but concluded that the project achieved economic efficiency by improving the baseline data in
       the socioeconomic, health, and agriculture sectors. Shifting to a cost-effectiveness framework, the ICR
       offered the following findings: (a) the average cost of a survey per household of US$203 in the Republic
       of Congo was relatively low compared to the same surveys in the region -- US$243 in Benin, US$311 in
       Niger, US$331 in Mali, and US$450 in the Democratic Republic of Congo; (b) the cost for the
       construction of the new Institut National des Statisque - Centre d’Application de la Statistique et de la
       Planification complex was reasonably low compared to other construction activities in the country --
       approximately US$470 per square meter.

Operational Efficiency. According to the ICR: (a) the project successfully completed all planned large
statistical operations in addition to advancing internal institutional reforms and finishing a large building
construction; (b) the project disbursed 97 percent of the IDA and IBRD financing (US$41.6 of US$43 million);
although (c) the time needed to accomplish some project activities was longer than planned -- it took 10 months
after approval for the project to become effective; the preparatory activities for all major surveys
(the Recensement Général des Entreprises du Congo, the Enquête Harmonisée sur les Conditions de Vie des
Ménages, and the Cinquième Recensement Général de la Population et de l’Habitation) took longer than
originally planned; and the construction activities were delayed for various reasons, with works starting three
years after approval. While the second restructuring extended the project completion date by 22 months due to
the AF, the third restructuring had to extend the project completion date by another 29 months to compensate
for delays in project implementation.

Based on the foregoing evidence, this ICR Review rates the efficiency as modest, lower than the ICR rating of
substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Based on a split evaluation, the overall outcome of the project is rated moderately satisfactory.



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CG-Statistics Capacity Building Project (P133731)



                                                          Original     Revision 1 Revision 2 Revision 3
Relevance of Objectives                                   High
Efficacy:
Objective 1 - To strengthen the NSS in the production
and, dissemination of timely and robust statistics    Substantial
relevant for policies and decision making.
Objective 1 - Revised - To strengthen the NSS in the
production and dissemination of quality statistics                   High         High         High
relevant for policies and decision making
Objective 2 - To promote the demand for statistical
                                                      Negligible     Modest       Modest       Substantial
information
Overall Efficacy                                      Modest         Substantial Substantial High
Efficiency                                            Modest
                                                      Moderately     Moderately Moderately Moderately
Outcome Rating
                                                      Unsatisfactory Satisfactory Satisfactory Satisfactory
Outcome Rating Value                                  3              4            4            4
Amount Disbursed, US$ million                         5.7            19.1         29.3         35.8
Disbursement %                                        15.9           53.4         81.8         100
                                                                     53.4-        81.8-        100-
Weight Value                                          15.9=15.9
                                                                     15.9=37.5 53.4=28.4 81.8=18.2
Total Weights                                         0.48           1.50         1.14         0.74
Overall Outcome Rating                                3.86 = Moderately Satisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
    Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to the sustainability of the development outcomes are substantial.

Institutional Capacity Risk. Although the project helped upgrade the institutional capacity of the Institut
National des Statistique in many aspects of data production, dissemination, and use, the ability of the Institut
National des Statistique to effectively lead and coordinate the NSS remains a work in progress. The
institutional reform agenda remains full, according to the ICR, with the next priorities centered on: (a) the
adoption of operating processes developed under the project as standard operating procedures of the NSS;
(b) the upgrading of the sectoral statistical services, after the initial focus on the Institut National
des Statistique and the Direction des Etudes et de Planification; (c) the "huge shortage of quality staff" even
after recent staff upgrades supported by this project; and (d) the implementation of the training plan
developed by the Institut National des Statistique.

Budgetary Risk. With the Republic of Congo undergoing a medium-term fiscal consolidation program
supported by an Extended Credit Facility arrangement with the International Monetary Fund (for SDR 234
million over 2022-2024), budgetary support for statistical capacity building will compete with other spending
priorities of the Government. According to the ICR, budgetary constraints are reflected in: (a) a low budget
for operations and maintenance for the new Institut National des Statisque - Centre d’Application de la
Statistique et de la Planification complex; (b) a lack of funds to finance scholarships and stipends for

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CG-Statistics Capacity Building Project (P133731)



students to study at regional African statistics schools; and (c) some uncertainty about the prospects for
hiring 34 out of the 48 recent graduates from the regional statistical school as full time professionals of the
NSS (the 34 had been working as interns with financial support from the project).

Risk Mitigation. Approved by the Bank for US$290 million in September 2023 and for an additional US$150
million in March 2024, the Harmonizing and Improving Statistics in West and Central Africa - Series of
Projects II (P180085) aims to help Cameroon, Chad, the Central African Republic, the Communauté
Économique et Monétaire (Central African Economic and Monetary Community), and most recently Gabon
and the Republic of Congo (with US$60 million of the AF) to "improve country statistical performance,
regional harmonization, data access and use, and to enhance modernization of the statistical system in
participating countries." This new operation for the Republic of Congo will help build on the progress made
by the Statistics Capacity Building Project in strengthening the NSS by focusing this time on: (a) further
equipping the new Institut National des Statisque - Centre d’Application de la Statistique et de la
Planification complex; (b) conducting a household budget survey in 2025; and (c) supporting the production
of harmonized data for policy support of climate change mitigation and adaptation related to the
country's Contribution Déterminée Au Niveau National (Nationally Determined Contribution) of 2021. This
new operation will help sustain the development outcomes achieved by the Statistics Capacity Building
Project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Analytical Underpinning. The project was informed by diagnostic work produced by the Government,
  international agencies, and peer countries. A review of the NSS, conducted in 2011 by the Republic of
  Congo, the Partnership in Statistics for Development in the 21st Century (PARIS21), the Observatoire
  Economique et Statistique d’Afrique Subsharienne (Economic and Statistical Observatory of Sub-
  Saharan Africa), the statistical office of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the statistical office of
  Benin examined the governance practices, organizational structure, strategic planning, service to
  users, funding, and sustainability of the Institut National des Statisques. While the study determined that
  the National Strategy for the Development of Statistics was sound and that Government was firmly
  committed to reforming the NSS, it concluded that: (a) the NSS was poorly led and coordinated; and (b)
  the lack of qualified staff and professional skills throughout the system made it extremely difficult to
  produce reliable statistics.

  Lessons Learned. The Bank had supported statistical capacity building in at least twenty countries in
  Sub-Saharan Africa since 2004. The Bank drew on lessons learned from this history to design an
  operation that covered three vital initiatives -- the institutional development of statistical agencies
  (covering the legal framework, organizational structure, statistical standards and methodologies, and
  training of staff), the production of statistics and statistical products (censuses, surveys, administrative
  data systems, economic statistics, and social sector data), and the improvement of the physical
  infrastructure for statistical production and dissemination (the information technology infrastructure and
  data management systems). The project advanced all three pillars in the two project objectives.

  Collaboration with Development Partners. The Bank helped create a Statistic Thematic Group of
  international partners, for which it acted as permanent secretary, to coordinate international support by

                                                                                                      Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CG-Statistics Capacity Building Project (P133731)



  development partners for the implementation of the country's National Strategy for the Development of
  Statistics. The coordinating group would also help avoid random interventions and duplication of
  activities, which had marred the implementation of the predecessor Programmatic Statistics Development
  Plan in 2005-09



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision. The Bank supervised the implementation of the project regularly. The Bank fielded
 fifteen supervision missions over the ten-year duration of the project, for which it filed 15 Implementation
 Status and Results Reports (ISRs). According to the ICR, the Bank: (a) dispatched senior technical
 experts with the supervision missions; (b) provided advice and training to the PIU on procurement, financial
 management, and environmental and social risk management; (c) fielded technical experts every two
 months to supervise the construction of the new Institut National des Statisque - Centre d’Application de la
 Statistique et de la Planification complex; (d) often resolved issues readily by identifying emerging risks and
 problems and raising them with senior Bank management; (e) communicated directly with senior
 Government officers; and (f) complemented in-person meetings in-country with virtual sessions. Three
 Task Team Leaders (TTLs) managed Bank supervision over ten years. Because two of the TTTLs had
 worked with the project since its inception, the transition was not difficult, according to the ICR. This was
 less so with the Environmental and Social Specialist, where turnovers among twelve specialists caused
 disruptions.

 Adaptation. The Bank responded readily to the fiscal straits faced by the Government in 2015 by
 restructuring the project early to shift the burden of financing from the Government to the Bank. The Bank
 processed one more restructuring and two AF quickly and efficiently.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Bank defined a results framework at appraisal with five outcome indicators and thirteen output
 (intermediate results) indicators to measure the achievement of the project objectives (the Project Appraisal
 Document also supplied five intermediate results indicators to measure project management -- not part of
 the assessment of efficacy). The results indicators had baseline and target values and identifiable data


                                                                                                    Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CG-Statistics Capacity Building Project (P133731)



 sources -- one from the Bank (the Statistical Capacity Score) and the rest from the Institut National des
 Statisques, including the Project Implementing Unit, and other ministries.

 The M&E plan called for the Institut National des Statisques, as the project implementing entity, to monitor
 and evaluate the progress of the project and to prepare quarterly project reports to be submitted to the
 Bank within 45 days from the end of each reporting period. The operation's Project Management
 component would fund M&E activities and the Project Implementing Unit would hire an M&E specialist.

 The Bank also planned for a "functional M&E" -- a system of quarterly workshops attended not only by the
 High Commission on Statistics and the Institut National des Statisques but also by the Statistics Thematic
 Group (see Section 8.A) to assess progress with the project and to learn from the collective experience of
 this and similar projects supported by development partners. Discussions at these periodic workshops
 would "go beyond quantitative measurement of progress to focus on qualitative improvements that
 contributed to the broad goal of the project," according to the PAD.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Bank revised the results framework and the set of outcome and output indicators during restructuring
  and at each AF (see Section 4). That many of these results indicators would be dropped at succeeding
  restructuring episodes suggest that they were not well considered. By closing, the project had
  five outcome indicators, three of which survived from appraisal, and eleven output indicators, six of which
  survived from appraisal, albeit some were reworded, or their targets changed.

  The M&E design was implemented as planned. The Government submitted project reports to the
  Bank. The Bank monitored the project regularly and produced ISRs (see Section 8.B), Aide Memoires,
  and Back-to-Office Reports to record and report on progress with the project.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data were useful for restructuring the project February 2017 and April 2021.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards. The project was listed as an environmental assessment category
   C project at appraisal ("no environmental review is required"), but reclassified as an environmental
   assessment category B project at the second restructuring and first AF ("some type of environmental
   assessment/review/plan is required, but limited in scope and flexible in structure, reflecting corresponding
   the limited environmental impacts of the project and the anticipated relatively straightforward
   mitigation"). The restructuring, which involved the construction of a new Institut National des Statisque -

                                                                                                   Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CG-Statistics Capacity Building Project (P133731)



    Centre d’Application de la Statistique et de la Planification complex triggered safeguards policies OP/BP
   4.01 (Environmental Assessment) because of potential negative environmental and social impacts, OP/BP
   4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources) in anticipation of potential impacts on physical cultural resources
   from the construction, and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) to manage any potential risks related to
   resettlement. The project complied with the requirements of all triggered safeguards policies during
   implementation, including the preparation and public disclosure of the Environmental and Social
   Management Framework and Resettlement Policy Framework prior to the start of project activities. There
   were no fiduciary compliance issues during implementation, according to the ICR, and the project was rated
   satisfactory in the last ISR of January 30, 2023, for overall safeguards and for compliance with OP/BP 4.01,
   OP/BP 4.11 and OP/BP 4.12.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement. The project complied with all rules and plans related to procurement, according to the ICR,
   although procurement activities were interrupted during the COVID-19 pandemic. PIU benefitted from
   hands-on training on procurement provided by the Bank task team, including on the use of the Bank's
   Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement, the online system that helped the Bank and borrowers
   plan, record, and track key stages of the procurement process. Procurement was rated satisfactory in the
   last ISR, from moderately satisfactory until May 2021.

   Financial Management. Financial management was rated satisfactory in the last ISR. However, there
   were problems with financial management earlier, meriting a moderately satisfactory rating until November
   2021: (a) hurdles with releasing Government counterpart funds after the first disbursement (a condition for
   effectiveness) delayed project implementation; (b) fifty tablets purchased for the Recensement Général
   des Entreprises du Congo were lost and had to be compensated for by the Government; (c) approximately
   US$6,000 was also misappropriated and was similarly compensated for by the Government.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                   The ICR rated efficiency as
                                                                                   substantial. This ICR Review
                                                                                   rates efficiency as modest, due
Outcome                          Satisfactory            Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                   to poor operational efficiency
                                                                                   and the lack of a robust basis for
                                                                                   judging economic efficiency.

                                                                                                     Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CG-Statistics Capacity Building Project (P133731)



Bank Performance                   Satisfactory            Satisfactory
                                                                                     There were too many changes
Quality of M&E                     High                    Substantial               to the results indicators that
                                                                                     were not well considered.
Quality of ICR                     ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

Two lessons are drawn from the ICR, with some adaptation.

In operations where government counterpart is the principal source of project financing, the
government must firmly earmark funds for the project. The Bank also needs to verify the ready
availability of these funds in a dedicated account at the public treasury. In this project, the
Government committed to financing US$28.2 of the project cost, and the Bank, US$4.8 million. It
took the Government 10 months to release the initial US$3.6 million of its commitment, delaying the
effectiveness of the project by as many months. Then the Government could not finance the
balance, necessitating a restructuring of the project and the first AF of US$25 million.

The Bank needs to clearly and explicitly verify operational assumptions embedded in a
project's design and assess all angles of operational risk. In this project, several assumptions
turned into operational problems. For example, it was assumed that the performance-based
pay proposal would be readily accepted by the staff of the Institut National des
Statisques. However, the staff deemed the demands for performance pay to be too high. In another
case, it was expected that international experts and the local staff would work together
smoothly. However, resentment about international-local pay disparities derailed cooperation.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is consistent with OPCS guidelines on ICRs for investment project financing operations. Considering
four episodes of changes to the project activities, the output and outcome indicators, the project cost and
financing, and the project schedule, the ICR presents a detailed account of the evolution of the project over a
lengthy period. The efficacy assessment is outcome-oriented and based on the degree of achievement of the
results targets. The efficiency assessment is too generous, however. The ICR presents ample evidence to
support its assessment of the Bank’s performance at design and implementation, including the analytic
underpinnings of the project, the lessons learned from similar Bank operations, and the extent of collaboration
with other development partners. The ICR draws lessons that would be valuable to other statistical capacity
building operations in similar settings.



                                                                                                       Page 20 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  CG-Statistics Capacity Building Project (P133731)




a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                   Page 21 of 21
