     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN - Integrated Agricultural Development (P164326)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023980

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P164326                                     GN - Integrated Agricultural Development

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Guinea                                      Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-62570                                  19-Jun-2023                                          35,454,279.56

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 09-Jul-2018                                19-Jun-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             40,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              36,999,973.96                                              0.00

 Actual                                          35,454,279.56                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally                Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Integrated Agricultural Development Project (PDAIG) as
   articulated in the Financing Agreement (FA, page 5) was identical to the one stated in the Project Appraisal
   Document and aimed to:

   "Increase agricultural productivity and market access for producers and agricultural small and
   medium enterprises (SMEs) in selected value chains in project areas."


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN - Integrated Agricultural Development (P164326)



   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on the following two objectives:

   1. To increase agricultural productivity for producers in selected value chains in project areas.

   2. To increase market access for producers and agricultural small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in selected
   value chains in project areas.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following four components:

   1. Increasing agricultural productivity (appraisal cost: US$20.37 million; actual cost: US$16.08
   million). This component aimed to increase productivity of the selected value chains (rice, maize, potato,
   eggs, and fish) in the project area through climate-smart intensification of selected production systems
   focusing on enhancing water management and facilitating access to improved technologies and innovation.
   This component was comprised two subcomponents:

    1.1. Improving water management. This included: (a) rehabilitation and/or development of small-scale
   irrigation schemes totaling about 3,000 ha; (b) adoption of simple, efficient, and labor-saving water
   management technologies to modernize production systems; and (c) creation or strengthening of water
   user’s associations.

   1.2. Increasing access to technology, innovation, and advisory services. This included: (a)
   multiplication of certified seed by cooperatives or firms to increase its availability and lower its cost to
   farmers; (b) technical assistance, training, and equipment for public and private advisory services to
   strengthen technology transfer systems; and (c) development of an e-extension platform, using digital
   solutions and applications to modernize advisory services and extend their reach.

   2. Increasing market access (appraisal cost: US$12.66 million; actual cost: US$8.01 million). This
   component aimed to help producers, small-scale processors, and their organizations to increase the
   production and commercialization of marketable surplus for the targeted agricultural value chains (rice,
   maize, potato, egg, and fish) in the project area. This component was composed of three subcomponents:

   2.1. Strengthening producer organizations. This included: (a) establishing and/or strengthening
   professional and interprofessional entities; (b) organizing and funding knowledge-sharing events, activities,
   and tools; and (c) rehabilitating and/or building small, community-managed infrastructure for market access.

   2.2. Promoting business development services. This included: promoting business development plans
   for individuals, producer groups, small processors, agribusiness SMEs for activities such as agricultural
   intensification, mechanization, small-scale processing, efficiency improvements, marketing, and storage



                                                                                                        Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GN - Integrated Agricultural Development (P164326)



  investments. Women entrepreneurs and women-led producer organizations would be encouraged to
  participate through a targeted information campaign.

  2.3. Financing productive investment projects. This included co-financing and implementation support
  for competitively selected investment initiatives of producers, small processors, and marketers. The project
  would co-finance microprojects costing up to US$5,000 for individuals and US$10,000 for groups, and SME
  sub-projects ranging from US$10,000 to US$50,000 for groups of investors and agricultural SMEs.

  3. Strengthening institutional capacity (appraisal cost: US$5.20 million; actual cost: US$10.06
  million). This component aimed to strengthen institutional capacity, focusing particularly on agricultural
  statistics and planning for a rapid response in the case of severe crises and emergencies. This component
  was composed of two sub-components:

  3.1. Strengthening the public agricultural statistics system. This included: (a) developing and testing
  the methodology; (b) collecting, entering, processing, and analyzing the data; and (c) preparing and
  disseminating reports.

  3.2. Contingency Emergency Response. This was designed to create a financing mechanism within the
  project for emergency demands arising from natural disasters and other shocks with a zero-dollar
  provision.

   4. Project coordination and implementation (appraisal cost: US$4.33 million; actual cost: US$5.46
  million). This component would finance the following activities: (i) expenses incurred in implementing the
  project through the Project Coordination and Implementation Unit (PCIU) as well as the participating
  implementing agencies and various service providers; (ii) technical assistance provided through
  consultancies, audits, and training to enhance implementation capacity of the PCIU; (iii) communication,
  knowledge production and sharing, and outreach activities; (iv) monitoring and evaluation of project
  outcomes and impacts; (v) citizen engagement; (vi) oversight of social and environmental safeguard
  policies; and (vii) institutional strengthening to ensure sustainability of the project’s results.

  Revised Components. The structure of the components was not changed, but with the potential fall-out
  from the prolonged disruptions triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic, US$4.0 million was reallocated from
  other activities to the CERC sub-component (as part of the first restructuring see below) for: (i) providing
  improved inputs to producers and vulnerable households to forestall a sharp decline in their productivity and
  livelihoods; (ii) establishing a food security platform, including a mobile platform within the National Agency
  for Agricultural Statistics to monitor stocks and prices of agri-food products and the impact of COVID-19 on
  food and nutritional security and on agriculture as a whole; (iii) supporting SMEs in collaboration with the
  International Finance Corporation (IFC) and the Investment Promotion Agency through an online
  competition of innovative subprojects with a positive impact on agriculture and agribusiness; and (iv)
  supporting cooperatives and SMEs operating in production, processing, marketing, logistics areas,
  providing matching grants through online applications to facilitate the supply of food to consumption centers
  and to promote innovative ventures.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN - Integrated Agricultural Development (P164326)



   Project Cost. The total project cost was estimated at US$42.56 million. This amount was revised down to
   US$36.99 million. The actual cost according to the ICR (Data sheet, page 2) was US$39.61 million.

   Financing. The project was financed through an Investment Project Financing (IPF) in the amount of
   US$40.00 million from IDA. The actual amount disbursed was US$35.45 million or 88.6% of the appraisal
   amount (ICR, Data sheet, page 2). The ICR (paragraph 11) reported that US$3.00 million of the project
   funds were cancelled due to the cancellation of some irrigation contracts that were performing poorly (see
   below).

   Borrower Contribution. The Borrower was expected to contributed US$1.10 million from the Government
   of Guinea and US$1.50 million from the project beneficiaries. The actual amounts of counterpart funds
   contributed were US$2.50 million and US$1.66 million of counterpart funds from the Government and the
   beneficiaries, respectively.

   Dates. The project was approved on July 9, 2018 and became effective eight months later on March 8,
   2019. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on May 24, 2021, about three years after effectiveness.
   The MTR date was timely conducted and in line with the suggested date in the PAD (paragraph 63) "a Mid-
   Term Review will be conducted no later than June 30, 2021." The project closed on June, 19, 2023, which
   was the original expected closing date at appraisal. The project was restructured twice, both level 2, as
   follows:

   1. On February 20, 2021, when the amount disbursed was US$17.00 million, in order to reallocate funds
   between disbursement categories. Reallocations into the CERC were done to mitigate the impact of
   COVID-19 on agriculture (ICR, paragraph 16).

   2. On June 14, 2023, when the amount disbursed was US$34.13 million, in order to reallocate funds
   between disbursement categories and cancel US$3.00 million, since irrigation development contracts were
   terminated because of poor performance, and there was not sufficient time in the project for a fresh tender
   (ICR, paragraph 11).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. At the time of the project’s appraisal in 2018, Guinea’s poor economic diversification
and very low agricultural productivity were major impediments to poverty reduction. Agriculture employed
approximately 52% of the active population and provided income for 57% of rural households, where
women play a central role. However, the agriculture sector had constantly been characterized by very low
productivity, making the poor struggle to meet their food security needs, limiting their ability to grow their
income. Constraints to agricultural productivity included low use of improved seed and fertilizer, poor
market access, limited access to finance, and negligible value addition, among others. This project would
enhance agricultural productivity, access to markets, and improve food and nutrition security through
supporting the rice, maize, potato, eggs, and fish value chains. The project would also contribute to rural
poverty reduction.



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN - Integrated Agricultural Development (P164326)



Previous Bank Experience. The World Bank Group (WBG) had accumulated relevant experience from
the Bank-financed West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program (WAAPP, P122065) which closed on 31-
Dec-2019. Also, the Bank benefited from the experience of other projects including: the Guinea Agricultural
Support Project (P148114), the Senegal River Basin Multi-Purpose Water Resources Development Project
(P131323), and the Niger River Basin Water Resources Development Program in Guinea (P093806).
Overall, the Bank had a solid experience in designing and implementing agricultural projects similar to
PDAIG.

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with WBG-Guinea Country
Partnership Framework (CPF, FY2018-FY2023). The project supported the third focus area of the CPF
related to increasing agricultural productivity and economic growth. The project also contributed to three
CPF cross-cutting themes: women’s empowerment, economic diversification and resilience. Further, the
project was expected to contribute to the achievement of the WBG’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty
and boosting shared prosperity, as well as the realization of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) of
no poverty and zero hunger by 2030.

At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with WBG-Guinea Country Partnership Framework (CPF,
FY2018-FY2023) which focused on greater economic diversification and higher agricultural productivity.
The continued relevance of the PDO was emphasized further through the approved IDA-financed Guinea
Commercial Agriculture Development Project (P164184, approved by the Board on 22-Sep-2020 and
closing on 31-Jan-2026) which, among other things seeks to incentive farmers to invest in productivity and
fosters connectivity to markets.

Consistency with Government Strategies/Priorities. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with
Government's agricultural development agenda as defined in the National Economic and Social
Development Plan (PNDES). The project would contribute to PNDES objectives of reducing the incidence
of poverty (from 55% in 2012 to 45% by 2020) and accelerate growth of the private sector by focusing on
increasing agricultural productivity and strengthening value chains. The project also supports Guinea’s
gender policy (Politique National Genre -2011) by increasing women’s access to productive resources and
income-earning opportunities.

At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the National Agricultural and Food Security and
Nutrition Investment Plan (PNIASAN, 2018–2025) which was supported by the African Union and Economic
Community of West African States. PNIASAN emphasized themes of boosting productivity of staple crops,
improving access to markets, and promoting women and youth in agriculture. The PDO was also in
line consistent with the Economic Recovery Plan (Plan de Relance Économique, or PRE) adopted by the
current transition government. The PRE focused on improving productivity, diversifying exports, and
improving living standards.

Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. While the PDO statement was pitched at an
adequate level of ambition, it could have benefited from better formulation to improve clarity. For example,
improving productivity (i.e. crop yields) was mainly for producers or farmers in the project area, while
improving market access was for producers (farmers) and small and medium SMEs. However, the
formulation of the PDO statement bundled everything together, which did not accurately reflect the project
ToC. At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the Bank strategies and the Government
strategies/priorities. Therefore, Relevance of Objectives is rated High.




                                                                                                   Page 5 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      GN - Integrated Agricultural Development (P164326)


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase agricultural productivity for producers in selected value chains in project areas.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported the following activities:

                             1. Develop small scale irrigation systems to reduce dependence on rainfall and increase cropping intensity,
                             and strengthen water user associations (WUAs) to establish a more sustainable infrastructure. The expected
                             outputs included: increasing the irrigated area and strengthening WUAs with more involvement of women and
                             youth. The expected outcomes were better water control and irrigation management and better maintenance
                             of infrastructure by WUAs.

                             2. Support the diffusion of climate smart agriculture (CSA) technologies and technology innovations which
                             would improve crop management and reduce post-harvest losses, support the multiplication of improved
                             seeds which would improve productivity, and strengthen extension services to better support farmers. The
                             expected outputs included an increase in the area covered with climate smart agriculture and technology
                             innovations, number of men and women benefitting from CSA and technology innovation, improved seed
                             produced, extension agents trained, and application of e-extension through digitization. The expected
                             outcomes were better access to improved technologies and CSA by men and women, increased used of
                             improved seeds, and more men and women accessing advisory services.

                             All these activities combined were expected to contribute to increasing agricultural productivity for producers
                             in selected value chains in project areas. Anticipated long-term impacts included: improved resilience to
                             climate change, improved food security with improved productivity which would also result in more marketable
                             produce, development of sound commercial agriculture, all of which would result in more income for
                             producers and other operators in the targeted value chains, job creation and less poverty.

                             The ToC reflected relevant activities that were directly connected to the outputs, and outcomes in a plausible
                             causal chain. However, the ToC in the both the PAD and the ICR lacked the critical assumptions that
                             underpinned the achievement of the PDO. In a further communication with IEG, the project team explained
                             that the critical assumptions could include: (i) sufficient implementation capacity given the country’s low-
                             capacity environment; (ii) adequate political stability given the country’s high fragility; and (iii) continued
                             Government commitment to improve food and nutrition security.

                             Outputs/Intermediate Results

                                        1,352 ha of irrigated land were provided with new/improved irrigation or drainage services which was
                                          below the original target of 3,000 ha (target was modestly achieved). The rehabilitation significantly

                                                                                                                                     Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GN - Integrated Agricultural Development (P164326)



         increased the utilization of the 1,352 ha from 40% before the rehabilitation, to 100% after the
         rehabilitation. Also, cropping intensity increased significantly, allowing two annual harvests for rice and
         up to three harvests for potatoes.
        23 operational water user's associations created and/or strengthened which was below the original
         target of 50 (target was modestly achieved).
        47,470 ha of land area were under improved technologies diffused by the project substantially
         achieving the original target of 50,000 (target substantially achieved).
        96,875 producers, including 41,370 women, were users of improved technologies diffused by the
         project which substantially achieved the original target of 100,000 and exceeded the women target of
         40,000.
        1,425 agricultural technicians were trained under the project significantly exceeding the original target
         of 1000.

Notable results not reflected directly as part of the RF:

      150 farmer field schools (FFS) for rice, maize, and potatoes, were set up which made it possible to
         directly reach nearly 4,000 producers and disseminate innovations, good practices, and improved
         varieties in the intervention area (ICR, paragraph 19).
        The project upgraded the e-Voucher system which was used in targeting input distribution among the
         most vulnerable thus enhancing their yields.
        The project supported the distribution of 3,500 tons of fertilizers (NPK and Urea), 60,000 liters of
         phytosanitary products, distributed improved potato seeds to 5,750 beneficiaries significantly
         exceeding the 3,000 farmers projected at appraisal, and promoted good poultry rearing practices.
        150 water bodies were developed for at least 11,460 beneficiaries (42% of whom were women)
         against an appraisal projection of 1,000 beneficiaries.
        Mitigating the impact of COVID-19 under the CERC. The project acquired and distributed kits for rice,
         maize, vegetables, poultry, and aquaculture production to nearly 40,000 vulnerable households to
         sustain/increase agricultural productivity that was being threatened by the pandemic-related
         disruptions. Also, 3,100 tons of maize and rice seeds and fertilizers were distributed to vulnerable
         households. In addition, 112 sub-projects were financed through grants ranging between US$5,000 to
         US$20,000 with technical assistance support (ICR, paragraph 20).

Outcomes

      By project completion, the overall aggregate increase in productivity of targeted value chains achieved
       by project direct beneficiaries reached 22%, which slightly exceeded the end target of 20% (PDO
       Outcome indicator 1). Specifically, rice yield increased by 30% (target fully achieved), potato yield
       increased by 18% which was slightly below the end target of 20%, maize yield increased by 30%
       exceeding the end target of 20%, egg production increased by 17% which was below the end target of
       20%, and fish production increased by 25% which exceeded the end target of 20%. However, these
       results lacked a control group for comparison and attribution. In total, 149,000 farmers
       (including 58,924 women and 45,645 youth) were reached with agricultural assets or services
       substantially achieving the overall target of 150,000 and women target of 60,000 and slightly
       exceeding the youth target of 45,000.
      However, the project achieved only 45% of the target for the area provided with new/improved
       irrigation or drainage services. This shortcoming was attributed to poor quality of contractors, COVID-

                                                                                                      Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GN - Integrated Agricultural Development (P164326)



       19 restrictions and disbursement suspension of IDA funds under OP 7.30 following the political events
       of September 2021 (ICR, paragraph 19).

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project contributed to productivity increases mainly through
improved access to inputs, farmer training, and to a lesser extent access to irrigation. For the targeted value
chains, the project achieved its target increase for rice and exceeded the target for maize and fish. However,
the project slightly fell short on achieving its target on potatoes and poultry. The shortcoming in potato was
attributed to using varieties susceptible to downy mildew, while the outbreak of avian influenza combined with
the delayed start-up of matching grant funding negatively impacted poultry. While the ICR (footnote #5)
explained that irrigation beneficiaries were estimated at 5,000 out of 150,000 project beneficiaries, the
cancellation of 55% of the irrigation rehabilitation activity was expected to negatively impact productivity.
Specifically, since irrigated agricultural areas usually result in higher and more stable agricultural productivity
than rainfed agricultural areas. Furthermore, the absence of a clear comparison to a control group makes
assessing attribution difficult. That said, in a further communication with IEG in May 2024, the project team
explained that Nationwide agricultural census data (that was not officially published at the time of the
ICRR) allowed “similar region” comparisons. The data on the yields for rice, maize, and potatoes showed an
average increase of 7% in the non-project areas (which was close to the baseline), versus a
26% accomplished among project beneficiaries at project closing. Also, there were clear cases where
“before-and-after the project” comparisons were adequate for attribution (e.g., inexistence of a fishpond
before the project versus the presence of a newly established, project financed alternative). Based on the the
new data provided by the project team, IEG finds evidence that supports the “before-and-after” comparison,
and it is plausible to assume that the increments in yields in the project areas were attributable to the project
activities.

Even though the project achieved the yield targets, it was over less than half the irrigated land. Only, 1,352 ha
of irrigated land were provided with new/improved irrigation or drainage services which was below the original
target of 3,000 ha/ Therefore and based on the reported achievements and the team's communication, the
efficacy of achieving this objective is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase market access for producers and agricultural small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in selected
value chains in project areas.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective the project supported strengthening the Producer
Organizations (POs), provided business development services, and financed productive investment sub-
projects. However, financing community type infrastructure did not materialize. The expected outputs
included: preparation of business plans for POs and SMEs, projects financed for SMEs, men, women and
youth, and two matching grants windows set: micro-projects and SMEs. The expected outcomes were:
establishing producers-buyers relationships, POs and SMEs employing business skills, and better access to


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GN - Integrated Agricultural Development (P164326)



finance. This was expected to result in better access to markets, more sales, more profit to SMEs and POs,
producers and SMEs become business oriented, and more investment flows into the sector.

The ToC reflected relevant activities that were directly connected to the outputs, and outcomes in a plausible
causal chain. However, the ToC in the both the PAD and the ICR lacked the critical assumptions that
underpinned the achievement of the PDO.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      566 micro-projects were financed with matching grants which was below the end target of 900 (target
         not achieved). The lower-than-expected achievement rate of 62.8% was according to the ICR due to:
         "(i) the belated operationalization of the matching grants mechanism; (ii) COVID19-related disruptions;
         and (iii) a six-month disbursement suspension by IDA."
        62 sub-projects were financed through the matching grants for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs)
         exceeding the target of 50 (target exceeded).
        2,045 (including: 680 women, 685 youths and 120 SME) producers, agri-entrepreneurs and SMEs
         were trained slightly exceeding the overall target of 2,000, as well as the targets of 600 for each of
         women and youth, and 100 for SMEs. (targets slightly exceeded).
        An agricultural and livestock census was completed (target achieved).
        However, the envisaged community market infrastructure did not materialize. This was due to the late
         on-boarding of the Technical Assistance Firm, COVID19-related disruptions, and the disbursement
         suspension by IDA, the procurement process which required more time than what was left under the
         project.

Other notable project achievements not directly captured by the RF included:

      The project supported 101 cooperatives by structuring them according to the OHADA uniform act and
         training their members and elected officials on management and strategic business planning (ICR,
         paragraph 22).
        The project financed post-harvest equipment including 50 improved rice parboilers, 10 improved fish
         smokers with sheds, 20 rice hullers, 20 maize hullers and mills. This facilitated value addition and
         benefited 4,357 people including 2,885 women and 2,507 young people (ICR, paragraph 22). The
         quantity of rice hulled rapidly grew from 4.1 tons in 2020, to 5.8 tons in 2022, thus contributing to
         growth in sales within a higher value market segment. Also, the gross revenue of 5 smoking groups
         supported by the project between 2020 and 2022 was on a positive growth path with a 3%increase in
         2021 and 6% increase in 2022 relative to the baseline in 2020.
        6 collaboration contracts were signed between producer cooperatives and processor cooperatives,
         and 5 contracts between producer cooperatives and women trading cooperatives.
        The project supported an integrated maize sub-project which brought together 258 farmers to cultivate
         1,531 ha. Under this sub-project, 7,000 tons of maize were produced of maize produced, and 2,400
         tons were collected and marketed by FUPRONA as part of a revolving financing fund
         mechanism (ICR, paragraph 24).
        The project established the food security platform, including a mobile platform at the National Agency
         for Agricultural Statistics to monitor closely stocks and prices of agri-food products and monitor the
         effects of COVID-19 on food system.



                                                                                                  Page 9 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                GN - Integrated Agricultural Development (P164326)



                            Outcomes

                                   By project completion, the overall percentage increase in the volume of market sales for five project-
                                    supported products (rice, maize, potato, fish and eggs) reached 42% slightly exceeding the end target
                                    of 40% (PDO outcome indicator 3). Specifically, maize showed the highest increase at 52%, followed
                                    by rice at 45%, then fish at 42%, potatoes at 35%, and lastly came eggs at 34%.

                            Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project contributed to increasing market access through
                            strengthening and funding farmers’ cooperatives/groups and SMEs, fostering market linkages, facilitating
                            value addition to increase competitivity of products, and aggregation for more efficient offtake of agricultural
                            output by other value chain actors. While the project slightly exceeded its PDO outcome target (42%
                            compared to 40%), it fell short on achieving its targets for two intermediate results indicators, namely,
                            financing microprojects with an achievement rate of 62%, and establishing community market infrastructure
                            which totally did not materialize. Therefore, and based on the above-mentioned results, the efficacy with
                            which this Objective was achieved is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.

                            For Objective 1, while the overall aggregate increase in productivity of targeted value chains achieved by
                            project direct beneficiaries reached 22%, which slightly exceeded the end target of 20%, potatoes and egg
                            productivity increase fell short of their respective targets. Also, the project achieved only 45% of its target for
                            irrigation rehabilitation. For Objective 2, while the overall percentage increase in the volume of market sales
                            for five project-supported products (rice, maize, potato, fish and eggs) reached 42% slightly exceeding the
                            end target of 40%, the project fell short on achieving its targets for two intermediate results indicators,
                            namely, financing microprojects with an achievement rate of 62%, and establishing community market
                            infrastructure which totally did not materialize. Further, the lack of a control group made it difficult to
                            accurately assess the contribution of the project to the reported achievements. In a further communication
                            with IEG in May 2024, the project team explained that there were cases where “before-and-after the project”
                            comparisons were adequate for attribution (e.g., inexistence of a fishpond before the project versus the
                            presence of a newly established, project financed alternative). However, crop yield increases required
                            contemporaneous “with-and-without project” comparisons. Attempts to use non-project participants in the
                            project areas suffered from project-contamination. Nationwide agricultural census data allowed “similar
                            region” comparisons. The data hadn’t been officially published at the time of the ICRR (it now is), but had
                            shown that by the project’s closing, yield for rice, maize, and potatoes had only increased by an average of
                            7% in the non-project areas (which was close to the baseline), versus 26% accomplished among project
                            beneficiaries at project closing. Hence, the “before-and-after” comparison still demonstrated attribution.


                                                                                                                                  Page 10 of 20
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        GN - Integrated Agricultural Development (P164326)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

ex-ante

     The overall Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was estimated at 31% and the Financial Internal
        Rate of Return (FIRR) was estimated at 23%. The estimates of financial and economic benefits were
        based on cash flows modeled over ten years. When carbon benefits were included, the EIRR was
        estimated at 51%. A discount rate of 6% was used and a project time horizon of 10 years, except for the
        GHG benefits where the considered time horizon was 20 years.
       The economic analysis focused on the estimated impact on the net income of producers and agricultural
        SMEs in each value chain and the growth of this net income arising from project activities. Indirect
        economic and financial impacts, as well as the net counterfactual, were accounted for by using a
        conservative multiplier of 1.25 on positive cash flows.
       The EFA estimated the impact on the net income of these beneficiary businesses based upon a base
        case for typical producers and agricultural SMEs in the value chains targeted by the project and in the
        project areas. For rice producers, a per hectare farm model was used to estimate project impact on net
        income in an estimated area of 3000 ha that were expected to be rehabilitated under the project.
       Sensitivity Analysis. The analysis showed that if there was 10% fewer beneficiary businesses, and 10%
        fewer hectares for rice over base case the EIRR would drop to 26% and the FIRR to 19%, while if there
        was a 20% lower margin for rice over the base case the EIRR would drop to 12% and the FIRR to 6%.
       Overall, the EFA in the PAD (Annex 2) was detailed with regards to benefits that resulted from improving
        productivity of targeted value chains. However, assessing the overall project benefits lacked details.

ex-post

     The EFA at completion estimated the EIRR at 41% and US$37.4 million for ENPV, while the FIRR was
      estimated at 30% and US$23.7 million for the FNPV. Both estimates exceeded the appraisal estimates at
      31% for EIRR and 23% for FIRR.
     There were three main differences between the EFA at appraisal and at completion: first, the analysis at
      completion used probabilistic modelling to factor in uncertainties; second, the irrigated rice areas at
      completion contributed 22% of the total NPV compared to 42% at appraisal; and third, the analysis at
      completion accounted for the entirety of the project disbursement (US$35 million), which included
      US$13.59 million (38% of the disbursed amount) for components 3 (Strengthening institutional capacity)
      and component 4 (Project coordination and implementation). The ICR (Annex 4) stated that components
      3 and 4 were both "supporting component 1 and 2 objectives in a transversal fashion."
     Sensitivity Analysis. Applying probabilistic modelling showed that only 1.2% of the tested scenarios
      yielded an EIRR below 25%; 89.3% of the computed IRR were in the 25% to 50% range, and 9.5% were
      exceptionally high and above 50%; and only 9.5% of scenarios came below 32%.

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GN - Integrated Agricultural Development (P164326)



      Implementation efficiency. While the project experienced implementation delays, it closed on its expected
       closing date. The recruitment of the Technical Assistance Firm to assist the PCIU was significantly
       delayed and happened 21 months after its effectiveness. This resulted in significant delays in
       implementing activities under component 2. The project disbursed 87.33% of its original financing (the
       US$ appreciated relative to the SDR and the GNF appreciated versus the US$ which resulted in an
       overall shortfall of US$3.0 million), and US$3.0 million was cancelled after on-going irrigation
       development contracts were terminated. The cost of component 3 was 193% of the appraisal estimate
       due to the activation of the CERC. Also, component 4 (project management) came in slightly higher at
       126% of its appraisal estimate.
      The analysis could have benefitted from shedding light on the economic/financial performance of the
       sub-projects under SMEs and micro-projects under producers.

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. The ex-post EIRR at 41% exceeded the EIRR at appraisal estimated at
31%. However, it was not clear whether the ex- post EIRR accounted also for carbon benefits (EIRR with carbon
benefits was estimated at 51% at appraisal). Also, the analysis at completion accounted for the entirety of the
project disbursement (US$35 million) of which 38% went to components 3 and 4 (compared to 22% according to
appraisal estimates). However, the analysis at completion did not account for any benefits from components 3
and 4. The project also experienced some implementation delays and disbursed about 87% of its appraisal
financing amount with US$3.0 million cancelled. The project experienced several areas of under-achievements,
which would negatively impact the project benefit streams and cast doubt on the project efficiency. For example,
the cancellation of 55% of the irrigation activity will negatively impact efficiency since irrigated farming is known
to result in higher and more stable agricultural productivity than rainfed farming. Also, the micro-projects
matching grants achieved 62% of the appraisal target, and the envisioned community market infrastructure did
not materialize. Therefore, Efficiency is rated Modest due to the aforementioned under achievements and the
significant increase in the cost of components 3 and 4 without a clear contribution to the estimated EIRR at
completion.




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                  31.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                               41.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.



                                                                                                      Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GN - Integrated Agricultural Development (P164326)



6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial with moderate
shortcomings. While the overall aggregate increase in productivity of targeted value chains achieved by project
direct beneficiaries reached 22%, which slightly exceeded the end target of 20%, potatoes and egg productivity
increase fell short of their respective targets. Also, the project achieved only 45% of its target for irrigation
rehabilitation. Thus, the productivity increase was achieved over less than half the envisaged area. The overall
percentage increase in the volume of market sales for five project-supported products (rice, maize, potato, fish
and eggs) reached 42%, which slightly exceeded the end target of 40%, but the project fell short on achieving
its targets for two intermediate results indicators, namely, financing micro-projects and establishing community
market infrastructure, where the latter did not materialize. Efficiency was rated Modest. While the ex-post EIRR
at 41% exceeded the EIRR at appraisal estimated at 31%, there were several under-achievements that could
negatively impact the project benefit streams. This was combined with a significant increase in the cost of
components 3 and 4 without a clear contribution to the estimated EIRR at completion.

Based on the assigned ratings for the three Outcome criteria, the project Outcome is rated Moderately
Satisfactory due to moderate shortcomings pertaining to the operation's Efficacy and Efficiency.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following risks could potentially impact the Development Outcome:

1. Institutional risk. This relates to continued access to improved inputs. While some farmers’ organizations
were trained to multiply improved seeds, domestic multiplication and distribution systems of improved seed
are still not fully developed. Therefore, continued government support and monitoring will be required to
maintain seed quality and supply, including promoting greater private sector involvement. Similarly, access to
fertilizer is likely to remain problematic - given the current high prices of fertilizer, which is exacerbated by the
supply disruptions due to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. While some farmers were trained in making
compost, this is not sufficient to supply optimal soil nutrient requirements on a large scale. The government
is actively working with the private sector and farmers’ organizations such as the Federation of Unions of
Maize Producers (FUPROMA) as well as farmers’ cooperatives to address fertilizer constraints. Finally, fish
fry replenishment for the aquaculture activity, producers will need continuous monitoring and support from
the National Aquaculture Agency of Guinea.

2. Technical risk. This relates to the maintenance of the irrigation infrastructure. Water users’ associations
were established and trained in irrigation management, infrastructure maintenance, and collection of water
fees. However, these associations will need to be continuously monitored by the National Directorate of
Rural Engineering (DNGR) to assess their sustained efficacy and resolve any issues that might arise.
Regarding fish, management committees were established for each fish farming site, and training provided in
sustainable management of the water bodies and in fish farming techniques.




                                                                                                         Page 13 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GN - Integrated Agricultural Development (P164326)



3. Environmental risk. This mainly relates to climate change and disease outbreaks. For climate change,
while the project introduced several climate smart agricultural practices which will help farmers adapt to the
increasing risks, the residual risk continues to be high. For disease outbreaks, the likelihood of an Avian
Influenza outbreak remains high, and there will be a need for constant monitoring by the Government
through its ongoing animal disease monitoring programs.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic relevance and approach. The project was strategically relevant and in line with the
            Government priorities. The PDO was also in line with the Bank strategies (see section 3 for
            details). Agriculture was considered essential for economic development, and a comprehensive
            approach was expected to improve rural incomes, reduce the poverty rate, and improve food
            security.
           Technical, financial and economic aspects. The project featured a comprehensive design that
            addressed different bottle necks in the agriculture sector. The design included an irrigation sub-
            component to reduce dependence on rainfall and increase cropping intensity. This was
            complemented with activities aimed to boost productivity through supplying better inputs and
            improved crop management. Finally, design featured a marketing component to improve access
            to markets, which is a critical element for any project aiming to boost agricultural productivity. The
            project also coordinated closely with ongoing projects and programs to optimize development
            outcomes. The PAD included a detailed economic and financial analysis that reflected logical and
            realistic assumptions, but lacked enough details on the estimation of the overall project benefits.
           Poverty, gender, and social development aspects. The project contributed to poverty reduction
            through its emphasis on value chains that were most depended upon by the poor smallholder
            farmers for food security and nutrition. Females constituted 60,000 out of the total 150,000
            beneficiaries. A number of RF indicators were disaggregated by gender to reflect women
            participation in the project activities.
           Environmental and Fiduciary aspects. Adequate social and environmental safeguards were put
            in place with all requisite disclosures made.
           Implementation arrangements. The Ministry of Agriculture was responsible for overall project
            implementation. The existing WAAPP Project Coordination and Implementation Unit (PCIU) in the
            Ministry of Agriculture oversaw the project preparation and was responsible for project
            implementation. Its staffing was strengthened to meet the specific needs of the project. A
            Technical Assistance Firm to assist the PCIU in project implementation, especially component 2,
            was expected to be recruited after effectiveness. However, this was delayed and only
            happened 21 months after effectiveness, which contributed to significant implementation delays.
           Risk assessment. Eight risk were identified at appraisal. One risk was rated High relating to
            institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability, four risks were rated Substantial, and
            three were rated Modest. While the identified risks had adequate mitigation measures, the
            technical and financial capacity of local SMEs to execute and supervise the envisaged irrigation
            schemes was not carefully assessed. A deeper assessment of the SMEs would have revealed
            their weaknesses and therefore informed mitigation measures.


                                                                                                       Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN - Integrated Agricultural Development (P164326)



        M&E arrangements. M&E arrangements were adequate. The RF reflected relevant indicators,
          and institutional arrangements and staffing to generate data for testing the Theory of Change
          were in place. While the PAD (paragraph 61) called for the collection of baseline data, there was
          no explicit reference to a control group.

  Summary of Quality at Entry Assessment. The project was strategically relevant. Design featured a
  comprehensive approach that addressed irrigation concerns, productivity and access to
  markets. Environmental and fiduciary aspects were adequate, but delayed recruitment of the technical
  assistance firm impacted implementation readiness. While the identified risks had adequate mitigation
  measures, the risk related to technical and financial capacity of local SMEs was not carefully assessed.
  M&E arrangements were adequate. Overall, Quality at Entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory. There were
  moderate shortcomings related to risk identification, and the hiring of the technical assistance firm, which
  should have been ensured at the preparation stage because it was connected to multiple activities.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The project faced some implementation challenges including the COVID-19 restrictions that started
          early in 2020 and a six months suspension of disbursements that came on the heels of political
          events in September 2021.
         The project conducted ten supervision missions over the course of implementation with an average
          of two formal implementation support missions per year. The project implementation support team
          conducted virtual interactions during the COVID-19 restrictions. The skill mix of the project team
          matched with project activities.
         The project implementation benefited from the support provided by the Conakry World Bank Office
          staff through close interactions with government counterparts, which allowed solving
          implementation issues as they arose. Implementation also benefited from continuity of the Bank
          team as there was only one team leadership change and very limited changes in the task team
          members throughout the project’s preparation and implementation.
         The Bank team was pro-active in addressing the project’s critical issues. This was demonstrated in
          restructuring the project to realign resources to mitigate the impact of COVID-19, and devising
          alternative arrangements for filling the gaps in extension services and data collection when
          government reduced its field staff.
         However, the Bank team should have addressed the delay in recruitment of the Technical
          Assistance Firm earlier to avoid the unnecessary delays in the implementation of the related
          activities.

 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. The Bank team successfully guided the project
 towards a achieving its outcomes. The project team provided adequate support and was proactive to
 restructure the project to address critical issues. Overall, Bank Supervision is rated Satisfactory.




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN - Integrated Agricultural Development (P164326)



 Based on the assigned rating to QAE and Bank Supervision, the Overall Bank Performance is rated
 Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD included a Theory of Change (ToC) that was reiterated by the ICR. The ToC reflected the
          relationship between the project activities, outputs, outcomes and long-term impacts in a plausible
          causal chain. This Review reconstructed a ToC narrative for each objective based on the detailed
          project description in the PAD (Annex 2) in combination with the ToC reported in the ICR.
         The PDO was composed of two objectives (see section 2), which were assessed based on the
          following three PDO outcome indicators: 1. Percent increase in yield of targeted products achieved
          by project direct beneficiaries (disaggregated by product: rice, maize, potato, egg, fish); 2. Number
          of farmers reached with agricultural assets or services, of which female (at least 40%) and youth (at
          least 30%); and 3. Percent increase in volume of market sales of targeted products achieved by
          project direct beneficiaries (disaggregated by product: rice, maize, potato, egg, fish). The first two
          outcome indicators measured objective 1 and the third measured objective 2. All three indicators
          were directly connected to their corresponding objectives, clear, measurable, specific, and reflected
          reasonable targets.
         The Results Framework (RF) included 13 intermediate results indicators (IRIs) to track the progress
          of the different project activities. Most of the IRIs were measurable, reflected reasonable
          targets, and were connected to the project activities. However, strengthening institutional capacity
          was not fully captured.
         M&E design called for baseline surveys, continuous data collection to gauge progress, and end-of-
          project impact assessments to gauge performance and draw lessons. However, M&E design lacked
          a control group which is a critical element to accurately assess the attribution of results.
         Overall, M&E design included adequate indicators for gauging progress towards attaining the PDO
          and testing the Theory of Change.



b. M&E Implementation
       M&E data utilized a computerized M&E system (HIVE software package) to provide real-time data
          on the project’s indicators and on its technical and financial aspects. All data collected was
          disaggregated by gender and age groups to adequately inform decision making on gender and
          the youth. According to the ICR (paragraph 49) M&E had implementation benefited from adequate
          staffing and funding.

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN - Integrated Agricultural Development (P164326)



        The baseline study, the mid-term evaluation and the final evaluation were carried out, as well as
         annual follow-up surveys of the results framework indicators.
        During implementation, the availability of some of the agricultural extension officers for primary
         data collection was affected by the reorganization taking place at the parent ministry. The project
         mitigated this through engaging grassroots farmers’ organizations and the field staff of the
         Technical Assistance Firm that had been recruited to support the PCIU to ensure continuous data
         collection.
        Overall, M&E activities were successfully implemented as envisioned.



c. M&E Utilization
       The M&E system was used to guide project implementation. This was demonstrated through four
         key aspects: First, M&E data helped to continuously gauge the relevance and effectiveness of
         the farmer field schools, facilitating constant adapting and tailoring of program content; Second,
         M&E proved useful in gauging the performance of cooperatives, especially women and youth
         groups, and constantly recalibrating and offering targeted support according to the nature and
         level of needs; Third, M&E data on crop yields revealed which crop varieties were doing well (for
         example, potato varieties susceptible to downy mildew were substituted with more resistant
         varieties); and Fourth, M&E guided the maize initiative to achieve significant yield improvements
         through a combination of inputs and capacity building.
        The National Confederation of Civil Society Organizations of Guinea (CNOSC) as well as the
         media kept the public informed about the project’s implementation status and accomplishments.

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. M&E design reflected adequate indicators for gauging
  progress towards attaining the PDO and testing the Theory of Change. While M&E implementation faced
  some challenges, it was successfully implemented with enough data generated to assess the project
  outcomes. Finally, M&E utilization was evident as noted above in guiding implementation and managing
  the project activities. Therefore, the Quality of M&E is rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
        Environmental Category and Safeguards. The project was classified as a Category B - partial
          assessment because potential environmental and social adverse impacts and risks of the project
          were expected to be moderate and mostly site specific, with no significant or long-term
          negative impacts. Four environmental and one social safeguard policies were
          triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09), Physical
          Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50),
          and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). Environmental and Social Management Plans



                                                                                                    Page 17 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GN - Integrated Agricultural Development (P164326)



         (ESMPs) and the Pest Management Plans (PMPs) were prepared. A Resettlement Policy
         Framework (RPF) and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) were also prepared.
        Compliance with Environmental and Social Safeguards. The ICR (paragraphs 53 & 54) reported
         that "the project complied with environmental management safeguards" and "complied with social
         safeguards." While the project triggered Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), there were no
         cases of physical cultural resources involved in the project. Environmental screening and social
         assessments were carried out at the level of all subprojects financed by the project in line with the
         World Bank's environmental and social safeguard policies. However, some challenges were related
         to the quality of the screening. With regard to land acquisition and resettlement, 133 people affected
         by the project (PAPs) were identified for a total compensation amount of US$100,370 (ICR,
         paragraph 54). A digital Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) platform through the Geo-Enabling
         initiative for Monitoring and Supervision (GEMS) tool allowed effective monitoring and processing of
         complaints. A total of 30 complaints were registered through the GRM. According to the ICR
         (paragraph 54) "all complaints were resolved in an inclusive manner involving the complainants, the
         committees, and the PCIU."




b. Fiduciary Compliance
        Financial Management (FM). Project audits were submitted on time and financial statements were
         certified without reservation (ICR, paragraph 57). As part of the process of transferring the
         unfinished irrigation work to new projects, the Bank has requested the Government to carry out a
         special audit of the terminated contracts. The disbursement rate under IDA financing was 87.33%
         of the appraised amount because of unfavorable foreign exchange movements (the US$
         appreciated relative to the SDR and the GNF appreciated versus the US$ which resulted in an
         overall shortfall of US$3.0 million) and cancellation of the poorly performing irrigation contracts
         worth US$3.0 million. FM was rated Satisfactory in the final ISR.
        Procurement. Procurement utilized the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP)
         to upload documents for all contracts financed by IDA as well as all signed contracts, acceptance
         certificates and payment documents. According to the ICR (paragraph 56) "there was no reported
         malfeasance in the procurement processes." Two procurement contracts were terminated by the
         project due to weak capacity of the contractors and the non-compliance with the clauses of the
         contract. Procurement was rated Moderately Satisfactory in the final ISR.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None.



d. Other
  None.




                                                                                                 Page 18 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GN - Integrated Agricultural Development (P164326)




11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                       IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                    Efficacy and Efficiency both had
Outcome                         Satisfactory              Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                    moderate shortcomings.
                                                                                    QAE had moderate
Bank Performance                Satisfactory              Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                    shortcomings.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial               Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                       Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included five lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. In a low-capacity context, building on existing projects’ operational framework is more
effective than establishing a new PCIU. The WAAPP and the Agricultural Sector Support Projects
were foundational to the PDAIG, serving as a knowledge base and operational launching pad for the
PDAIG. The project experience demonstrated that starting on a good footing helped the project to
successfully navigate through the COVID-19 period and adapt to the changing context of the
country. Despite the disturbances of the pandemics and the several-month-long disbursement
suspension of Bank operations, the project was able to meet most of its development targets within
the allotted implementation timeframe. In low capacity contexts, a unified capacitated permanent
project and program coordination unit in the sector would have multiple benefits including: (i)
strengthening the government's capacity to manage projects; (ii) reducing operating costs; (iii)
capitalizing on project management skills and know-how (particularly in safeguards, procurement,
FM, and M&E), (iv) strengthening the synergy and complementarity between projects; (iv) preserving
the institutional memory; (v) reducing the long delay in achieving the effectiveness conditions; and
(iv) finally improving the readiness for a quick start of new projects.

2. To ensure smooth implementation, crucial technical assistance needs to be recruited very
early in the project cycle. PDAIG had envisaged very important technical assistance for the PCIU
given the diverse nature of the project activities. However, its belated recruitment resulted in major
delays in implementing some of these activities. Therefore, it is important to start the procurement of
such critical technical assistance during project preparation to ensure timely onboarding.

3. To correctly identify adequate design approaches, the overall capacity for irrigation
development needs to be critically assessed during project appraisal for projects with
irrigation development activities. This includes assessing the technical and financial capacity of
local SMEs to execute and supervise the envisaged irrigation schemes. Such an assessment is
critical in informing options for procurement planning, including possibilities of packaging various lots
to attract more capable regional and international firms.




                                                                                                      Page 19 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GN - Integrated Agricultural Development (P164326)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

      Quality of Evidence. The ICR provided an adequate evidence base to support the achievements
        reported.
      Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.
      Results Orientation. The ICR included an adequate discussion on the achievement of the two elements
       of the PDO. The discussion was balanced between reporting on the PDO outcome indicators and what
       actually was achieved on the ground.
      Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the available data to justify most of the assigned ratings.
       The ICR also included an explicit statement on the compliance with the World Bank's safeguard
       policies.
      Conciseness. As a whole the ICR was well written and provided a clear and concise coverage of project
       activities and candidly reported on most shortcomings. However, there was no explanation provided for
       the moderately satisfactory ratings for overall safeguard performance and for environmental and
       pest management. Also, the ICR reflected Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) under social
       safeguards when it should be under environmental safeguards. The ICR did not report on the critical
       assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the PDO.

 Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. The ICR provided an adequate assessment of outcomes, and
the lessons drawn by the ICR were relevant. Most sections were concise yet thorough and reflected relevant
information. Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                               Page 20 of 20
