     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Economic Recovery DPL (P172597)



                                                                           Report Number: ICRR0024063

1. Program Information



 Country                               Practice Area (Lead)
 Ukraine                               Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                     Approved Operations
 0                                      0

 Operation ID                           Operation Name
 P172597                                Economic Recovery DPL




 L/C/TF Number(s)                      Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-91380                            30-Jun-2021                                       350,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                    Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Jun-2020                           30-Jun-2021
                                       IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                        350,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Revised Commitment                         350,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Actual                                     350,000,000.00                                           0.00




P177931_TBL
 Country                               Practice Area (Lead)
 Ukraine                               Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                          Operation Name
                                       SECOND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT POLICY LOAN (
 P177931
                                       P177931 )



                                                                                            Page 1 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Economic Recovery DPL (P172597)




  L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
  IBRD-91380,IBRD-93230,IBRD-                31-Jan-2023                                           1965999000.19
  93660,IBRD-93670,IBRD-93680,TF-
  B8350

  Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
  17-Dec-2021                                31-Jan-2023

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                           838,750,000.00                                      98,496,075.00

  Revised Commitment                            838,750,000.00                                      98,496,075.00

  Actual                                        818,989,656.09                                  1,147,009,344.10



 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 William F. Steel             Vandana Chandra              Donna Kaidou Jeffrey             IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The program development objectives (PDOs) of the Ukraine Economic Recovery Development Policy Loan
(ERDPL) series (as stated in the ICR, para. 16) and the program documents (PDs) were to: (i) foster de-
monopolization and anti-corruption institutions; (ii) strengthen land and credit markets; and (iii) bolster the social
safety net, (PD1, para. 27, indicated that the latter was intended “to cushion the impact of the crisis on the
vulnerable elderly population.”). The PDOs did not change between the first and second DPLs. For the purpose of
this ICRR, the PDOs are taken as:

      PDO1: To foster de-monopolization and anti-corruption institutions.
      PDO2: To strengthen land and credit markets.
      PDO3: To bolster the social safety net.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The Pillars as stated in the PDs were identical to the PDOs. For the purpose of this ICRR, the Pillars and Policy
Areas (as indicated in the ICR, paras. 18-20 and 34) are represented as follows:

      Pillar 1: Foster de-monopolization and anti-corruption institutions:

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Economic Recovery DPL (P172597)



            o  Gas sector (separate transmission and production functions);
            o  Infrastructure (overhaul Law on Concessions);
            o  Inland waterways (establish an open regulatory framework).
            o  National Agency on Corruption Prevention (NACP; enhance independence).
      Pillar 2: Strengthen land and credit markets:
            o Land sales (legal framework);
            o Financial market reforms (to resolve non-performing loans [NPLs]);
            o Credit guarantee facility (for credit-constrained farmers).
      Pillar 3: Bolster the social safety net:
            o Reform the pension system.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Originally designed as a standalone operation, the ERDPL was split into a series of two after the decision
meeting (27 February, 2020) in response to disruptions from the COVID-19 pandemic, which also motivated
seeking additional financing to cope with the adverse budgetary and social protection consequences (ICR, para.
66). The First ERDPL (P172597) was an IBRD loan of US$350 million, which was approved 26 June, 2020 but
not effective until a year later (25 June, 2021), whereupon it was fully disbursed, and it closed as expected on
30 June, 2021. The Second ERDPL (P177931) consisted of IBRD loans of US$349.5 million (approved 17
December and disbursed by 25 December, 2021) and a Supplemental FREE DPL (Financing of Recovery from
Economic Emergency; approved on 7 March, 2022, and disbursed two days later) totaling US$489 million,
bringing total IBRD financing to US$1.19 billion. Actual disbursements under ERDPL2 amounted to US$
818,989,656 out of US$ 850,000,000 approved, with the difference due to trust fund fees and currency
variations.

The World Bank (WB) mobilized supplementary support from development partners amounting to US$1,902
million, consisting of (ICR, Annex 5, Table 5.2):

      US$1,168 million through the FREE Multi-Donor Trust Fund (from the USA, UK, Norway, Denmark,
       Austria, Latvia, Lithuania, and Iceland), exceeding the ICR reported figure of US$1,147 million due to
       waiver of trust fund fees;
      US$600 million parallel budget support from Japan;
      US$134 million in bilateral guarantees from The Netherlands and Sweden.




3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Country Context

 Ukraine’s transition toward a market economy over the last three decades has been constrained by a heavy
 state presence and weak institutions (ICR, para. 1). State control of productive assets through over 3,600
 state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and vertically-integrated monopolies dominated what was intended to be a

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Economic Recovery DPL (P172597)



competitive economic space. Property rights were vulnerable to corruption and a weak judicial system.
Vested interests delayed reforms and distorted markets, as did the 20-year moratorium on land sales and
subsidies for natural gas.

During the five years preceding preparation of the ERDPL series, the Government of Ukraine (GoU) had
undertaken considerable reforms to begin addressing these issues and to “reinforce macroeconomic stability
and bolster the foundations of economic growth". The economy grew by 3.3 percent in 2018-2019 and public
and publicly guaranteed debt declined to 50 percent of GDP (PD1, para. 2). Preparation of a standalone
ERDPL to take advantage of these positive developments to advance the reform process was interrupted by
the COVID-19 pandemic and the consequent threats to economic growth, budgets, health and social
protection, posing risks to implementation and achievement of the intended objectives. In order to
accommodate delays and the need to raise substantial complementary funding, the ERDPL was split into a
series of two operations, with the second complemented by supplemental funds and parallel support from
development partners (see section 2.c above).

Relevance of Objectives

The redesigned series “prioritized support for critical reforms to enable a recovery of investment and
economic activity once the COVID-19 pandemic subsided, as well as to bolster the social safety net with a
focus on the elderly” (ICR, para. 8). The objectives as stated were directly relevant to the main areas of
constraints on progress toward a competitive market economy that is amenable to private investment. PDO1
was oriented toward the burdens of state ownership and corruption. PDO2 focused on two important, highly
constrained markets (land and credit). PDO3 addressed weakened ability of social safety nets to enable
people, especially the elderly, to cope with COVID-19 and other shocks. These objectives were relevant to
the broader objective of accelerating growth through a more competitive, market-oriented economy
conducive to private investment. Nevertheless, PDO3 was overly broad with respect to the limited focus of
the PA and associated RI on indexation of pension benefits.

The objectives were well aligned with the Ukraine Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY 17-21, which
focused on: “(i) making markets work; (ii) fiscal and financial sustainability; (iii) efficient, effective, and
inclusive service delivery; and (iv) better governance, anticorruption, and citizen engagement” (PD1, para.
46). They also supported the priorities of the 2017 Systematic Country Diagnostic and the 2019 study on
“Ukraine Growth: Faster, Lasting, Kinder,” and were consistent with the World Bank (WB) COVID-19 Crisis
Response Approach Paper (PD2, para. 4). WB involvement was important to help deal with opposition from
vested interests, as well as the complexity and difficulty of the reforms (ICR, para. 8).

The series supported the commitment of the Government that came into power in 2019 to undertake reforms
needed to accelerate growth (its 2019-24 Action Program aspired to 5-7 percent annual growth over five
years): increase foreign direct investment, develop infrastructure, create jobs and reduce poverty (PD2, para.
3). The ERDPLs supported its stated priorities of “establishing land markets, de-monopolization, and
strengthening institutions of anticorruption and rule of law.”


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Economic Recovery DPL (P172597)



The series had 12 PAs with a total of 15 specific actions. Of the five PAs in ERDPL2, three followed through
on actions initiated in ERDPL1; four of the ERDPL1 PAs had no specific follow-through in ERDPL2. The
introduction of PAs in two new action areas in ERDPL2 reflected the last-minute decision to break the
program into a series of two operations, in part to accommodate delays occasioned by the COVID-19 crisis.
Five PAs were highly satisfactory in terms of relevance to objectives, and none unsatisfactory.

Table 1: Objectives and Prior Actions (PAs) for Ukraine Economic Recovery Development Policy
Loan (ERDPL) Series

PAs under DPL1                                                  PAs under DPL2
PDO1: Foster de-monopolization and anti-corruption institutions
PA1: Completed the unbundling of the state-owned gas
transport system from Naftogaz on January 1, 2020
through: (i) the enactment of Law #264-IX on Unbundling;
and (ii) the transfer of state-owned gas transport
system’s assets from the balance sheet of UTG to Gas
TSO LLC.
PA2: Enacted Law #155-IX on Concession to enhance
the legal framework for attracting private investment in
infrastructure and ensuring transparency in concession
projects.
                                                                PA3: The Borrower has enacted Law #
                                                                1054-IX dated December 3, 2020 “On
                                                                Inland Water Transport”, and duly
                                                                published in the Borrower’s Official Gazette
                                                                on January 9, 2021, establishing an open
                                                                regulatory framework and enabling non-
                                                                discriminatory access of operators to inland
                                                                waterways.
PA4: Enacted [i] Law # 140-IX to strengthen the
governance of the National Agency of Corruption
Prevention (NACP) and [ii] Law # 263-IX to restore
liability for illicit enrichment and enable civil forfeiture of
unjustified assets.
PDO2: Strengthen land and credit markets
PA5: Enacted [i] Law # 552-IX to enable the sale of             PA6: The Borrower has enacted Law
agricultural land and the use of land as collateral and [ii] #1423-IX dated April 28, 2021 “On
Law # 554-IX to strengthen transparency by improving            amendments to some legislative acts of
access to cadastral data and links between the cadaster Ukraine to improve the system of
and registry.                                                   management and deregulation in the field
                                                                of land relations”, and duly published in the
                                                                Borrower’s Official Gazette on May 26,
                                                                2021, streamlining land transfer procedures
                                                                and decentralizing land management,
                                                                which simplifies procedures to create,
                                                                transfer, and use land parcels; and transfer
                                                                the ownership and administration of state

                                                                                                        Page 5 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Economic Recovery DPL (P172597)



                                                             land from the Geocadaster to local
                                                             authorities.

                                                             PA7: The Borrower has enacted Law #
                                                             1444-IX dated May 18, 2021 “On
                                                             modification of some legislative acts of
                                                             Ukraine concerning sale of the land plots
                                                             and acquisition of the right of their use
                                                             through electronic auctions”, and duly
                                                             published in the Borrower’s Official Gazette
                                                             on June 25, 2021, regulating local state
                                                             land use, including mandating electronic
                                                             auctions for state land sales.
PA8. Issued NBU prudential regulations #49 and #52 on
write-offs for fully provisioned NPLs and approved
Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine Resolution # 281 to
enable state-owned banks NPL resolution through
conventional tools including restructuring and sale with
haircut on principal, as well as write-offs.
PA9: Enacted Law # 79-IX to enhance the regulatory
framework for nonbank financial institutions by abolishing
the National Financial Services Commission and
assigning the regulatory functions to the National Bank of
Ukraine and National Securities and Stock Market
Commission.
                                                             PA10: The Borrower has enacted Law
                                                             #1865-IX dated November 4, 2021 “On the
                                                             Fund for the Partial Guarantee of Loans in
                                                             Agriculture” and duly published in the
                                                             Borrowers’ Official Gazette on November
                                                             23, 2021, creating affordable and effective
                                                             financing instruments for small farmers
                                                             through the establishment of a partial credit
                                                             guarantee facility.
PDO3: Bolster the social safety net
                                                           PA12: The Borrower, through its Cabinet of
                                                           Ministers, has approved the Budget
                                                           Declaration for 2022-2024 and submitted it
PA11: Approved Cabinet Resolution # 251 to set the         to the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine through
date and rate for the statutory pension indexation in 2020 Resolution No. 548 dated May 31, 2021
and bolster the purchasing power of the pension benefit. “On the Budget Declaration for 2022-2024”
                                                           requiring indexation of pensions for all
                                                           categories of retirees not later than March
                                                           1st of each year from 2022 to 2024.

Source: ICR, Section II.



                                                                                                      Page 6 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Economic Recovery DPL (P172597)



The 12 PAs (7 in ERDPL1 and 5 in ERDPL2) had a total of 15 distinct actions/subactions.

PDO 1: Foster de-monopolization and anti-corruption institutions

Gas sector

PA1 directly addressed the monopolistic problem of locating both gas production and transmission within the
state-owned Naftogaz, which limited the scope for independently generated gas and transmission (ICR, para.
31). “The vertically integrated structure of gas transit and production…had been a significant roadblock in
advancing negotiations on the new long-term gas transit agreement and in attracting investment in the
transport network” (PD1, para. 29). The unbundling of gas transmission from Naftogaz and transfer of assets
to an independent Transmission System Operator (TSO) involved a series of steps from September 19,
2019, to January 1, 2020 (PD1, para. 30), and was essential to incentivize investment both by the two
independent state-owned entities and by potential private competitors in this key sector. Relevance: PA1:
Highly Satisfactory (HS).

Infrastructure

PA2 was highly relevant to overcoming disincentives to the private investment needed to help overcome
Ukraine’s poor trade and transport infrastructure (ranking 119th among 160 countries on the quality of trade
and transport infrastructure in the World Bank’s 2018 Logistics Performance Index 2018; PD1, para. 31). A
more transparent and competitive procedure for awarding concessions was important to move away from
politically-connected allocations and to enable project financing (ICR, para. 33). Incentivizing private
infrastructure investment supported both de-monopolization and anti-corruption objectives. Relevance: PA2:
Highly Satisfactory (HS).

Inland waterways

PA3 was needed to address the regulatory restrictions that had constrained usage of and investment in
inland waterways. Usage of inland waterways had fallen from 66 to 4 million tons (PD2, para. 34), only 3
percent of Ukraine’s major exports of grain, “even though the environmental and monetary costs of this type
of transport were lower than for rail and road” (ICR, para. 34). Dominance of a single company and
anticompetitive permit requirements for foreign vessels posed major barriers (PD1, para. 34). New
regulations under PA3 supported the objectives of de-monopolization and facilitating private investment in
transport infrastructure to strengthen economic recovery and growth. Relevance: PA3: Highly Satisfactory
(HS).

National Agency on Corruption Prevention (NACP)

PA4 strengthened the capacity of NACP – a key anti-corruption institution established in 2016 – to tackle the
negative effects of corruption, vested interests and state capture on Ukraine’s investment and growth
prospects. Asset declarations and penalties for incorrect information and illicit enrichment were key
deterrents, but implementation (and indeed effectiveness of ERDPL1) had been delayed by a Constitutional
Court ruling (ICR, para. 35). Despite establishment of three anti-corruption institutions since 2014, failure to
achieve any convictions by end-2018, despite “widespread suspicions of illicit enrichment based on asset
declarations and officials’ lifestyles,” had led to public outcry (PD1, para. 33). Furthermore, “the governance
of NACP was compromised at an early stage through political interference and ineffective leadership.”
Legislative actions under PA4 to strengthen governance of the NACP and restore penalties were directly


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Economic Recovery DPL (P172597)



relevant to the anti-corruption objective – though the series contained no further actions to support
implementation steps needed to actually achieve that objective. Relevance: PA4: Satisfactory (S).

PDO 2: Strengthen land and credit markets

Land Sales

PA5 was highly relevant to unblocking the major constraint on agricultural investment and productivity
imposed by a 20-year moratorium on the sale of government-owned land plots. This moratorium had
“undermined the security of land tenure and incentives to undertake productivity enhancing investments such
as irrigation and manage the land in a sustainable manner,” resulting in much lower yields per hectare than
other European countries and limiting the key contribution of Ukraine’s large arable land endowment to
economic growth and exports (PD1, para. 36). Implementation of the new law was designed first to allow
small individual purchases (supported by PA10 to enhance access to credit) before opening up to legal
entities. The PA also covered complementary legislation needed to ensure “free and open access to the
cadaster data and to mandate interoperability between the cadaster and registry, which is important to reduce
manipulation of ownership records and opportunities for corruption” (PD1, para. 38). The legislative action
was clearly the dominant factor toward the objective of an open, transparent market for land, with
implementation supported by further actions in ERDPL2. Relevance: PA5: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA6 and PA7 in ERDPL2 provided safeguards to strengthen achievement of objectives for land reform by
enhancing data security and transparency, automating data transfer between databases, and mandating
electronic auctions. These measures made a major contribution to achieving the objective by “restricting
discretionary handouts of state land by local authorities and preventing multiple registrations and raider
attacks” (PD1, para. 38). Relevance: PA6: Satisfactory (S); PA7: Satisfactory (S).

Financial market reforms

PA8 was an important step to carry forward financial sector consolidation and reforms that were initiated
following the 2014-15 financial crisis, which stabilized the system but left “a high share of legacy [non-
performing loans (NPLs) concentrated in fewer, and especially state-owned banks” (SOBs), and
disincentivized writing off or discounting NPLs (ICR, para. 39). The new prudential regulations issued by the
National Bank of Ukraine (NBU) under PA8 enabled write-offs for fully-provisioned NPLs and resolution
through conventional methods. This action to enable resolution of NPLs was especially important to give
banks space to cope with an expected increase in NPLs due to the impact of COVID-19 (PD1, paras. 40-41).
Relevance: PA8: Satisfactory (S).

PA9 was highly relevant to redressing the weak supervision of non-bank financial institutions (NBFIs),
including insurance, pension funds, non-bank lenders, and credit unions, which had resulted in “significant
fraud and money laundering” and inhibited the important potential contribution of NBFIs in financing economic
growth (PD1, para. 42). Despite having responsibility for supervising some 2,200 institutions, the existing
NBFI regulator was considered “weak, non-functional, lacking both independence and capacity” (PD1, para.
42). The legislation under PA9 “abolish[ed] the NBFI regulator and split its functions between the National
Bank of Ukraine and the National Commission for Securities and Stock Market,” which were more capable
and credible regulatory authorities. Relevance: PA9: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

Credit guarantee facility



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Economic Recovery DPL (P172597)



 PA10 was designed to complement PA5 by providing guarantees that would enable small farmers to access
 financing for land purchase, using land as collateral. Although small farmers produce more than half of
 Ukraine’s agricultural output, they “are significantly credit constrained because banks consider them high risk”
 (PD2, para. 42). The action was an appropriate, if modest step toward improving the conditions for
 agricultural lending. However, the results chain to achieving a significant increase in credit to small farmers
 via guaranteed bank loans was unclear in that “most of them do not have access even to basic banking
 services” and that Ukraine had virtually no loans secured by agricultural land (PD2, para.42). Since banks
 often do not accept agricultural land as collateral, evidence was needed that they would do so in Ukraine. In
 addition, further actions and support would be needed to implement the long process of “registering,
 capitalizing and licensing the Fund as well as passing internal bylaws, selecting Supervisory Board and top
 management, staffing it, and signing framework agreements with participating financial institutions” (PD2,
 para. 43). Furthermore, the expectation that (after initial capitalization by the state) it would “run on a self-
 sufficient basis in line with international best practice, with guarantee fees covering operational expenses of
 the fund” and therefore not need further support was highly optimistic (in light of experience worldwide with
 agricultural credit guarantee funds, which was not discussed) and, at best, would compromise the
 affordability objective if the guarantees had to be priced at commercial rates. Relevance: PA10: Moderately
 Satisfactory (MS).

 PDO3: Bolster the social safety net

 PA11 and PA12 were justified in PD1 (para. 43) and PD2 (para. 45) mainly in terms of cushioning the impact
 of the COVID-19 crisis, especially on the elderly. The actions included an initial acceleration of adjustment of
 pensions for inflation and institutionalizing such adjustments via indexation in the future, which were relevant
 to maintaining the purchasing power of the elderly – though not of employees and others who lost their
 sources of income under pandemic restrictions. While the pension system is Ukraine’s largest social
 program, the ICR (paras. 41-43) noted that the exclusive focus on pensions, the modest initial income boost,
 and the lack of evidence on the expected benefits weaken the results chain from the supported actions to the
 objective of a substantially stronger safety net. Relevance: PA11: Moderately Satisfactory (MS); PA12:
 Moderately Satisfactory (MS).



Rating

Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

The nine results indicators (RIs) were generally relevant to implementation of associated PAs, though not
always to achievement of the desired outcome or objective (which rendered three of them Moderately
Unsatisfactory). Two of them suffered from lack of data available for continued monitoring.

PDO1: Foster de-monopolization and anti-corruption institutions

RI1 monitored implementation of PA1 in terms of gas transit revenues flowing to the new independent entity
created as part of the unbundling of gas production and transport, under the new transit agreement between

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Economic Recovery DPL (P172597)



Naftogaz and Gazprom that had been enabled by the action (PD1, para. 30). The definition and data were clear.
The result was attributable to the action and related to the objective of de-monopolization. The intended result of
increased investment in the transport network was not captured, but this outcome was likely beyond the time
frame of the series. Relevance: RI1: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

RI2 tracked whether two tenders made under the old concessions law were signed under the new law enacted
under PA2, but that result “lacks attribution” (ICR, para. 49). PD2 (para. 32) argued that signing existing tenders
related to the new law in that it “made commercial and financial closing possible by creating necessary
conditions for project financing by lenders;” but it is unclear why tenders would have been made under the old
law if financing was not already available. While tracking progress of new private investment is relevant to the
PA and the objective of de-monopolization, measurement of increased tenders under the new law would have
been more convincing in terms of the intended result and attribution to the PA (ICR, para. 42). Nonetheless,
implementation of the two “first-ever PPP contracts in the ports sector“ was directly relevant to the objective of
“increased private sector participation in infrastructure investment” and to implementation of PA 3, since the
ports in question were on key river arteries (PD2, para. 33). Relevance: RI2: Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU).

RI3 was directly relevant to implementation of PA3’s measures to remove regulatory constraints on shipments
via Ukraine’s cost-effective inland waterways and to the objective of de-monopolization as well as the broader
objective of economic recovery and growth. RI 3 complemented RI2 in that the two port modernization projects
were on the inland waterways and thereby facilitated implementation of PA3. Data definition and availability
were sound, and the results chain well defined and attributable to the action. Relevance: RI3: Highly
Satisfactory (HS).

RI4 responded to public concerns that had motivated PA4 to both strengthen governance of NACP and restore
penalties. “Detailed verifications of asset declarations based on a more risk-sensitive approach with reduced
discretion” was attributable to implementation of PA4 and expected to “help increase accountability and bolster
investors’ confidence,” consistent with the anti-corruption objective of PDO1. Thus the results chain was clear
(ICR, para. 44), and the required data were clear and available. Nevertheless, it did not capture the ultimate
outcomes of increased convictions and reduced corruption. Relevance: RI4: Satisfactory (S).

PDO 2: Strengthen land and credit markets

RI5 directly captured the impact of implementing PA5 (Law #552-IX) on purchases of agricultural land and PA6
on streamlining the system, representing an important “precondition” toward the objective of stronger land
markets (ICR, para. 44). However, it did not capture the second part of PA5 [Law #554-IX] relating to data
transparency and linkage, nor PA7 regarding electronic auctions. RI 5 was also relevant to achieving the
intermediate objectives of “security of land tenure and incentives to undertake productivity enhancing
investments such as irrigation” (PD1, para. 36). Data definition and availability were clear. Relevance: RI5:
Satisfactory.

RI6 was intended to track the ability of small farmers to obtain credit due to the partial credit guarantee facility
established under PA10, as one of the preconditions toward the objective of better-functioning markets for credit
and agricultural land. However, it only monitored whether any loan had been issued backed by the facility, rather
than the number and/or value of loans (or at least guarantees) issued, which would have been a stronger
indicator. Nor did it track whether land purchases were actually effected. Relevance: RI6: Moderately
Unsatisfactory (MU).




                                                                                                     Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Economic Recovery DPL (P172597)



RI7 directly measured the initial impact of PA8 on cleaning up the existing NPLs of state-owned banks,
consistent with the objective of strengthening credit markets and opening up space to deal with the COVID-19
crisis. However, it was static in that it referred only to the pre-2020 NPLs and there was “no publicly available
data that allows to follow this indicator” (ICR, para. 46), either with respect to the pre-2020 portfolio or regarding
resolution of subsequent NPLs. PD2 (para. 38) alleged “strong progress in the reduction of NPLs at SOBs”
without providing evidence. A supplementary indicator of on-going NPLs would have been
desirable. Relevance: RI7: Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

RI8 related only to the action plan for implementing the new law under PA9, representing only the next step. It
did not track whether regulatory supervision of NBFIs had in fact been strengthened, or even whether the
expected reassignment of responsibilities had taken place. Unfortunately, ERDPL2 had no follow-up actions or
supplementary indicator; PD2 (para. 38) stated only that the reforms were being “supported by continued
dialogue and technical assistance by the World Bank.” Thus, while the RI indicated whether the next step toward
implementation had been taken, it did not adequately reflect actual progress toward the objective. Relevance:
RI8: Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU).

PDO3: Bolster the social safety net

RI9 was relevant to PA12, which followed through on PA11 (which concerned only 2020) to make indexation of
pensions mandatory “not later than March 1st of each year from 2022 to 2024,” consistent with the objective of
bolstering the safety net. Besides protecting purchasing power, annual indexation supported the objective by
making this adjustment more predictable. The RI, however, did not include a specific sub-indicator to monitor
achievement of the objective of at least 65 percent of the beneficiaries being women (the ICR, para. 46, states
that “gender disaggregated data are not readily available”). Additional indicators would have been desirable to
more fully monitor achievement of the broad objective to “bolster the social safety net.” Relevance: RI9:
Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

Table 2: Results indicators by Objective and PAs; baseline and target values; status and achievement

                                                                                            Actual as
                                                                                                           RI
                                 Associated     RI   Baseline Target (           Actual       % of
    Results indicator (RI)                                                                            Achievement
                                    PAs     Relevance (2019)   2022)             (year)     targeted
                                                                                                         rating
                                                                                             change
PDO1: Foster de-monopolization and anti-corruption institutions
  RI1: The share of gas transit
      revenues flowing in a
    transparent manner from
                                1          HS        0%       100%     100%                   100%            High
       Naftogaz to the new
 independent Gas TSO, based
on the tariff set by the NEURC.
       RI2: Number of port
   concession projects signed
     with private investment    2         MU          0      2 (2021) 2 (2021)                100%       [Substantial]
    mobilized through project
       financing by lenders.
  RI3: Number of voyages by     3          HS      11,938 14,300 15,840                       165%            High
    ships (including cargo) on
    Dnipro River increases by

                                                                                                       Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Economic Recovery DPL (P172597)



       about 20 percent.
       RI4: Number of full
     verifications of high risk
  declarations selected using
                                                                             1,026
 prioritization criteria, assigned 4            S          0      1,500                 68%        Substantial
                                                                            (2021)
   automatically to staff, and
      implemented using an
     improved methodology.
PDO2: Strengthen land and credit markets
                                                                         100,314
 RI5: Area of agricultural land                                           (2021)
                                                                                  67%
 previously under moratorium                                     150,000 +69,242
                                   5-7          S        0 ha                     113%                 High
  sold/purchased by eligible                                       ha     (2022)
                                                                                     189%
          individuals                                                    +114,135
                                                                          (2023)
RI6: Loans are issued to small
farmers and backed by Partial      10          MU         No       Yes        No         0%        Negligible
Credit Guarantee (PCG) facility
  RI7: Gross Pre-2020 NPL
                                                       UAH 397 < UAH    UAH
    Portfolio of State-Owned        8          MS                                       147%          [High]
                                                         bn    300 bn 253.98 bn
              Banks
 RI8: NBU and NSSMC adopt
   action plan on reshuffling
     supervisory regimes for
                                    9          MU         No       Yes       Yes        100%      [Substantial]
    insurance, credit unions,
   pension funds, and other
              NBFIs.
PDO3: Bolster the social safety net
RI9: Pension benefits increase
   in line with the indexation                                               Yes
 formula within the first half of                                          (2022)       100%
                                                                Yes 65%
 each calendar year, allowing     11-12        MS         No                                      [Substantial]
                                                                 women
      adequate support for                                                (2023) n.a     n.a.
 pensioners, of which at least                                                .
     65 percent are women.


Source: ICR, Section II.

Note1: RI achievement ratings note achievement of the targeted change for the RI. RI achievement ratings in
brackets reflect ratings that may have been adjusted based on weak relevance of the results indicator
(discussed in efficacy section).

Note 2: There is no RI for PA7.




                                                                                                Page 12 of 20
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Economic Recovery DPL (P172597)



  Rating

  Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Foster de-monopolization and anti-corruption institutions

               Rationale
               Full achievement of the target for RI1 indicated that the independent Gas TSO was receiving transit revenues
               under the new Gas Transit Agreement with Gazprom in a transparent manner (PD2, footnote 7), consistent
               with the objective of independence of the companies responsible for production and for transmission.
               Nevertheless, their fiscal independence was undermined somewhat by a transfer of UAH 27 billion of gas
               transmission to Naftogaz in September, 2021, in order to “protect households from the impact of the severe
               global energy [price] shock” (ICR, para. 46). While this was considered a one-time emergency measure that
               was not expected to affect the independence of future decision-making, it was “indicative of structural
               challenges related to rules-based, transparent and predictable financing of public service obligations” (PD2,
               para. 7). Rating: RI1: High.

               The target for RI2 was achieved in that two tenders for port concession projects were signed under the new
               law. While this represented progress toward the objective of private investment to help de-monopolize the
               sector, since the tenders were already in progress, the MU rating for the indicator in terms of attribution to the
               action and attraction of new investors triggers a downgrade to Modest achievement. Rating: RI2: Modest.

               RI3 was exceeded, and the steadily increasing ship traffic on Dnipro River signaled strong progress toward
               the PDO of de-monopolization and the broader objective of growth of exports and the economy. The ICR
               (para. 50) reported further progress in the form of a Cabinet resolution to expand navigable inland waterways,
               including dredging and waterway works. Rating: RI3: High.

               RI4 was substantially (68 percent) achieved, despite a temporary suspension of declarations and verification
               from February 2022 to September 2023 due to enactment of martial law following the Russian invasion of
               Ukraine (ICR, para. 51). The verifications responded to key aspects of the legislation, including high positions,
               response to complaints, use of digital tools, and lifestyle monitoring by NAPC. Reinstatement of asset
               declarations in 2023 included public access. Rating: RI4: Substantial.



               Rating
               Satisfactory




                                                                                                                  Page 13 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Economic Recovery DPL (P172597)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthen land and credit markets

Rationale
RI5 was fully achieved by the 2022 target year and exceeded in 2023, despite temporary suspension of the
land market in February-April 2022 (ICR, para. 53). Progress toward the objective of strengthening land
markets continued with opening to legal entities in January, 2024. Rating: RI5: High.

RI6 was not achieved in that no loans had been issued backed by a partial guarantee, since the Partial
Guarantee Fund was finally launched only in January, 2024 (18 months behind schedule). Nonetheless,
gradual progress had been made toward implementing PA10 in that the Fund was established, the necessary
capital was budgeted and half transferred as of January, 2024, and the first guarantee issued in February,
2024 (ICR, para. 54). A WB investment operation (P180242) will provide further support. While this additional
evidence indicates modest progress in implementation, it remains to be seen whether the guarantee will
substantially alter the reluctance of banks to lend to small farmers and enable the objective of land purchases
to be achieved. Rating: RI6: Negligible.

RI7 was exceeded in that the pre-2020 NPL portfolio of the four SOBs fell below the target. The ICR (para.
55) reported that the NBU undertook further supervisory actions and that the NPL ratio for the sector
continued to decline, consistent with the objective of strengthening the credit market, although no data were
given. While data from the National Bank of Ukraine show that the overall NPL ratio of Ukraine’s banks had
fallen from 55 percent to 27 percent as of March 2022, it had risen again to 38 percent as of January 2023,
three-quarters of it in state-owned banks. Due to the MS rating of relevance of RI7, the achievement is
lowered to Substantial. Rating: RI7: Substantial.

RI8 was nominally achieved, but the ICR (para. 56) reported that further steps toward implementation “are still
under development and the policy action has not been fully implemented.” An MU rating for the RI triggers a
downrating to Modest. Rating: RI8: Modest.



Rating
Moderately Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Bolster the social safety net

Rationale
RI9 was nominally achieved in that pension benefits were indexed in 2020, 2021, 2022 and 2023 (ICR, para.
84) with a further adjustment planned for 2024 (TTL). While the ICR reported a decrease in the share of
pensioners among the poor, data were lacking on the extent to which the overall objective of strengthening


                                                                                                Page 14 of 20
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Economic Recovery DPL (P172597)



                  the social safety net was achieved in terms of the predictability and benefits of indexation. More importantly,
                  no data were available to assess progress toward the sub-objective of women constituting at least 65 of
                  beneficiaries. Absence of the latter data warrants a downgrade of the achievement rating to Substantial.
                  Further, an MS relevance rating, contributes to a further downgrade of the achievement to Modest. Rating:
                  RI9: Modest.



                  Rating
                  Moderately Satisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

One PDO is rated Satisfactory, two Moderately Satisfactory. Three of the nine indicators show High
achievement, only one is Negligible.



Overall Efficacy Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

The Relevance of PAs is rated Satisfactory, and Efficacy rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ongoing conflict poses an extreme risk to the achievement of the objectives, particularly those
involving institutional capacity, fiscal costs and enabling investment. The current conflict diverts both human and
financial resources away from anti-corruption measures, public-private partnerships to improve infrastructure,
improving credit markets, and social safety nets. Vested interests can continue to impede institutional reforms in


                                                                                                                    Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Economic Recovery DPL (P172597)



an environment of uncertainty and reduced resources. High uncertainty about the path of the conflict inhibits
willingness to invest, by small farmers as well as by the unbundled gas companies and port concessionaires.

Fiscal capability to sustain progress in reforms is severely compromised by the heightened
macroeconomic risks during the conflict. Continued progress in de-monopolization depends in part on
budgetary resources available to the gas companies and port infrastructure projects. Uncertainty adversely
affects banks’ NPLs, as well as their readiness to lend to small farmers for land purchases.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

Analytical underpinnings and lessons from prior experience

The analytical underpinnings were strong thanks to a multi-year sustained engagement and knowledge
developed through sector work and operations, as well as technical assistance (TA) (ICR, para. 67). Ongoing TA
supported the design of actions with respect to energy, concessions, anticorruption, financial sector, and
pensions (ICR, Table 3).

PD1 did not explicitly incorporate lessons learned, and (perhaps as a consequence) it “underestimated the
extent of the deep-rooted influence of powerful vested interests” (ICR, para. 68). Following a substantial delay
due to invalidation of PA4 anti-corruption actions by the Constitutional Court (representing such interests), PD2
(para. 31) was more explicit that specific measures were needed to deal with “major governance challenges and
pushback from vested interests.” Although PD1 (para. 72) noted that implementation of “reforms in key sectors
require[s] follow up actions to yield results,” ERDPL2 “did not include such follow-up actions in critical reform
areas such as gas unbundling and anti-corruption” (ICR, para. 70). With respect to the financial sector, PD2
(para. 38) argued that follow-up actions were not needed because “continued dialogue and technical assistance
by the World Bank remain on track as reflected in strong progress in the reduction of NPLs at SOBs.”

Design

The ERDPL was “initially conceived as a standalone operation and was converted to a programmatic series of
two only after the decision meeting” (ICR, para. 66). As the decision meeting was on 27 February, 2020, at the
time that COVID-19 was emerging as a serious pandemic, the change to a series presumably was to enable
adjustments to the disruption of pandemic measures and mobilization of additional resources to cope. (Neither
the ICR nor PD2 was explicit on the rationale.) The consequences of this last-minute change in design included
“a limited number of triggers for DPL2” and “a slight disconnect between DPL-1 and DPL-2, with limited
complementarities between the two operations” (ICR para. 66).

Results chain and indicators

PD1 (section 4.1) provided thorough explanations of the rationale for the PAs, which enabled the ICR (Figure 0-
1) to formulate a detailed, credible theory of change linking the actions to expected outcomes and development


                                                                                                  Page 16 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Economic Recovery DPL (P172597)



impacts. The RIs were generally satisfactory in terms of monitoring the impact of the associated PAs, though
with some gaps with respect to tracking and progress toward objectives. There was no RI for PA7 that mandated
electronic auctions for state land sales.

Identification and mitigation of risks

PD1 (para. 71) recognized that “substantial political and governance risks arise from the deep-rooted influence
of powerful vested interests that could derail or even reverse reforms supported by this operation,” but was
unable to mitigate those risks sufficiently to prevent invalidation of key anti-corruption reforms, resulting in a
year’s delay before effectiveness conditions could be met (ICR, para. 77). PD2 maintained the “substantial”
overall risk rating, but the Supplementary DPL raised it to “high” in view of the increased macroeconomic, social,
governance and fiduciary risks emanating from the ongoing conflict (ICR, para. 76).

PD1 (para. 73) recognized the implementation risks for sectoral reforms, especially regarding agricultural land,
given the “politically charged nature of the reform, with significant vested interests.” These risks were “mitigated
in part by technical assistance provided by development partners and by close engagement of civil society
organization to resist vested interests.”

The supplementary funding with support from various development partners created fiduciary risks that were
mitigated through a range of safeguards, including verifications of the flow of funds, review of monthly
expenditures, and a suspension trigger (ICR, para. 78).

Consultation with stakeholders and development partners

PD1 (para. 47) set forth the “specific consultations held on the different reform areas” with key stakeholders
(including farmer associations, landowners, and the general public, as well as a parliamentary working group
regarding land reform); with civil society and the media; and with parliamentarians and the government on anti-
corruption).

Close coordination with multilateral and bilateral development partners was critical to ensuring support (TA as
well as financial) for implementation of key reforms and mobilization of emergency funding to offset the fiscal
demands of coping with the COVID-19 crisis and thereby minimizing diversion of resources from the reform
program. Key financing and TA for financial, institutional and anticorruption reforms came from the IMF
(including a 3-year, US$5.5 billion EFF program), European Union, United States Treasury and Agency for
International Development, United Kingdom, Japan international Cooperation Agency, Swedish International
Development Agency, and others, in addition to World Bank sectoral projects and TA (ICR, para. 6).



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale




                                                                                                      Page 17 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Economic Recovery DPL (P172597)



Monitoring

Data for RIs were generally available, monitored and assessed as part of the preparation of the second ERDPL
and Supplementary DPL. However, data were not available for continued monitoring of NPLs (RI 7) or the share
of women among beneficiaries of pension indexing (RI 9).

An Implementation Status and Result Report at the time of the decision review for the second ERDPL (5
November, 2021) provided details on progress in implementing policy and institutional reforms during 2021 (after
a slowdown in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic), giving the status for each RI, and rated the overall risk as
Substantial (subsequently raised to High as of the Supplementary DPL).

Adaptation

The Bank responded to the rapidly emerging severe consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic and measures to
contain it early in 2020 by splitting the planned standalone DPL into a series of two operations and seeking
substantial supplementary funding to offset the heavy fiscal burden. In view of the disruption to institutions,
priorities and budgets, this adaptation was appropriate to allow adequate time and fiscal space to implement
some of the ERDPL measures. It allowed the flexibility to postpone some measures to the second operation,
and also to introduce some new actions to further achievement of the objectives (PAs 3, 7 and 10). On the other
hand, this retrofitted split meant that there was not as much linking the two operations in terms of initial actions
in the first and follow-up actions in the second.

Implementation of PA4 was initially prevented by the October 2020 decision of the Constitutional Court that the
law underpinning the asset declaration and verification regime was unconstitutional. This delayed effectiveness
by a year and required drafting and passage of new legislation (with WB TA) in December 2020 and June 2021
“to restore the verification process of asset declarations, key powers of the NACP and other fundamental parts
of the legal framework on asset declaration” (PD2, para. 33).



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Both design and implementation are rated Moderately Satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts


                                                                                                     Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Economic Recovery DPL (P172597)



a. Social and Poverty

It is too early for evidence to be available on possible social and poverty impacts.



b. Environmental

It is too early for evidence to be available on improvements in resilience to climate change and other external
shocks.



c. Gender

It is too early for evidence to be available on impacts related to gender. Data on the gender composition of
pensioners was not available.



d. Other

n.a.



10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR provides a thorough, clearly-written narrative of the DPL series, including the context, rationale and
challenges, summarized in an excellent, coherent Theory of Change that sets out the results chain from actions
to intended outcomes and objectives. It both presents the actions and results in tabular form and thoroughly
interrogates the data in the text discussion. It both explains the rationale behind PAs and RIs and queries their
relevance when appropriate, including suggestions for more appropriate measures to achieve or monitor results.
The discussion of lessons learned is well grounded in and focused on the actual experience of the series. It is
consistent with the guidelines.


a. Rating

High

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreement/Comments



                                                                                                   Page 19 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Economic Recovery DPL (P172597)



                                 Moderately
 Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
 Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
 Relevance of Results
                                 ---                    Moderately Satisfactory
 Indicators
 Quality of ICR                  ---                    High


12. Lessons

Overcoming resistance to reforms by vested interests depends on a combination of collaboration with
development partners, engagement with civil society, and TA. Getting the government to persist with new
legislation after the Constitutional Court invalidated the previous anti-corruption law required both external
pressure from the donor community (especially the EU and US) and internal push from civil society (ICR, para.
83). Rapid preparation and passage of new legislation was enabled by WB “TA in drafting these legislative acts
and continue to support strengthening the governance structures to ensure that NACP is able to fulfill its long-
term mandate” (PD2, para. 33). The ability to rapidly mobilize supplemental financing from development partners
was also critical to maintaining the funds needed for implementation of the DPL series.

When political risks are high, as in a conflict situation, additional measures to mitigate fiduciary risk
may be needed. Supplemental financing was critical to offset the fiscal costs of dealing with the pandemic, but
once disbursed, careful monitoring of the flow of funds was important to avoid diversion. Furthermore, a
suspension trigger was needed to mitigate the risk of a possible change in government and redirection of funds
(ICR, para. 86).

New instruments could improve the WB’s ability to cope rapidly with a sudden disaster or conflict. Grant
funding for the Supplementary DPL had to be processed separately from the established loan agreement. The
ICR (para. 87) suggested “clear operating procedures that clarify the legal and procedural steps to quickly
transfer resources.” It also noted (para. 88) that “the World Bank does not have an instrument in place to
suspend interest and principal payments to ensure net-positive flows at the on-set of conflict or disasters.”

“Breaking up a vertically integrated monopoly is a necessary but not sufficient condition to enhance
competition in a state-dominated sector” (ICR, para. 85). Making a sector more competitive in the absence of
private investment requires both external enforcement of a suitable regulatory framework and internal measures
to strengthen corporate governance of SOEs.

Digitalization can help improve market functioning and governance by reducing barriers to entry, reducing
the scope for discretionary decisions by central intermediaries, giving everyone access to the same information,
and providing an audit trail (ICR, para. 91). Electronic auction of state land sales helped to mitigate the risk that
vested interests could shut out small farmers from purchasing or leasing state land (ICR, para.89).


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No



                                                                                                      Page 20 of 20
