     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     APNIP (P132754)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023924

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P132754                                  APNIP

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Kyrgyz Republic                          Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A0645                                 30-Jun-2022                                         38,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 11-Dec-2015                              30-Jun-2023

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          38,000,000.00                                   38,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           38,000,000.00                                   38,000,000.00

 Actual                                       38,000,000.00                                   38,000,000.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally               Dileep M. Wagle             Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Agriculture Productivity and Nutrition Improvement Project
   (APNIP) as articulated in the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program Grant Agreement (page 5) was
   identical to the one stated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 12) and aimed to:

   "Increase agricultural productivity and food and nutrition security of rural households in selected
   areas nationwide."


                                                                                                Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     APNIP (P132754)



   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on the following two Objectives:

   1. To increase agricultural productivity of rural households in selected areas nationwide.

   2. To increase food and nutrition security of rural households in selected areas nationwide.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  21-May-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following four components:

   1. Rehabilitation and Modernization of Irrigation and Drainage Infrastructure (appraisal cost:
   US$28.00 million, actual cost: US$25.17 million). This component financed: (a) civil works for the
   rehabilitation and modernization of selected existing irrigation and drainage (I&D) infrastructure systems, (b)
   provision of essential maintenance equipment to Water User Associations (WUAs) and Federation of Water
   User Associations (FWUAs), (c) off-farm irrigation infrastructure and water measurement structures, and (d)
   limited rehabilitation works on selected critical off-farm structures managed by the Department of Water
   Resources and Land Improvement (DWRLI).

   2. Agricultural Advisory Services (appraisal cost: US$3.50 million, actual cost: US$7.34 million). This
   component was designed to provide agriculture advisory services to WUA members within selected local
   government areas (Aiyl Aimaks [AAs]) to increase irrigated agricultural production and improve access to
   markets, including (a) training and technical advisory support for participating WUAs on the rehabilitation of
   I&D systems and development of agricultural development plans (ADPs); (b) provision of small grants up to
   US$30,000 to participating WUAs to implement ADPs; (c) advisory services for knowledge dissemination to
   a wider group of beneficiaries; and (d) on-farm water management demonstrations.

   3. Nutrition Improvements (appraisal cost: US$4.60 million, actual cost: US$2.93 million). This
   component was designed to support improved productivity, food security, and nutrition levels of
   beneficiaries, especially women, female adolescents, and children in selected AAs, and consisted of four
   sub-components in support of a wide range of activities, as follows:
   3.1. Improved household nutrition through nutrition education targeting women (18–49 years), children (0–5
   years), and adolescent girls (12–17 years).
   3.2. Provision of micronutrient and vitamin supplements for pregnant women, women of reproductive age
   and adolescent girls, and children of 6–24 months
   3.3. Improved household nutrition and dietary consumption by improving domestic gardening and providing

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    APNIP (P132754)



  options for household plot improvement; identification of the most vulnerable households to receive nutrition
  assistance; establishment of women’s Self-Help Group (SHGs) and community seed banks for provision of
  good quality vegetable seeds; carrying out of detailed technical assessments of current agronomic and
  production practices, seed and crop status, soil fertility and soil testing, advisory services for individual
  households, including development of household plot production guidelines and demonstration materials,
  and establishment of household demonstration plots; and associated season-long training and financing for
  basic equipment.
  3.4. Improved national coordination for food and nutrition security through provision of support for the Food
  Security Council (FSC).

  4. Project Management (appraisal cost: US$1.80 million, actual cost: US$2.56 million). This
  component financed project management costs, including for the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) staff,
  training, equipment, operational costs, administration, coordination, engineering, procurement, financial
  management (FM), safeguards, and M&E.

  Revised Components. While the project components were not changed during implementation, the March
  2020 restructuring reallocated funds between the APNIP components and cancelled one of the sub-
  components under component 3 (see below for details).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost inclusive of taxes and duties was estimated at US$38.0 million
  including US$ 3.7 million of physical and prices contingencies. The actual cost according to the ICR (Data
  Sheet, page 2) was US$38.00 million.

  Financing. The project was fully financed through a Global Agriculture and Food Security Program
  Grant worth US$38.00 million. The Grant was fully disbursed by project completion (ICR, Data Sheet, page
  2).

  Borrower Contribution. The project was fully financed through a Grant as mentioned above and no
  Borrower contribution was expected.

  Dates. The project was approved on December 11, 2015 and became effective about ten months later on
  September 14, 2016 due to delays related to government approval, signing, and parliamentary ratification
  (ICR, paragraph 57). The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on May 22, 2020, which was about three
  years and three months after effectiveness. While the PAD did not specify a date for the MTR, this Review
  finds that the MTR was timely conducted and in-line relative to other Bank operations. The project closed on
  June 30, 2023 which one year beyond the original closing date on June 30, 2022. The project was
  restructured twice, both were Level 2, as follows:

  1. On May 21, 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$18.00 million, in order to revise the Results
  Framework and change components and costs. These changes aimed to better align indicators to the PDO
  and improve definitions and methodologies to better capture progress and achievements (ICR, paragraph
  15). Also, to support the GoK’s efforts to mitigate emerging food security risks and ensure sustainability of
  agricultural production during the COVID-19 pandemic. Specifically, funding for component 2 was increased
  by US$2.27 million to provide seeds and fertilizers for the fall 2020 and spring 2021 planting seasons for
  7,800 farmers in 30 participating WUAs. Sub-component 3.2 (Provision of Micronutrient Supplements) was

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     APNIP (P132754)



   canceled as per the Recipient’s request due to a change in the GoK’s priorities and lack of progress due to
   persistent difficulties in procuring iron folic acid and micronutrient supplements. Furthermore, project
   management costs (component 4) were increased using cost savings from components 1 and 2

   2. On February 24, 2022, when the amount disbursed was US$32.32 million, in order to extend the
   Grant closing date by 12 months from June 30, 2022 to June 30, 2023. The extension was in response to
   the recipient’s request primarily to allow completion of the I&D rehabilitation works that were subject to
   delays including those resulting from the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic (ICR, paragraph
   16).

   While one PDO indicator was dropped and replaced by another and targets for two other PDO indicators
   were revised down during the March 2020 restructuring, this Review did not apply a split rating since the
   project scope and ambition did not change, and the actual final values at project closure indicated that the
   project not only achieved and exceeded the revised targets but also substantially met the original targets.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. In 2014, the Kyrgyz Republic was one of the poorest economies in the Europe and
Central Asia Region with an estimated per capita Gross National Income (GNI) of US$1,250.The
agricultural sector generated about one-fifth of the country’s GDP and one-third of employment in 2014.
Crop production was dominated by small-scale irrigation that covered around 82% of the 1.3 million ha of
agricultural land. The agricultural production faced major constraints, including poor access to reliable
irrigation, lack of maintenance of irrigation and drainage (I&D) systems, low usage of quality seed, and low
rates of machinery replacement. Agricultural activities were also subject to natural hazards such as
droughts, floods, and landslides. Household food insecurity was high, fluctuated substantially, and was
more prevalent in rural areas (6–10% in the north and 10–20% in the south in 2014). The APNIP aimed to
address issues in agriculture, irrigation, and nutrition mainly through the rehabilitation of the I&D
infrastructure of selected WUAs to provide more reliable and equitable irrigation and contribute to increased
crop production and introduce nutrition programs aimed at vulnerable groups.

Previous Bank Experience. The World Bank has extensive experience in irrigation rehabilitation in Kyrgyz
as well as regional and global experience. Specifically, the APNIP approach was built on the World Bank’s
long-term program for I&D rehabilitation and development of the WUA approach in the Kyrgyz Republic-
including the On-Farm Irrigation Projects 1 and 2. The APNIP’s advisory services component was built on
the long-term engagement of the World Bank and other development partners for the establishment of a
nationwide network of financially independent rural advisory services including the Agricultural Support
Services Project (ASSP) (P040721, May 1998–January 2013) and Agricultural Investments and Services
Project (AISP) (P096993, April 2008–April 2016). The nutrition improvement component followed on from
existing interventions delivered through the Community Action for Health Program and the country-wide
partnership between the health system and Village Health Committees (VHCs). The domestic gardening
program adopted some of the practices (such as Seed Funds and women’s self-help groups) that were
implemented under previous World Bank projects including the Agricultural Productivity Assistance Project



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     APNIP (P132754)



(APAP) (P118838, June 2011–August 2016). Overall, the World Bank was in a strong position to continue
its involvement in the irrigation and agriculture sectors under the APNIP.

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the Bank's Country Partnership
Strategy for Kyrgyz (CPS, FY2013-FY2017). The CPS noted the important role of both water resources
management and irrigation for the country as a whole and agricultural productivity in particular, and
maternal and child health care for improving the livelihoods of women and children. The project also
contributed to the goals of the World Bank to reduce extreme poverty and promote shared prosperity. The
rehabilitation of I&D systems and the provision of agricultural advisory services would improve agricultural
production and marketing of higher value crops and increased seasonal employment resulting in increasing
incomes of the rural population. Also, the provision of agricultural advisory services and educational
campaigns for increased production and utilization of nutritious food combined with targeted provision of
micronutrients and vitamins would improve nutrition and food security of rural poor in general and
vulnerable groups in particular. Finally, improved coordination of food and nutrition security at the national
level, would benefit the food and nutrition insecure vulnerable population.

At project completion, the PDO continued to be in line with World Bank's Country Partnership Framework
for Kyrgyz (CPF, FY2024–FY2028). The CPF included three high level outcomes (HLOs): 1. Increased
Private Sector-led Job Creation; 2. Improved Access to Sustainably Managed Natural Resources; and 3.
Enhanced Human Capital and Empowerment of Vulnerable Populations. The APNIP, improved access to
water, improved nutrition and training to help improve food security and increased efficiency of water use
which mainly contributed to HLO2 of the CPF.,

Consistency with Government Strategies and Priorities. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the
national priorities and Government policies and strategies for agriculture, food, and nutrition security as
reflected in the National Sustainable Development Strategy (2013–2017), the Concept of Food Security of
the Kyrgyz Republic (2009–2019), and the Food Security and Nutrition Program (2014–2017). In the afore-
mentioned documents, agriculture was considered essential for economic development, and required a
comprehensive approach to help reduce social tensions and provide solutions for rural development. Also,
a key medium-term policy for the Government was ensuring food safety through increasing domestic
production and productivity in agriculture and by creating food reserves. In food and nutrition security, the
Government aimed to provide all citizens with permanent access to sufficient food and had established a
national-level Food Security Council (FSC) responsible for coordinating food security issues.

At project completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the National Development Strategy (2018–2040)
which emphasized the development of energy and water-efficient irrigation networks, and the improvement
of agricultural production to achieve food and nutrition security. The Government also adopted the National
Irrigation Program (2017–2026) which featured the support and modernization of irrigation infrastructure to
a climate-resilient irrigation infrastructure to (a) create new jobs, improve socioeconomic conditions, and
reduce migration; (b) develop crop farming; and (c) increase tax revenues and GDP. The PDO was also
aligned with the Food Security and Nutrition Program for (2019–2023) which aimed achieve sustainable
development, ensure the country's food security, and respond to internal and external threats for the
stability of the domestic food market.

Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. The PDO statement was clear, focused and pitched
at an adequate level of ambition. At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with Bank Strategy and the
Government strategies/priorities as discussed above. However, the alignment of the PDO with CPF at



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      APNIP (P132754)



               completion was noticeably at a lower level relative to the CPF at appraisal. Therefore, Relevance of
               Objectives is rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase agricultural productivity of rural households in selected areas nationwide.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported the following activities:

                             1.Finance the rehabilitation of I&D infrastructure to ensure improved and sustained access to adequate
                             agriculture water resources which would contribute to increasing agricultural productivity. Specifically, the
                             project would finance civil works for the rehabilitation and modernization of the existing command area of I&D
                             systems on about 60,000 ha managed by approximately 30 WUAs; essential maintenance equipment would
                             be provided to WUAs; support installation of off-farm irrigation infrastructure, and water measurement
                             structures at the intakes of around 300 WUAs for measurement of water delivered; and support limited
                             rehabilitation works on critical off-farm structures managed by the DWRLI.

                             2. The project would support the provision of agricultural advisory services to WUA members in order to
                             improve farm practices and technology and improve access to markets, which would contribute to both
                             increasing irrigated agricultural productivity and food and nutrition security. Specifically, the project would
                             support training and technical support for the 30 WUAs selected for rehabilitation of I&D systems to prepare
                             and manage agricultural development plans; provide technical advisory services for the 30 WUAs selected for
                             rehabilitation works and to WUA members in the 30 adjacent AA for the implementation of the agricultural
                             development plans; finance small grants of up to US$ 30,000 for the implementation of the agricultural
                             development plans managed by the WUAs; support additional advisory services for further knowledge
                             dissemination for a wider group of beneficiaries; and support on-farm water management demonstrations,
                             including drip irrigation.

                             3. Support nutrition improvements which would contribute to both improved productivity and food and nutrition
                             security through nutrition education, provision of micronutrient supplements, and production diversity and
                             yield growth of more nutritious crops on household plots. Specifically, the project would support establishing a
                             community level nutrition education program; dietary diversification through improved domestic gardening on
                             household plots; and support improved national coordination for food and nutrition security.

                             The following outputs were expected: increase in the number of water users with improved I&D service,
                             increase in the area with improved I&D service, and increase in the number of operational water user

                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   APNIP (P132754)



associations (WUAs); improved capacity of WUAs and WUAs members, number of client training days
provided, development plans prepared and implemented by WUAs, number of farmers receiving seeds and
fertilizers; increase in the number of self-help groups (SHGs) members adopting methods to improve
household nutrition, proportion of target beneficiaries participation in household nutrition campaigns.

Those activities combined were expected to contribute to increased agricultural productivity based on the
following three outcomes: average percent increase in crop productivity for WUAs, Operational WUAs
strengthened, and WUA members with increased adoption of improved crop management practices.
Anticipated higher level outcomes included: improved economic opportunities and higher income for rural
population, improved social welfare and health of the rural population, and better nutrition.

The achievement of the stated objective was underpinned by the following critical assumptions: 1.Improved
irrigation coupled with improved advisory services would lead to increased agricultural productivity and
improved food nutrition; 2. Local contractors would have sufficient capacity to carry out rehabilitation works; 3.
Preparation of ADPs and small grants for agricultural inputs and machinery, plus training, would strengthen
the capacity of WUAs to provide services; 4. Formation of SHGs combined with training would increase
production of nutritious vegetables and thus better nutrition; and 5. Nutrition training and coordination would
lead to better nutrition.

The activities stated in the ToC were directly connected to the outputs and outcomes in a plausible causal
chain. The stated assumptions were logical and realistic.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

The information below is based on the ICR (Annex 1) unless referenced otherwise.

      31 WUAs were providing irrigation water delivery in line with agreed irrigation schedule exceeding the
         target of 30.
      64,632 ha were provided with improved irrigation and drainage services exceeding the target of
         60,000 ha.
        31 WUAs were operational and strengthened exceeding the target of 30.
        31 irrigation schemes were successfully rehabilitated exceeding the target of 30.
        30 development plans were prepared and implemented by WUAs fully achieving the target of 30.
        81% of WUA members showed evidence of increased adoption of improved crop management
         practices exceeding the target of 80%.
        20,663 farmers received seeds and fertilizers exceeding the target of 7,800.
        34,767 farmers benefitted from improved I&D services including 6,715 women exceeding the target of
         2,600 females (target achieved).
        5,713 WUA administration staff and members were trained in ADP preparation, procurement and
         contract management, financial management, operation of agricultural machinery, and establishment
         of a revolving fund (no target provided).
         25,339 WUA members (73% of total members), of which 8,419 were women, trained in modern
         agronomic technologies.
        65 on-farm demonstrations established showing improved water management technologies. These
         included 30 demonstrations on drip irrigation and 35 on improved water management (short-furrow



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  APNIP (P132754)



     and contour irrigation), plus use of water measurement devices on a range of orchard, vegetable, and
     field crops.
    150,682 client days of training were provided exceeding the original target of 7,200 and the revised
     target of 96,900. Also, 96,938 client days of training were provided for females exceeding both the
     original target of 3,600 and the revised target of 79,560 (targets exceeded).
    2,704 WUA members benefited from the use of agricultural machinery in 2022 covering 10,530 ha.
     The use of equipment contributed to more timely field operations and improved land preparation. Also,
     planting/seeding machines resulted in more precise planting and improved seed germination, reduced
     losses from weeds, and fewer losses during harvesting, and thus contributes to increased productivity
     (ICR, paragraph 30).

Outcomes

    The project activities resulted in an average increase of 65% for the productivity (over the baseline) of
       major field crops (alfalfa, barley, beans, cotton, maize, sainfoin, and wheat) (PDO outcome indicator
       1) for WUAs that received a full package of project inputs (improved irrigation, seeds and fertilizers,
       agricultural machinery, and training), significantly exceeding the 10% target.
      According to the ICR (Table 2) the highest percentage increase relative to the baseline was 157% for
       maize and the lowest was 27.5% for sainfoin. Alfalfa recorded a 84.5% increase in productivity,
       followed by barley at 69.7%, wheat at 45.7%, and lastly was beans at 27.7% increase. The baseline
       was in 2018 while the end line recordings were in 2022.
      Productivity increases were verified also through a PIU conducted survey of the 30 WUAs in 2022.
       The survey estimated productivity increases specifically for WUA members who received seeds of
       three crops (wheat, barley, and maize) and fertilizers as well as improved irrigation. The weighted
       average yield increase was 44% higher than the 2016 National Statistical Committee (NSC) data for
       the project-supported districts (i.e., before the project) and 29% higher than the 2022 NSC data. The
       NSC figures reflected the yields that would be expected without the project (ICR, paragraph 26).
      The ICR (paragraph 28) noted that while the areas cultivated with main field crops remained the
       same, there was a small shift to higher value crops (maize, berries, and vegetables) following
       irrigation improvements. Also, the area of alfalfa for livestock feeding and sale also increased.
      By project completion, water users provided with improved irrigation and drainage services reached
       34,767 users substantially achieving the original target of 36,000 and exceeding the revised target of
       26,000 (PDO outcome indicator 2). Also, 6,715 female water users were provided with irrigation and
       drainage services substantially achieving the original target of 7,200 and exceeding the revised target
       of 2,600 (PDO outcome indicator 3).
      According to the end line study, 80% of farmers received irrigation water in the required quantity and
       frequency, while 91% confirmed improved water supply. The time required to deliver water was
       reduced (1.5 times more farmers received water within one hour), and conflicts were reduced due to
       better scheduling (63% of farmers indicated that the schedule was not violated). The PIU estimated
       that the coefficient of water use increased from an average of 56 to 76% because of the
       improvements. This allowed previously partially irrigated land (area not provided) to be fully irrigated
       and a greater number of irrigations to be applied (ICR, paragraph 29).
      According to the ICR (paragraph 79) the project activities resulted in improving the coefficient of
       water from 56 to 76% and reduced conveyancing losses from 44 to 24%.




                                                                                                  Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   APNIP (P132754)




      However, demonstrated drip irrigation systems were not widely adopted, partly because of high costs
       (currently around US$2,800–$3,200 per hectare). Alternatively, farmers installed simpler and cheaper
       modified systems, especially on small plots and in the south (ICR, paragraph 32).

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project-supported I&D rehabilitation contributed to increased
agricultural productivity through improving the efficiency of water delivery, and enabling more timely irrigation
scheduling to farmers in 31 WUAs, including tail-enders who before the project did not receive sufficient
water. The project also contributed to increased productivity through the provision of good quality seeds and
fertilizers and the purchase of more efficient farm machinery. Further, the project provided-training contributed
to increased productivity where 81% of farmers/WUA members applied the knowledge gained to increase the
productivity of their crops (ICR, paragraph 31). Finally, the project significantly achieved its target for the PDO
outcome indicator achieving an increase of 65% in crop productivity compared to a target of 10%. Based
on the observed increases in yields (as noted above) from the combination of irrigation and crop production
improvements, more efficient irrigation and strengthened WUAs, the efficacy with which this objective was
achieved is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase food and nutrition security of rural households in selected areas nationwide.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported nutrition improvements
through supporting the following activities: domestic gardening, nutrition training, micronutrient supplements,
improve national coordination for food and nutrition security. The expected outputs included: number of SHGs
adopting methods to improve household nutrition, and proportion of target beneficiaries participating in
household nutrition campaigns. The overall expected outcome was increased food and nutrition as evidenced
by: (a) increased proportion of women 15-49 years of age who consumed at least 5 out of 9 food groups, and
(b) the number of people receiving improved nutrition services. Anticipated long-term outcomes included;
improved social welfare and health of the rural population, and better nutrition.

The achievement of the stated objective was underpinned by the following critical assumptions: 1.Improved
irrigation coupled with improved advisory services would lead to increased agricultural productivity and
improved food nutrition; 2. Formation of SHGs combined with training would increase production of nutritious
vegetables and thus better nutrition; and 3. Nutrition training and coordination would lead to better nutrition.

The activities stated in the ToC were directly connected to the outputs and outcomes in a plausible causal
chain. The stated assumptions were logical and realistic.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

The information below is based on the ICR (Annex 1) unless referenced otherwise.


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  APNIP (P132754)




    98% of households had a Food Consumption Score (FCS) above 28.5 points (already exceeded by
       completion of baseline survey in 2019).
      150,682 client days of training provided in nutrition, health, and domestic gardening - 96,938 were
       female exceeding the overall revised target of 96,900 and the original target of 7,200, and exceeding
       the revised target and original targets for females of 79,560 and 3,600, respectively.
      1,340 Self-Help Groups formed (89.5% women) with 11,100 members and were provided with good-
       quality seeds and season-long training (no target provided).
      11,100 members of Self-Help Groups adopted methods to improve household nutrition exceeding the
       original target of 9,000 (original target was not revised).
      The project trained 1,269 medical workers (93% women) in 60 AAs on infant and young child feeding
       (IYCF) and nutrition and anemia in Women of Reproductive Age and adolescent girls, exceeding the
       target by 5.7% (ICR, paragraph 36).
      130,255 households were trained on topics such as the importance of a varied diet, anemia
       prevention, IYCF practices, food safety, and sanitation and hygiene with the help of 4,500 volunteers
       (ICR, paragraph 36).
      The project provided training for 225 Village Health Committees (VHCs) and in villages where no
       VHCs existed, training was provided to local initiative groups, which were then converted to VHCs
       (ICR, paragraph 36).

Outcomes

    The project contributed to increased food and nutrition security by increasing dietary diversity. The
     irrigation improvements discussed under Objective 1 contributed to increased agricultural crop
     productivity, including staple foods, which were major contributors to food and nutrition security.
    The end line evaluation showed that an increase in dietary diversity and (production and) consumption
     of iron-rich and nutrient dense food resulted from the combination of increased agricultural
     productivity, nutrition training at the community level and through local health centers, and increased
     production in household plots. The proportion of women 15–49 years of age who consumed at least 5
     out of 9 food groups increased from 67.3% at baseline to 78.0% at project completion exceeding the
     end target of 75% (PDO outcome indicator). The survey also indicated that consumption of iron-rich
     foods increased from 94 to 97% and vitamin A-rich foods from 84 to 85%. Further, 1.5 times more
     families with a woman as the main breadwinner confirmed that their nutrition became more varied,
     and that participation in information events significantly motivated them to maintain a proper balanced
     and varied diet, including consumption of food rich in iron and vitamin A.
    The project activities also contributed to nutrition education and information dissemination which
     resulted in improved household nutrition and health. Specifically, 17% more households began to boil
     water before use, and washing hands increased to 96% from 88% (ICR, paragraph 36).
    The project enhanced food and nutrition security through improved domestic gardening. To improve
     food quality and quantity from household plots, 1,340 SHGs were established from 2018 to 2021 in
     246 villages, covering 11,100 people (including 89.5%). The average increase in yields for SHG
     members was 27% for vegetables and 31% for fodder crops compared with farmer’s practice. The
     production increases resulted in an increase in sales income averaging about KGS 10,480 in each
     year for SHG participants and an increase in household consumption of vegetables. The ICR
     (paragraph 37) reported the training program was also highly valued, with 83% of SHG members
     implementing their knowledge of nutrition and processing compared to a baseline of 35%.



                                                                                               Page 10 of 22
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                APNIP (P132754)



                            Summary of Efficacy Assessment. To support increased food and nutrition security, the project financed a
                            combination of nutrition education, dissemination of information on nutrition and health issues, improved
                            domestic gardening to produce a greater quantity of nutritious vegetables and increase household incomes,
                            strengthening of VHCs, and improved national coordination for food and nutrition security. The project
                            exceeded its target for the outcome indicator and met or exceeded most of its targets for the IRIs. Therefore,
                            the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated High.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. As discussed above, the project substantially contributed to both
                            objectives: increased agricultural productivity (Objective 1, rated Substantial) and increase food and nutrition
                            security (Objective 2, rated High) of rural households in selected areas nationwide.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

   ex-ante

                               Economic and financial rates of return (ERR & FRR) for the overall project were estimated at ERR of
                                26.3% and ENPV of US$48.2 million and FRR of 24.8% and FNPV of US$64.2 million.
                               The project was expected to generate agricultural and nutritional benefits. Main agricultural
                                benefits included: (i) increased irrigated crop productivity due to improved irrigation water supply and
                                application of improved farm practices and technologies on around 60,000 ha operated by around
                                36,000 farm families; and (ii) increased agricultural profitability due to diversification towards higher value
                                crops and increased marketed share of crops for around 50,600 farm families operating approximately
                                84,000 ha. Key nutritional benefits included: (i) improved availability (and consumption) of nutritious food;
                                (ii) improved access to nutritious food by raising farm households’ incomes; (iii) provision of micronutrient
                                supplements and vitamins; and (iv) improved food utilization.
                               Quantified agricultural and nutrition benefits included: (i) 15% yield increases for all field crops and
                                10% increase for orchards; (ii) incremental production on 5% of irrigated lands that were left unused due
                                to lack of irrigated water supply; (iii) prevented workforce losses from nutrition-related mortality; and (iv)

                                                                                                                                Page 11 of 22
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        APNIP (P132754)



      averted productivity and income losses to children who were under five at the project start. Also, the
      project investments in rehabilitation of I&D systems and agricultural extension and marketing is expected
      to generate incremental agricultural net benefits at US$ 2.3 million annually. Financial returns for
      representative farms located in the North and South, with respective average holding sizes of 3.63 ha
      and 1.25 ha were analyzed. The respective incremental gross margins to the Southern and Northern
      farmers will be US$380 and US$682.
     Sensitivity Analysis. Four sensitivity variables were tested: (i) an increase in the project cost, (ii) a
      benefits decline, (iii) a two-year delay in benefit accumulation and (iv) a simultaneous increase in the
      project cost and reduction in benefits. The results showed that the project was moderately sensitive to
      changes in the all variables, but within 20% changes in the four variables, the EIRR remains higher than
      20%, so the project was considered robust.

ex-post

     The ex-post economic analysis estimated an ERR of 28.7% and an ENPV of US$59.3 million, which
        was slightly higher when compared to the appraisal estimates at an ERR of 26.3% and ENPV of
        US$48.2 million. While the ex-post EFA mostly followed the same methodology at appraisal to ensure
        consistency and comparability, the ICR (Annex 3, Table 4.2.) listed some differences related to the
        financial and social discount rates, the length of the analytical period, expected increase in yields, and
        adoption rates.
       The economic analysis assessed country-level project impact through converting financial prices into
        economic values (using the conversion factors and removing the value added tax of 12%) to assess the
        real costs and benefits from the social (country) point of view, and undertaking economic analysis of the
        overall project by aggregating all costs and benefits.
       The ex-post economic and financial analysis were conducted based on project investments to assess the
        project’s overall effect, particularly using the actual beneficiary number/implementation of sub-projects
        and the actual project expenditures schedule.
       Crop models used a without and with project to estimate financial net returns per hectare. Also, farm
        models were prepared to assess the project’s impact at the household level.
       However, the nutrition benefits could not be estimated under the changed nutrition indicator (Increase in
        proportion of women 15–49 years of age who consumed at least 5 of 9 food groups), as there was no
        evidence of how this could be translated into a benefit stream and what would be the attribution rate of
        the project (ICR, Annex 3, paragraph 2).
       Sensitivity Analysis. Economic returns were tested against changes in benefits and costs and for various
        lags in the realization of benefits. These changes did not have a significant impact on the ERR, and the
        economic viability remained well above the discount rate of 13% despite a 20% decline in benefits (ERR
        23.9%) or a 20% increase in costs (ERR 24.9%). A two-year delay in project benefits reduced the ERR
        to 19.6%.
       Implementation Efficiency. Declaration of effectiveness was delayed for about 10 months and the project
        experienced implementation delays at the start. A one-year extension of the closing date was required to
        accommodate initial delays and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the associated restrictions.
        All project activities were completed by the extended closing date and the project disbursed 100% of the
        allocated funds. The project was also able to finance I&D rehabilitation for 31 WUAs (one more than the
        planned target 30 WUAs). The project also provided a greater quantity of seeds and fertilizers and farm
        machinery to the WUAs than planned and established a larger number of SHGs than expected.
        However, project management costs increased from the originally planned 4.74% of the total project cost


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      APNIP (P132754)



       to 6.7%. According to the ICR (paragraph 43) this increase in management cost enabled "the PIU to be
       sustained and to manage the project over the extended implementation period."

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. The ex-post ERR was estimated at 28.7% which slightly exceeded
appraisal estimate at 26.3%. The extension of the project closing date was justified given the initial delays and
the COVID-19 disruptions. Overall, the project was efficiently implemented and disbursed 100% of the allocated
funds. However, management costs were higher than anticipated and the nutrition benefits could not be
estimated. The ex-post EFA in the ICR (Annex 3) was detailed and provided a solid justification of the project
investments. Therefore, and based on the above-reported information, Efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 26.30
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              28.70
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial. The project substantially
contributed to both objectives: increased agricultural productivity (Objective 1) as evidenced by the reported
increase in crop productivity, and increased food and nutrition security (Objective 2) of rural households in
selected areas nationwide as evidenced by increase in the proportion of women 15–49 years of age who
consumed at least 5 out of 9 food groups. Efficiency was rated Substantial. The ex-post ERR was estimated at
28.7% which slightly exceeded the appraisal estimate at 26.3%, and the project was efficiently implemented
and disbursed 100% of the allocated funds.

Based on the assigned rating for the three Outcome criteria, the Outcome of the project is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      APNIP (P132754)



The following risks could potentially impact the Development Outcome:

1. Institutional risk. While the project WUAs were considerably strengthened under the project, there is a
risk that the role of the autonomous WUAs could be weakened in the future with uncertainty over the roles of
local government (AO), district-level water authorities (RayonVodKhoz), and the WUA Support Units (WSUs)
under the national Water Resources Service (WRS). Through project support, the WUAs were
strengthened from a weak base both at the technical level through irrigation rehabilitation and at the
management and administrative levels through training. WUAs also were provided with assets that increased
income for investment and O&M. The fee collection rate increased, and the revolving funds provided
additional income. The project emphasized the value of autonomous farmer led WUAs, which has been
supported by the World Bank since 1997 and is codified in the 2002 Law on WUAs. However, further efforts
from the World Bank and WRS are required to define the roles and strengthen the water institutions in their
roles and responsibilities to achieve long-term technical and financial stability.

2. Financial risk. The Ministry of Finance required repayment to the budget of 25% of the costs of
rehabilitation and 50% of the costs of the excavators provided as a part of component 1. Most repayments
are now due, with a concomitant large increase in WUA costs. The project mitigated this risk through
enabling the WUAs to improve delivery of water and provide additional services (agricultural machinery and
good-quality seeds and fertilizers). This allowed WUAs to increase the irrigation fee level and collection rate
from WUA members. That said, many WUAs were concerned that the WUA membership fees will not suffice
to fully cover the repayment requirements. This could result in reducing the ability of WUAs to continue
investment in improving the I&D system including expanding the works to cover all the command area. It will
be necessary for the WSUs/WRD to continue to monitor and propose solutions for continuing investment.
Also, there is a risk that the agricultural machinery purchased through the small grants will not be replaced or
added to, and that the value of the revolving funds that were set up for repayments of the value of the seeds
and fertilizers provided will wind down over time. These risks were mitigated by the preparation of guidelines
at the outset of the project governing the operation of machinery including allocating a proportion of funds for
depreciation and for the operation of revolving funds for seed and fertilizer. The actual terms for repayment
into the revolving fund and the level of charges for machinery use are determined by the WUA management
and approved by the WUA General Assembly of members, thus it is in the interest of members to sustain
these programs. Further, the use of good quality seeds and fertilizer has a demonstration value and should
generate increased income for farmers allowing further purchases of these inputs. Nevertheless, it will be
necessary for the WSUs/WRD to continue supporting the WUAs through monitoring the WUA budgets and
expenditures and providing advice and training on maintenance of the machinery and revolving funds.

3. Technical risk. This risks relates to infrastructure rehabilitation and O&M. All I&D infrastructure
rehabilitation was successfully completed, and the infrastructure is currently being satisfactorily operated and
maintained by the WUAs. While the rehabilitated assets are expected to last 25 years, inadequate and non-
timely O&M will reduce the lifespan of the works. This risk was partially mitigated by the project's WUA
capacity strengthening. In addition, the provision of excavators limits the modest risk that some on-farm
irrigation channels could silt up again in the long term.

4. Environmental risk. Reduced availability of water for irrigation was a problem in 2012 and 2023, although
2022 was a good year. This is a recurrent problem (typically every 5 or 6 years) but may be exacerbated by
climate change. The project aimed to mitigate this effect through better conveyancing, measurement, and
delivery of water. The coefficient of water use increased from 56% to 76% because of the project, and
conveyancing losses were reduced from 44% to 24%.



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      APNIP (P132754)



5. Project specific risk. The project-supported activities for the WUAs, farmers, SHGs, and village women
were beneficial and improved the beneficiaries' knowledge and skills. While the training material is available
online and as hard copies, the benefits will wane over time as WUA management and people move on.
Training should not be considered a ‘one-off’ activity, but should be continued to involve new people over the
long-term. Also, the nutrition training and formation of SHGs were beneficial, but there is a risk that additional
training will be needed over time. This risk can be mitigated by including ongoing training as part of future
projects, especially grant projects such as those funded by GAFSP. There is also a risk that some of the
nutrition activities will not be continued after the project closes. This risk has been mitigated by agreements
with local governments (AOs) to allocate funds from their budget for continuing nutrition and health
programs, incorporation of project-related nutrition training modules into national-level training programs, and
establishment of additional VHCs.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic relevance and approach. The project was strategically relevant and in line with the
          Government priorities. The PDO was also in line with the Bank strategies (see section 3 for
          details). Agriculture was considered essential for economic development, and a comprehensive
          approach was expected to help reduce social tensions and provide solutions for rural
          development.
         Technical, financial and economic aspects. The project design was built on the World Bank’s
          long-term program for I&D rehabilitation and development of the WUA approach in the Kyrgyz
          Republic. The design featured an advisory services component that was built on the long-term
          engagement of the World Bank and other development partners for the establishment of a
          nationwide network of financially independent rural advisory services. The nutrition improvement
          component was modeled based on existing interventions delivered through the Community Action
          for Health Program and the country-wide partnership between the health system and Village
          Health Committees (VHCs). While the domestic gardening program adopted some of the
          practices under previous World Bank projects including the revolving Seed Funds and women’s
          self-help groups (SHGs). The project design benefited from international expertise in irrigation
          engineering, preparation of an implementation manual for ADPs, and nutrition planning (ICR,
          paragraph 73). The PAD included a detailed economic analysis that provided adequate
          justification of the project investments.
         Poverty, gender, and social development aspects. The project activities were expected to
          benefit poor tail-end farmers who received less irrigation water and often experienced an
          uncertain supply. The project also targeted the most food-insecure individuals and households to
          reduce poverty in the project area through the nutrition and SHG programs. Women benefitted
          from I&D rehabilitation partly because of improved water delivery to the participating/benefiting
          households, including in some cases to household plots that were normally managed by women.
          The Results Framework featured sex disaggregated indicators to capture women participation.
         Environmental and Fiduciary aspects. The project had adequate environmental and financial
          management arrangements. However, procurement capacity was weak and contributed to
          implementation delays.


                                                                                                      Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     APNIP (P132754)



        Implementation arrangements. The PIU had experience in implementing World Bank irrigation
         projects but lacked experience in agricultural advisory services or nutrition. A notable shortcoming
         was the failure of the PIU to timely fill all the needed positions with competent staff resulting in
         implementation delays at the project’s outset. Also, the PIU was responsible for several interlinked
         irrigation projects. This was not the best arrangement and the PIU had to be reorganized such
         that dedicated PIU staff oversaw the implementation of APNIP.
        Risk assessment. Eight risks were identified at appraisal with an overall rating of Substantial.
         The risks related to political and governance, technical design of project or program, and
         institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability were all rated substantial. While the
         identified risks had adequate mitigation measures, the risks related to rising prices, limited
         availability of construction materials (such as prefabricated concrete forms); and difficulty in
         carrying out works during the irrigation season were not anticipated.
        M&E arrangements. While M&E was under the responsibility of the PIU, there were no M&E
         specialists specifically working on the APNIP until seven months after project effectiveness. M&E
         design had some shortcomings as several PDO outcome indicators were revised at restructuring.
         Also, the Food Consumption Score (FCS) proved not to be an adequate indicator of nutrition
         benefits, as the estimated target value was found to be fully met at the time of baseline survey.

  Summary of Quality at Entry Assessment. The project was strategically relevant. Design featured a
  comprehensive approach that addressed irrigation concerns, advisory services and improved nutrition.
  Design could have benefited from a marketing component to address the expected surge in crop
  production. Environmental and fiduciary aspects were adequate, but staffing issues impacted
  implementation readiness. While the identified risks had adequate mitigation measures, some risks
  were not anticipated. M&E design had minor shortcomings.

  In a further communication on May 27th, 2024, the project team explained that the PIU being responsible
  for several interlinked irrigation projects was the accepted and applied practice in the Kyrgyz Republic.
  Also, the team noted that it was considered normal for any irrigation project to anticipate some difficulties
  with scheduling construction works during the irrigation season as farmers want a continuous supply of
  water during the season. Finally, the team explained that the correct target value for the Food
  Consumption Score could be foreseen. There was no information about the state of the food
  consumption score in the country, and the target for the Food Consumption Score was derived from the
  experience in other countries. The Food Consumption Score was not an appropriate indicator for the
  project, and the team addressed that issue by restructuring the project and introducing a new indicator on
  dietary diversity to reflect the nutrition activities under the project better.

  Overall, and based on the team's clarifications noted above, the Quality at Entry (QAE) is rated
  Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision



                                                                                                     Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     APNIP (P132754)



       The World Bank team provided regular implementation support with 14 missions carried out
        including an MTR and virtual missions during COVID-19 restrictions. After the MTR, closer
        implementation support was provided through monthly meetings on irrigation rehabilitation
        progress, and additional technical missions on the agriculture and nutrition components.
       The project implementation benefited from the support provided by the World Bank experts
        throughout the project for the irrigation and agriculture components including the SHG activity as
        well as safeguards and procurement. The continued presence of the co-task team leader and
        subsequently the task team leader in the country provided the opportunity to quickly respond to
        arising challenges. Implementation also benefitted from international consultants on technical and
        institutional aspects who joined the missions and carried out technical visits and provided advice to
        both the team and the PIU.
       While nutrition support activities benefitted from an international consultant, there was less
        continuity by the Bank for nutrition activities in the first half of the project. After the MTR a dedicated
        Bank staff oversaw nutrition activities and provided support.
       Finally, the Bank team was both proactive and supportive of the Government’s requests to
        restructure the project based on findings of an MTR in 2020. The Bank used the restructuring to
        refine the RF and revise indicators and corresponding targets.

 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. The Bank team successfully guided the project
 towards a successful outcome. The project team provided technical support and was proactive to
 restructure the project after the MTR. Overall, Bank Supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 Based on the assigned rating to QAE and Bank Supervision, the Overall Bank Performance is
 rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) since it was not yet required by the Bank at the
        time of appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR included a ToC that reflected the relationship between
        the project activities, outputs, outcomes and long-term impacts in a plausible causal chain. This
        Review reconstructed a ToC narrative for each objective based on the detailed project description in
        the PAD (Annex 2) in combination with the ToC reported in the ICR.
       The PDO was composed of two objectives (see section 2), which were assessed based on the
        following four PDO outcome indicators: 1. Average percentage increase in crop production for
        WUAs (with completed I&D and advisory services); 2. Proportion of beneficiary households with
        food consumption score (FCS) above 28.5 points; 3. Number of water users provided with


                                                                                                       Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     APNIP (P132754)



        new/improved irrigation and drainage services; and 4. Number of female water users provided with
        improved irrigation and drainage services. While the four PDO level indicators were measurable
        and connected to the project activities, there were some shortcomings. For example, the first
        indicator referred to "production" which included not only yields but cropped areas and prices, which
        were beyond the project scope, and the "WUAs" lacked specificity in terms of the project support
        received. Also, the FCS indicator was not the best choice to measure the support to nutrition
        because the baseline study showed that 98% of households already had a score of 35 points and
        thus the target was already achieved by 2019. Finally, with regards to PDO outcome indicator #3,
        the project was working with existing WUAs so the inclusion of the term "new" as part of the third
        PDO indicator was not accurate.
       The Results Framework (RF) included 14 intermediate results indicators (IRIs) to track the progress
        of the different project activities. Most of the IRIs were measurable, reflected reasonable
        targets, and were connected to the project activities. However, some IRIs needed further
        clarification and one IRI was duplicated.
       Overall, M&E design was adequate and included an independent baseline, mid-term, and end line
        surveys to assess the PDO and intermediate indicators and evaluate the project’s contribution to
        agricultural productivity and food and nutrition security. However, there were some weaknesses
        pertaining to the PDO outcome indicators as noted above.



b. M&E Implementation
       M&E implementation was initially delayed because there were no M&E specialists specifically
           working on the APNIP until seven months after project effectiveness (ICR, paragraph 64).
          M&E implementation improved after recruiting an M&E specialist. The project progress reports
           and Results Framework updates were generally timely and made available for the implementation
           support missions. The contracted consultants provided detailed assessments of the results of the
           ADP preparation, demonstration program, and SHG activities.
          After the 2020 MTR, the project was restructured to clarify the formulation of some indicators and
           make them more measurable. The ICR (Annex 8) provided a detailed list of all the PDO and IRIs
           that were revised. Most notable was dropping PDO outcome indicator # 2 and replacing it with a
           more suitable indicator.
          The baseline survey assessment of the PDO and intermediate indicators was completed in June
           2019 due to delays in contracting a suitable local company and finalizing the report. This
           delay resulted in the cancellation of the mid-term assessment as the limited time before the MTR
           (March 2020).
           The M&E rating was lowered to Moderately Unsatisfactory from June 2021 to January 2022 due
           to limitations in reporting (ICR, paragraph 64). As M&E reporting improved towards completion,
           the project closed with a Satisfactory M&E rating. An end line survey was eventually carried out in
           2022 and finalized by project completion in 2023, according to the ICR the end line survey was
           "adequate."
          The ICR (paragraph 64) noted that the PIU carried out additional surveys toward the end of the
           project to assess yields obtained by farmers receiving seeds and fertilizers, use of revolving
           funds, and adoption of technologies.




                                                                                                    Page 18 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     APNIP (P132754)



c. M&E Utilization
       While the M&E results were used to inform the project management, the ICR noted that at times
         "decision-making appeared to be guided more by technical engineering aspects than other
         considerations (paragraph 65)."
        M&E data were useful in adjusting the target indicator values at MTR and ensuring their
         measurability and attribution to the project activities.
        By project completion, the M&E system generated a database on irrigation rehabilitation, WUA
         performance, and crop productivity. This proved useful for project management and would be
         available through the WRS for use to inform and support future project implementation.

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. M&E design was adequate overall, but there were some
  weaknesses pertaining to the PDO outcome indicators. While M&E implementation had some
  weaknesses including a delayed baseline survey, most design weaknesses were rectified at
  restructuring. Finally, as noted above the project generated a database on the different supported
  activities that informed the project management and the ICR. This helped project management and was
  expected to inform future projects. Therefore, the Quality of M&E is rated Substantial with moderate
  shortcomings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
        Environmental Category and Safeguards. The project was classified as a Category B - partial
          assessment because it was not expected to involve any large-scale, significant, or irreversible
          adverse environmental impacts. Four environmental and one social safeguard policies were
          triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09), Safety of
          Dams (OP/BP 4.37), Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50), and Involuntary
          Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) identified preventive and/or
          mitigation measures. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) as well as a Resettlement Policy
          Framework (RPF) were prepared.
         Compliance with Environmental and Social Safeguards. The ICR (paragraph 67) reported that
          "the APNIP was implemented in compliance with the World Bank environmental safeguards policies
          as well as national environmental requirements and was rated Satisfactory on compliance with
          environmental safeguards throughout implementation." Involuntary Resettlement - OP 4.12 was
          triggered for site-specific works requiring small-scale land acquisition. A Grievance Redress
          Mechanism (GRM) was established at an early stage to address involuntary resettlement. In total 57
          grievance cases were registered (10 complaints and 47 appeals), and according to the ICR
          (paragraph 69) "all grievances were resolved satisfactorily by the project completion date." The
          APNIP did not finance enlargement or development of new irrigation systems, the project fell under
          the exception to the riparian notification requirement in paragraph 7(a) of OP 7.50. Some small
          dams (less than 15 m in height) were present, and in line with OP/BP 4.37, appropriate actions were



                                                                                               Page 19 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    APNIP (P132754)



           taken to ensure dam safety. Finally, appropriate training of agricultural advisers and WUA staff in
           integrated pest management (IPM) was carried out by qualified and experienced IPM trainers.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
        Financial Management (FM). The PIU had adequate budgeting capacity, and the quarterly
         financial reports and annual audits were issued on time and were satisfactory to the World Bank. In
         December 2020 the guaranteeing bank refused to repay the advance payment of KGS 5.5 million
         under a terminated contract due to the absence of a written refusal from the contractor. The PIU
         resolved the issue by establishing a payment schedule with the contractor such that the whole
         amount was recovered by July 2021. The FM rating was generally Satisfactory, while the closing
         FM was rated Moderately Satisfactory in the latest World Bank Implementation Status Report. This
         downgrade in the FM rating was due to internal control issues involving unjustified payments to a
         contractor and manipulation of accounting records discovered during the FM review in December
         2022 (ICR, paragraph 71). These shortcomings were fully addressed by project closing, including a
         change of the financial manager and full recovery of funds. The ICR highlighted that these FM
         shortcomings were not noted in the annual audits as those were sample based and did not pick up
         all issues. This Review is in agreement with the recommendation by the ICR that the World Bank
         should ensure "through the Terms of Reference, considering the elevated risks associated with
         construction contracts, that auditors undertake comprehensive audit examinations and substantive
         procedures for such contracts."
        Procurement. Procurement experienced initial delays because of weak PIU staff capacity in
         conducting procurement processes. In 2017, the procurement rating was downgraded to
         Moderately Unsatisfactory because of slow progress in the procurement of civil works and the two
         complaints regarding the first contract award under component 1. In the second half of project
         implementation, procurement performance benefitted from regular monitoring and capacity building
         provided by the World Bank procurement staff, and by replacing staff and hiring additional
         specialists. However, minor shortcomings persisted concerning contract management,
         advertisement and disclosure arrangements, bidding processes, and incomplete information
         uploaded in the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) tool. The project closed
         with a Moderately Satisfactory procurement rating (ICR, paragraph 72).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None.



d. Other
  The ICR (paragraph 54) noted that "Although not part of the project design, the APNIP helped strengthen
  the capacity of the WUAs and WUA members to respond to climate change challenges. More efficient
  irrigation; demonstrations of drip irrigation; introduction of good quality seeds; more efficient farm machinery
  for better land preparation; and farmer and SHG training which included climate-smart agriculture


                                                                                                    Page 20 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     APNIP (P132754)



   techniques such as efficient land preparation and soil fertility management, integrated pest management,
   more timely harvesting, and improved storage contributed to improving farmers’ capacity to adapt to climate
   change over the longer term."



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included five lessons, the following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. Projects aiming to support rural livelihoods could benefit from a comprehensive cross-
sectoral approach comprising irrigation, agriculture, and nutrition. The experience of the
project showed that such approach provided synergistic benefits in terms of agricultural productivity
and food and nutrition security. The project also demonstrated the value of implementing project
activities aimed at all households in the same geographical areas, that is, in the selected WUAs, the
same AAs and same villages.

2. To increasing agricultural production and improve food security, irrigation rehabilitation
interventions should be clearly linked to on-farm agricultural support. Farmers were able to
obtain high-quality seeds and, in conjunction with improved irrigation water supply, training, and
agricultural machinery. This enabled farmers to increase productivity and change their cropping
pattern to higher-value crops. It is noted that there are 481 WUAs in the country, with only 31
covered by the project, leaving considerable scope for future activities.

3. To improve nutrition of vulnerable households, the SHG methodology can be a successful
approach to introduce quality seed and increase productivity on household plots. Self-help
groups (SHGs) are comprised of 5-7 members, 90% of which are expected to be women. The key
characteristic is that SHGs are a small group of women who work together effectively as
demonstrated through the project experience. This approach enabled the improvement of nutrition
for vulnerable households, especially for women. Good social mobilization and season-long training
were an essential part of this methodology. Similar programs will be valuable in the future to ensure
that projects represent all household members and women-headed households.




                                                                                                  Page 21 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       APNIP (P132754)



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

     Quality of Evidence. The ICR provided an adequate evidence base to support the achievements
        reported.
     Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.
     Results Orientation. The ICR included an adequate discussion on the achievement of the two elements
      of the PDO. The discussion was balanced between reporting on the PDO outcome indicators and what
      actually was achieved on the ground.
     Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the available data to justify most of the assigned ratings.
      The ICR also included an explicit statement on the compliance with the World Bank's safeguard
      policies.
     Conciseness. As a whole the ICR was well written, provided a clear and concise coverage of project
      activities, and candidly reported on most shortcomings. Additional information was reported in the
      Annex section which was cross referenced multiple times in the main text. However, the Quality at Entry
      section could have benefited from more details.

     Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. The ICR provided a solid assessment of outcomes, and
        the lessons drawn by the ICR were relevant. Most sections were concise yet thorough and reflected
        relevant information. Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                Page 22 of 22
