     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN - Electricity Sector Support (FY12) (P125565)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023923

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P125565                                      SN - Electricity Sector Support (FY12)

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Senegal                                      Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                   Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-51450,IDA-58920                         30-Sep-2016                                         148,188,502.60

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Jul-2012                                 30-Jun-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              85,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             154,991,728.27                                                0.00

 Actual                                         148,188,502.60                                                0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Ichiro Toda                  Dileep M. Wagle              Ramachandra Jammi                IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The original Financing Agreement (FA) dated August 3, 2012, on page 5 stated that the project development
   objectives were “to contribute to (i) reducing SENELEC’s technical and commercial losses; and (ii) improving
   reliability of electricity services in selected areas focusing primarily on Greater Daker”. The statement of the
   original PAD dated July 1st, 2012 on page 11 was identical to the one in the FA.

   The PDOs were changed as a part of the second project restructuring in 2020. As per the Second
   Amendment to the Financing Agreement (FA) on page 1, the project development objectives were “to

                                                                                                     Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN - Electricity Sector Support (FY12) (P125565)



   contribute to (i) reducing SENELEC’s technical and commercial losses (“Updated PDO 1”); and (ii) improving
   the access to and reliability of electricity services (“Updated PDO 2.” The Updated PDO 1 remained the same
   from the original PDO 1, while the element of access was added and the focus on Greater Daker area was
   eliminated in the Updated PDO 2 compared to the original PDO 2. The statement of the second restructuring
   paper dated 2020 on page 13 was identical to the one in the FA and was unchanged until the project closure.

   The assessment of project performance will include the parsing of PDO 2 in two sub-objectives as follows:

   (ii) (a) To improve the access to electricity services, and (b) To improve the reliability of electricity services



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  01-Oct-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   At appraisal, the project had three components, which were revised through three restructurings in August
   2018, October 2020, and March 2022 as described below[1]:

   Component 1: Upgrade and modernization of the transmission and distribution network. Cost at
   appraisal: US$43 million, increased to US$155.7 million under the Additional Finance (AF), and
   increased to US$159.3 million at completion. At appraisal, this component targeted the Greater Dakar
   area to finance the upgrade, rehabilitation, or replacement of existing transmission lines and substations,
   upgrade of the distribution network from 6.6 kV to 30 kV in at least two substations, installation of at least 15
   remotely controlled medium voltage/low voltage (MV/LV) distribution substations, extension and
   densification of the distribution network, and extension of the grid to reach isolated secondary consumption
   centers.

         Revised Component 1: When the AF was approved in 2016, the scope of Component 1 was
          expanded so that the component targeted selected activities of SENELEC’s Priority Action Plan to
          strengthen the utility’s T&D network and increase capacity to manage the network, so as to reduce
          losses and improve network availability, reliability, and safety. These included the following: (i)
          rehabilitation of 13 existing MV/LV substations, update and standardization of SENELEC’s electrical
          protection systems,[2] rehabilitation of the radio system and telecommunications of SENELEC’s
          network, and network expansion with a third bay transformer of 40 MVA/30 kV in Touba’s
          substation; (ii) installation of remote control for switching (circuit breaker and disconnector) devices
          in 90 MV substations; (iii) creation of 61 MV/LV substations, installation of 100 km of MV lines, and



                                                                                                         Page 2 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  SN - Electricity Sector Support (FY12) (P125565)



       installation of 34 km of LV lines; and (iv) creation of 40 MV/LV substations, installation of 464 km of
       MV lines, and installation of 93 km of LV lines.

Component 2: Improving SENELEC’s commercial performance. Cost at appraisal: US$33.0 million,
increased at AF to US$77.0 million; and increased to US$72.9 million at completion. At appraisal, this
component aimed to reduce the cost of billing, increase bill collection, and reduce commercial losses
through a reduction of arrears. Investments include the installation of prepaid and smart meters, a remote
meter reading system, and a new electricity customer management system for SENELEC.

      Revised component 2: The AF expanded the scope so as to focus on investments to improve
       SENELEC’s commercial performance by increasing bill collection and reducing nontechnical losses
       through fraud reduction, including the following investments: (i) Additional prepayment meters; (ii)
       Internal wiring for selected LV customers; (iii) Development of communication and marketing on
       SENELEC’s prepayment system; and (iv) Support to improve the quality of services provided by
       SENELEC’s customer call center, including expansion of call center facilities and the purchase of
       associated equipment.”

Component 3: Long-term strategic outlook. Cost at appraisal of US$8.25 million, increased at AF to
US$16.3 million; and increased to US$13.1 million at completion. At appraisal, this component was
dedicated to technical assistance and support to conduct studies so that the Government of Senegal (GoS)
could develop a medium- and long-term strategy for the energy sector in exploring options for (i) energy
diversification (into coal, gas, renewable energies, and regional integration), (ii) energy sector governance
(strengthening sector efficiency, transparency, and accountability) and private sector participation, and (iii)
financial restructuring of SENELEC and review of electricity tariffs.

      Revised Component 3: Under the AF, Component 3 included support to implement
       recommendations from strategic studies conducted under the parent project, including the following:
       (i) Support for improvement of SENELEC internal governance; (ii) Support for sector reform, through
       technical assistance; and (iii) Support for sector and project planning.

Component 4: Project implementation, communication, and monitoring & evaluation. Cost at
appraisal: US$3.5 million, increased at AF to US$11.5 million, and increased to US$ US$16.1 million
at completion. At appraisal, this component aimed to finance support for project coordination, supervision,
financial management, communication and outreach, procurement, supervision of implementation of the
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF),
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of the project, training, and goods and audit services. The recruitment of
owner’s engineers (OEs) to support SENELEC in the supervision of project works was to be financed
through this component as well as specific expertise as needed to support the Permanent Secretariat for
Energy and the fiduciary function within SENELEC.

      Revised Component 4. Under the AF, the component continued to support project supervision-
       related activities, including the following: (i) support to the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) through
       the provision of technical assistance, training, operational costs, support for project coordination,
       supervision, financial management, communication and outreach, procurement, and audit services;
       (ii) In terms of M&E, a beneficiary survey, including baseline and end-of-project surveys to
       understand the project’s impact, including gender-related impacts; and (iii) studies, communication



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN - Electricity Sector Support (FY12) (P125565)



          activities, and technical assistance to ensure that the project safeguard measures are systematically
          carried out throughout the life of the project.

   [1] Excluding the activities to be financed by EIB.

   [2] With the installation of antitheft units for up to 50,000 households.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost, Financing, and Borrower Contribution: At appraisal, the total project cost was estimated at
   US$93.5 million, to be financed by an IDA credit of US$85 million and a borrower (Government of Senegal)
   contribution of US$8.5 million. Under the AF, the total project cost increased to US$261.4 million, to be
   financed by an IDA credit of US$155 million, EIB financing of US$93.9 million, and the Government of
   Senegal’s own contribution of US$12.5 million. Through the restructuring, there was a reallocation among
   Components 3 and 4 for the portion to be funded by the IDA credit. At closing, 95.6% of the IDA financing
   was disbursed (US$148,188,503 out of US$155,000,000). The ICR does not indicate that the resources
   from the GoS and EIB which had been actually disbursed.

   Dates: The project was approved on July 26, 2012, and became effective on January 1, 2013. The AF was
   approved in July 2016. The project went through three restructurings as follows: (i) The first
   restructuring took place on August 7, 2018, and brought about changes in the Financing Plan and
   reallocation between disbursement categories; (ii) the second restructuring took place on October 1, 2020,
   with changes in Project Development Objectives, Results Framework, Components and Cost, Loan Closing
   Date(s), Safeguard Policies Triggered and Implementation Schedule, and Reallocation between
   Disbursement Categories; and (iii) the third restructuring took place on March 17, 2022 and brought about a
   change in the Loan Closing Date. A medium-term review was completed on January 8, 2015, and the
   project was closed on June 30, 2022, 5 years and 9 months later than the original closing date (September
   30, 2016) and 8 months later than the closing date defined by the AF proposal.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context: By the time when the project was approved in 2012, Senegal had been enjoying the
stable political climate over the previous years, while the economy was had been affected by a series of
domestic and external shocks, with slowing GDP growth, rising inflation, widening fiscal deficit, and
increasing current account deficit. In this context, the development of energy infrastructure represented a
key component of the Government’s strategy to support economic development, and the government had
been conducting several institutional reforms and investing significant financial resources aligned with the
“Letter for Energy Sector Development Policy (LPDSE)”. However, the electricity sector had been facing a
major crisis over the previous four years, resulting in widespread load shedding and stagnant revenues and
performance of SENELEC. In order to address the crisis and the widespread load shedding, the GoS
undertook an electricity sector diagnostic and developed an Emergency and Recovery Plan for 2011-2015,



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      SN - Electricity Sector Support (FY12) (P125565)



               aiming at (a) removing the electricity supply bottlenecks and (ii) addressing SENELEC’s cash-flow and
               financing constraints.

               Alignment with the County and Bank Strategy: The objective of the project was and continues to be fully
               aligned with the development challenge of the electricity sector in Senegal. At approval, the project was
               consistent with the Government’s LPDSE, and the 2011-2015 Electricity Emergency and Recovery Plan,
               which included addressing SENELEC’s cash-flow and financing constraints as one of the key objectives
               (PAD paragraphs 12 and 15). In addition, the AF was provided under the broad strategy of the 2014
               Emerging Senegal Plan (PSE), which included the pillar of “higher and sustainable growth by increasing the
               quality of electricity supply (AF PAD paragraph 7).” The AF PAD also mentioned that the project responded
               to the Government’s efforts to relaunch the electricity sector reform, which was originally launched in 2011.

               The PDOs of the project were also aligned with the Bank’s latest strategy. The latest Country Partnership
               Framework (CPF) FY20-F24 included lowering energy cost and the carbon footprint and optimization of the
               energy mix among the key objectives under the focus area of “Boosting competitiveness & and job creation
               through private sector led-growth.” The CPF document identified the need to improve the quality of
               electricity service, such as reduction of losses. It also specifically mentioned that the PASE project would
               contribute to the reduction of SENLEC’s technical and commercial losses and improvement of the reliability
               of services in the Grater Dakar and Casamance areas, as a part of WBG interventions to support the
               Government’s reform efforts in the energy sector (CPF Paragraph 69 and 70).

               The project’s objectives were almost fully aligned with the strategies of the country and the Bank. The
               relevance of objectives is rated High.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To contribute to reduce SENELEC’s technical and commercial losses

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change:

                             Through the implementation of some of the inputs and activities under Component 1 “Upgrading and
                             modernization of the transmission and distribution network” – particularly the upgrade, rehabilitation, or
                             replacement of existing transmission lines and substations in the interconnected network, as well as
                             installation of remotely controlled MV/LV distribution substations in Greater Dakar, several major outputs were

                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SN - Electricity Sector Support (FY12) (P125565)



expected, including upgrading/replacement of existing transmission lines and substations and upgrading of
the distribution network and installation of remotely controlled substations in Greater Dakar. These outputs
would lead to the reduction of technical losses and increase of transit capacity.

In addition, through the implementation of the inputs and activities under Component 2 “Improving
SENELEC’s Commercial Performance and connecting low-income households” – particularly installment of
additional prepayment meters, including standard transfer specification-compliant split prepaid meters,
installment of internal wiring of low-income households, development of communication and marketing on
SENELEC’s prepayment system, and improvement of the quality of services provided by SELELEC’s
customer call center, several major outputs were expected, including connection to the grid of 37,5000 low-
income households, installation of pre-paid meters, smart meters, and a new customer management system,
as well as securing of markets and households anti-fraud equipment. These outputs would lead to the
reduction of SENELEC’s commercial losses.

Achievement of outcomes such as the reduction of technical losses and increase of transit capacity as well as
the reduction of SENELEC’s commercial losses would lead to the reduction of SENELEC’s technical and
commercial losses, the PDO 1. These outcomes would lead to higher level impact such as improvement of
SENELEC’s financial and operational viability.

The results of the outputs and outcomes are as follows:

The ICR indicates that among the main PDO indicators for PDO1, the overall SENELEC recovery rate (%)
improved but fell short of the target (83.8% delivery rate), whereas the overall bill collection rate (%) improved
and achieved the target (104.0% target delivery). The ICR team also added another indicator at ICR,
technical losses, and it improved and achieved the target (190% delivery rate) (ICR paragraphs 32 and 33).
Although the ICR explained that the commercial losses have been negatively affected by the COVID-19
pandemic, the improvement of the overall bill collection rate indicates improved commercial losses.

According to the PDO Indicator tables in the ICR, construction and rehabilitation of transmission and
distribution lines, including those in the Southern Senegal area, fell short of the targets. Despite the fact that
two of the main intermediate indicators have fallen short, the fact that most of the overall PDO1 indicators
were achieved may indicate the disconnect between these PDO indicators and interim indicators and the lack
of attribution of the PDO indicators to the interim indicators.

Regarding the project’s outputs, the ICR does not provide detailed information on the status of each
activity. However, it provides the implementation status for key items under the components financed by AF
(ICR Table 6) and overall implementation status (ICR Table 7). According to them, activities under
Component 1 were almost completed (99% completion rate), including those items that are considered
relevant to PDO 1. The ICR also indicates that the key items financed by AF under Component 2 were yet to
be completed. The completion rate of those relevant to PDO1 was 78% for securing installation of 50,000
customers in difficult neighborhoods (100% IDA funding) and 23% for securing installations of 20,000
canteens in 9 market (100% IDA funding), indicating that some of the IDA funded activities got delayed, not
only EIB funded activities, but they were expected to be competed with EIB fundings It is expected that all
the activities would be completed by the end of 2024.

In summary, the project’s activities under Component 2 were either completed or expected to be completed
soon. Intermediate indicators relevant to this PDO1 were also either achieved or expected to be achieved. In
addition, the targets of the three PDO indicators were mostly achieved or exceeded, although there is an

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SN - Electricity Sector Support (FY12) (P125565)



attribution issue of PDO indicators to the project activities. Taking these issues into account, the rating is
Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To contribute to improve the access to and reliability of electricity services; (changed from “to contribute to
improve reliability of electricity services in selected areas focusing primarily on Greater Dakar”). As the ICR
already did, this PDO can be parsed into two outcomes: 2a Improvement of access to electricity services; and
2b improvement of reliability of electricity services.

Rationale
Theory of change:

Through the implementation of some of the inputs and activities under Component 1 “Upgrading and
modernization of the transmission and distribution network” – particularly the upgrade, rehabilitation, or
replacement of existing transmission lines and substations in the interconnected network, installation of
remotely controlled MV/LV distribution substations in Greater Dakar, several major outputs were expected,
including upgrading/replacement of existing transmission lines and substations as well as upgrading of the
distribution network and installation of remotely controlled substations in Greater Dakar. These outputs would
lead to the reduction of technical losses and increase of transit capacity as well as reduction of outages and
voltage drops for greater supply continuity. These would lead to the PDO2b “Improvement of reliability of
electricity services” and higher impact “Improved quality and reliability of electricity fostering economic growth.

Through the implementation of some of the inputs and activities under Component 1 “Upgrading and
modernization of the transmission and distribution network” – particularly extension and densification of the
distribution network, including creation of MV/LV substations, installation of MV/LV lines, as well as extension
of the interconnected network to reach isolated secondary consumption centers, including creation of
substations and installation of MV/Lines, other major outputs were expected, including extension and
densification of the distribution network in Greater Dakar and other regions as well as extension of the
interconnected network to reach isolated secondary consumption centers, leading to increase of electricity
access. In addition, through the implementation of some of the inputs and activities under Component 2
“Improving SENELEC’s Commercial Performance and connecting low-income households” – particularly
installment of additional prepayment meters, other major outputs such as connection to the grid of 37,5000
low-income households were expected, leading also to the increase of electricity access. Increased electricity
access would lead to the PDO2a “Improvement of the access to electricity” and higher-level impact
“Increased electricity access, contributing to poverty reduction.”

The results of the outputs and outcomes are as follows:

The ICR indicates that among the main PDO indicators for PDO 2a, the results of low-income households
provided with access to electricity substantially fell short of the target (only 57.6% target achievement)
whereas the results of “Direct project beneficiaries (number of SENELEC’s customers),” exceeded the target

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 19
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               SN - Electricity Sector Support (FY12) (P125565)



                            (126% achievement), and the results of Direct project beneficiaries (out of which females, share %)” met the
                            target (100% delivery rate). However, the focus on female beneficiaries – being a core indicator - does not
                            specifically contribute to achievement of PDO 2a. Regarding the shortfall of the indicator “Low-income
                            households provided with access to electricity,” the ICR indicates that the remaining households are targeted
                            to be connected by the end of 2024 when the project funded by EIB is completed. ICR mentioned that “As of
                            November 2023, 21,601 households were connected with the reminder expected by the end of 2024 (Table
                            6) and “the operation is likely to do so (achieve its objectives) in the future (that is, once the EIB-EU funded or
                            activities transferred under EIB-EU supervision are complete).” (Paragraph 37).

                            Regarding the main PDO indicators for PDO 2b, the results of “Average response time to customer
                            complaints related to backouts and malfunctions (hours)” exceeded the target (121% delivery rate) and other
                            indicators, such as Unserved energy on the interconnected system (GWh/yr)”, “SAIFI in Greater Dakar and
                            SAIDI in Greater Dakar” mostly achieved the target (Delivery rate of 104%, 96.4%, and 98.9%,
                            respectively). In particular, the levels of reduction of SAIFI and SAIDI were substantial (from 50.44 to 10.00
                            and from 95.38 to 6.70, respectively).

                            As outlined in the PDO indicator tables in the ICR, the interim indicator, “Installed capacity of power
                            transformers installed in Southern Senegal under the project” fell short of the targets. Other interim indicators
                            met the targets.

                            As mentioned in the analysis of PDO1 above, regarding the project outputs, the ICR does not provide detailed
                            information status on each activity under the components. However, it provides the overall implementation
                            status for key items financed by AF under the components (Table 6) and overall implementation status (ICR
                            Table 7). According to it, activities under Component 1 have almost been completed (99% completion rate),
                            including those items that are relevant to PDO2, such as Guediawaye Injector Station (GIS) (100%),”
                            “Connection to Kedougou network (100%),” “Marassoum-Tangaori Connection (1% IDA/99%EIB).” The key
                            items related to PDO2 under Component 2 are yet to be completed with the completion rate of 58% for
                            “Connection of 37,500 low-income households (financed by 1% by IDA/99% by EIB).” However, it is
                            expected that all the activities will be completed by the end of 2024.

                            The project’s activities under Component 2 were either completed or likely to be completed soon. Most of the
                            intermediary indicators relevant to this PDO were also achieved. One of the PDO indicators, “Low-income
                            households provided with access to electricity”, fell short of the target but is expected to be achieved once the
                            relevant activities are completed. It should be reminded, though, that there is an attribution issue of PDO
                            indicators to the project activities. Taking these issues into account, the rating is Substantial.




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY

                                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SN - Electricity Sector Support (FY12) (P125565)




  Rationale
  The Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. The World Bank’s funding has mostly been disbursed. The
  remaining activities that were transferred to be funded by EIB and the activities that were originally planned to
  be funded by EIB, including those aimed to expand the access of energy, are also expected to be completed
  soon. Accordingly, although most of the intermediate results indicators and the PDO indicators related to the
  access to energy (“Low income households provided with access to electricity”) were not achieved, they are
  likely to be achieved once the remaining activities are completed. Even though one of the other PDO
  indicators (Overall SENELEC recovery rate) was not achieved either, the rest of the PDO indicators were
  achieved. As explained above and in the M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization section as well, there is
  the attribution issues of PDO indicators. However, given the relatively large share of facilities supported by
  the project among SENELEC's overall asset as well as the level of achievements of results, it is reasonable to
  assume that the activities supported by the project have made a good contribution to the achievement of
  project's development objectives and achievement of overall development outcome ratings.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Analysis

Economic analysis. Assessments of economic analysis, both at appraisal and at completion, were provided by
the ICR (paras 39 to 43). At appraisal and for the AF, the project’s economic analysis was conducted for those
activities directly contributing to PDO 1 (i.e., specifically related to the impact of reduction in the technical loss)
and PDO2 (i.e., specifically the impact of reliability of electricity services), composed by Component 1, with
focus on the upgrade and modernization of the transmission and distribution network. These activities tend to
generate quantifiable benefits for which economic value can be clearly identified. Particularly, the analysis
included benefits associated with incremental consumption enabled by lifting T&D supply constraints,
incremental consumption enabled by reduction in technical losses, and reduction in unserved energy, where
different economic values of electricity were assigned depending on how benefits are derived in each
activity. Among the activities contributing to PDO1, reduction of SENELEC’s commercial losses was not
included in the economic analysis as a benefit because it was considered to be a transfer of welfare from the
consumers to the Government, as described by ICR (Paragraph 39). Activities under Components 3 and 4 were
not included in the analysis either, which is justifiable because it would be difficult to assess/identify quantifiable
benefits for which an economic value cannot be clearly identified and measured.

At appraisal, the economic analyses identified a net present value (NPV) of US$52 million and an ERR of 22%
for the original project as well as an NPV of US$114 million and an ERR of 23% for the AF. The ICR followed
the same methodology used at the appraisal and identified an updated NPV between US$8 million and US$17
million, corresponding to an ERR of between 6.5% and 7.0%. The lower NVPs and ERRs at completion were
due to the adjustments of a number of shortcomings found in the original analyses. Those shortcomings include
an approach to identify fuel costs, higher value of (avoided) operating costs, assumption of constant value for
variable costs and benefits, approaches to identify WTP, and exclusion of relevant project costs funded by the
GoS and EIB. The lower band of updated ERR, 6.5%, still meets the threshold of the social discount rate of 6%,

                                                                                                         Page 9 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SN - Electricity Sector Support (FY12) (P125565)



although the updated NPVs and ERRs were much lower than those identified at the appraisal for the original
loan and AF.

Financial analysis: At appraisal, an analysis on SENELEC’s financial situation was conducted, including
SENELEC’s financial forecast that incorporated the expected effect of SENELEC’s financial restructuring as a
part of the Government’s 2011-2015 Emergency and Recovery plan to restore stability in the electricity
subsector. The financial restructuring measures included the provision of the necessary subsidies,
recapitalization, restructuring of debt, and efficiency gains. As a result of the plan, the level of subsidies for
SENELEC was expected to decrease from 117 CFAF billion in 2012 to 20 CFAF billion in 2016. The AF PAD
updated the financial analysis of SENELEC. According to the analysis, the level of subsidies actually decreased
from 123 CFAF billion in 2012 to 77 CFAF billion in 2014, and it was expected that SENELEC would start
producing a positive net profit from 2016. The EBITDA/debt service ratio (excluding subsidies) was also
expected to improve from 0.18x in 2015 to 1.42x in 2020. However, as the activities under the project to achieve
SENELEC’s technical and commercial losses (PDO2) were a part of the overall financial restructuring measures,
these expected improvements would not be exclusively attributable to the project. It should be noted that these
financial analyses were undertaken to explain the project’s context in detail, not necessarily to assess the
project’s financial impact. As such, these financial analyses did not include the project’s expected financial rate
of return, and at completion, the ICR did not provide an updated financial analysis of SENELEC either.

Operational and Administrative Efficiency

Although the ICR did not report on the implementation efficiency, IEG made the following observations:

The original project was expected to be implemented from July 2012 to September 2016. By the time the AF
was approved in July 2016, the original project was rated Satisfactory for progress (AF PAD paragraph 19), with
the disbursement ratio of 56.4% and 90% of available financing had been committed. The AF PAD had an
expected closing date in October 2022, although it was extended twice, and the project was finally closed in
June 2022. However, three activities under Component 2 in the AF have not been completed yet as of the ICR’s
preparation. The ICR identified several factors that contributed to implementation delays, including institutional
challenges of SENELEC, procurement delays, various contractor issues, poor coordination, project
management, communication, shifts in strategy and team composition, co-financing/parallel financing,
safeguards, and COVID-19 pandemic disruptions (ICR paragraph 55 to 62). In terms of the budget, the original
amount of financing from the World Bank was US$155.0 million (including both the original loan and AF), and
US$148.2 million was actually disbursed (delivery rate of 95.6%), whereas the ICR did not indicate how the
funding from the Government and EIB, totaling US$102.5 million, has been disbursed.

Based on the updated ERR, which – though it met the social cost of capital threshold - was much lower than
projected at appraisal, the lack of an updated financial analysis, and the delay in implementation, the overall
efficiency rating is Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SN - Electricity Sector Support (FY12) (P125565)




                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     56.00
Appraisal                                                  22.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     56.00
ICR Estimate                                               7.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The overall development outcome of the project is rated Moderately Satisfactory. The project’s development
objectives were substantial at approval and remained so during the project implementation. The project’s
implementation experienced some delays, particularly the activities related to the expansion of electricity access
under Component 2, which remained uncompleted at the Bank’s project completion but were likely to be
completed soon. The following all contributed to the delay in the project’s implementation: the overall
complexity of the project due to the ambitiously expanded scope under the AF; constraints of the Government
agencies’ implantation; coordination issues among the government, the World Bank, and EIB; and the negative
effect of the pandemic. Despite the delay both PDOs were mostly achieved evidenced by the PDO indicator
results. The project’s efficiency also had shortcomings in terms of lower-than-expected economic return, the
absence of ex-post financial return analysis, and implementation efficiency issues.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Project implementation: As many of the activities under Component 2 have not been completed yet
(although they are expected to be by the end of 2024), there is some risk of further implementation delay for
the project. In addition, even though the rest of the components were completed, there is a risk associated
with the maintenance of quality of services, which depends on the capacity of the Government and
SENELEC to continuously provide adequate resources for maintenance and upgrade.

Institutional capacity: During the implementation of the project, several issues associated with the
institutional capacity of SENELEC and the Government of Senegal emerged, which included poor
coordination, project management, and communication. Although the Bank has been providing support to
address operational and resource capacity issues throughout the project cycle, once the project was
completed, unless support is continuously provided through another projects, continued limited capacity of
SENELEC and the Government may undermine the maintenance of the facilities developed by the project.

Financial sustainability of the electricity sector: According to the ICR, the financial deficit in the
electricity sector continues to be an issue. Despite the Government’s ongoing efforts to increase electricity
tariff and eliminate subsidies, the electricity sector continues to encounter the issue of payment delays to
IPPs and requires investment to improve the resilience of work (ICR paragraph 88). Component 3 of the

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN - Electricity Sector Support (FY12) (P125565)



project intended to provide the support to strengthen the energy sector, including implementation of
recommendations from the studies to improve strategic outlook of
SENELEC.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Issues related to the project quality-at-entry are discussed in the ICR in the paragraphs 51-54, and 77-
  80. IEG’s own assessment on the Bank performance in this area, including key features, are discussed
  below.

  The project, including modifications made through the AF and three restructurings, was relevant to the
  strategies of GoS, such as the third Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP III), the new Priority Action
  Plan, and Plan Senegal Emergent (PSE), as well as a series of Bank Group CPF, which called for the
  recovery and expansion of the overall power system. The PDOs (both the original and revised ones),
  which included reduction of SENELEC’s technical and commercial losses as well as improvement of
  electricity services’ reliability, fully intended to address the objectives outlined in GoS’ strategies and the
  WBG’s CPFs.

  As regards the project’s design, the project was composed of comprehensive capital expenditures
  programs for the (i) the upgrade and modernization of the transmission and distribution network; (ii)
  improvement of SENELEC’s commercial performance; (iii) technical assistance to studies on long-term
  strategy outlook; and (iv) support for project implementation, communication, and monitoring and
  supervision. While keeping these original four components, activities to be undertaken under each
  component were substantially expanded as a result of the AF. These components were comprehensive,
  covering the broad spectrum of transmission and distribution networks, with the purpose of addressing
  both PDOs simultaneously.

  The original PAD identified the overall implementation risks as Substantial based on substantial
  stakeholder risks and implementing agency risks, whereas the overall project risk was rated
  Moderate. These risks were mostly adequately identified. The PAD also identified the risks associated
  with the sustainability of GoS’ financing subsidies. However, regarding the implementing agency risk, the
  PAD mainly focused on the procurement and financial management capacity risk in general, but it fell
  short of drawing attention to the overall broad scope of the project and resultant complexities of
  implementing the project. Although the ICR claims that the risk assessments were adequate and
  described thoroughly in both the original PAD and the AF PAD, highlighting potential mitigation factors on
  fiduciary, E&S, or M&E arrangement, such assessments were not explicitly found in the original PAD or
  AF PAD. In fact, the ICR also identified that project preparation and appraisal were insufficient given the
  large scope of activities and low implementation capacity. This design issue and lack of recognition of it
  as a risk is considered one of the factors which affected the actual project implementation.

  Another shortcoming identified was the quality of the economic analysis undertaken at the original
  appraisal and the AF appraisal, which included exaggeration of some of the benefits and omission of
  some of the costs., such as the costs of supplying the incremental demand through reduction in


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN - Electricity Sector Support (FY12) (P125565)



  outages. These shortcomings undermined to certain extent the quality of assessments based on which
  the approval decision was made for the project, as commented by the ICR.

  Finally, when the PDOs and the corresponding indicators were revised at the time of AF approval in 2016
  and the second project restructuring (2020), some of the revised indicators were defined in such a way
  that it became difficult to fully attribute the results of those indicators to the project because they were at
  the overall system and SENELEC levels, which were also subject to other investments undertaken during
  the period (as mentioned also in the quality of M&E section).

  The overall quality-at-entry was Moderately Unsatisfactory due to shortcomings arising from the optimistic
  assumption of the implementation capacity of GoS, including SENELEC, given the project’s complexities,
  quality of economic analysis, and challenges of attributing several of the indicators’ results to the project.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Key developments related to the quality of supervision were discussed in the ICR in paragraphs 55-62 and
 81-84. IEG’s own assessment, including key issues found, are summarized below.

 The project faced a number of issues that affected its implementation. They included the following:
 institutional challenges for SENELEC; procurement delays (including processing and implementation of the
 contracts); various contractor issues; poor coordination; project management; and communications among
 PIU, SENELEC, and other entities; co-financing/parallel financing changes for EIB financing; safeguard
 related issues; and COVID-19 pandemic disruptions (ICR paragraph 55 to 62). The ICR states that the
 World Bank team undertook a proactive and collaborative approach to support PIU, the presence of local
 TTL complemented by frequent project supervision missions, and just-in-time and proactive project
 implementation support (paragraph 81-84). The ICR does not provide much specific information on the
 actual support provided. However, as highlighted by the project team in the meeting with IEG,
 Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) documented instances where key sources of delays
 were flagged and subsequently addressed, such as inclusion of operating expenses in the authorized
 financing category at the first restructuring, design of an action plan closely tracked by Bank management
 at CMU, issuance of a threat of suspension to address the delay in safeguard action plan implementation,
 hiring of senior procurement consultant to support PIU, and recruitment of additional staff in PIU and more
 frequent field missions after the first fatality.

 Although. as observed in the ICR, it would seem that more support was provided to the PIU relative to
 SENELEC, it was clarified by the Bank team that it also had a close working relationship with both entities,
 with frequent management updates. The project team also engaged with other government bodies, such as
 the Ministry of Petroleum. From a safeguards perspective, while there were some failures in implementing
 safeguards instruments for Component 1 and slow clearance of the ESMP before the launch of civil works,
 the Bank did take swift actions to address them, including the preparation and implementation of the
 Safeguard Action Plan (paragraph 83).



                                                                                                      Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN - Electricity Sector Support (FY12) (P125565)



 A review of recent ISRs suggests that the project team provided sufficient attention to the project's
 implementation and development outcome, by providing objective descriptions and candid reporting. By
 way of example, good explanations were provided on the issues associated with the project
 implementation delay, factors contributing to those delays, and measures to address them. The ratings on
 progress towards achievement of PDOs and overall implementation progress in recent ISRs also showed
 the project team’s measured assessment of project status.

 The Bank team adequately processed the appraisal and approval of AF as well as three rounds of project
 restructuring, which included responding to the increasing strategic priorities of the project and adapting to
 the evolving situations of project implementation.

 As required, the Bank team prepared 21 ISRs in total, commencing semi-annually from 2013 to 2018, then
 increasing the frequency to three reports per year from 2019. A total of 25 missions were undertaken on a
 regular bi-annual basis, evidenced by mission Aid Memoires produced, with weekly meetings with the PIUs
 also being undertaken. The mid-term review (MTR) was prepared in January 2015 and several
 restructuring papers were produced. During the period 2015-2022, the TTLs, who were energy sector
 specialists, were locally based, which facilitated closer dialogue and collaboration with government
 counterparts and relevant stakeholders. (ICR paragraph 81 and 82).

 Overall, the Bank team utilized all of the Bank instruments available and effectively collaborated with the
 relevant stakeholders. The quality of supervision is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Constructing the M&E framework for this project would have been challenging because there is no clear
 one-to-one correspondence between the PDOs and components, where activities under Components 1
 and 2 would contribute to both PDOs. In addition, the PDOs are not mutually exclusive. For example,
 reduction of SENELEC’s technical loss would also mean improved reliability of the electricity service.

 That said, although the PAD for the original loan did not contain a theory of change, the second
 restructuring paper in 2020 had a theory of change, which reflected the expanded scope of the
 project. Although the theory of change in the second restructuring paper adequately represented the
 project’s overall logic, it was a little confusing, because the items under the Outputs, PDO outcomes, and
 Impacts dimensions were not fully aligned with the activities under the components, intermediary outcome
 indicators, PDO outcome indicators, and actual PDO defined in the PADs. Particularly, the output
 “Connection to the grid of 37,5000 low-income households” cannot be found in the PAD narratives, except
 a short reference in the second restructuring paper, which only stated "Moreover, PASE is financing the


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN - Electricity Sector Support (FY12) (P125565)



 connection of 37,500 low-income households to the grid under Component 2” making it challenging to fully
 understand how this indicator was going to be achieved. Therefore, the readers would need to reconcile
 the theory of change under PAD and the narratives. In addition, as indicated by the ICR, most of the PDO
 indicators are at the overall SENELEC and system levels (although SAIFI and SAIDI indicators were limited
 to the Greater Dakar area), creating an attribution issue. The ICR commented that the T&D development
 would cover 30% of SENELEC’s the entire system.

 Regarding the institutional arrangement for M&E, SENELEC has been given overall responsibility for the
 monitoring and evaluation of the results and outcomes, including the preparation of the project report every
 semester (PAD paragraph 73 and 74). Many of the PDO indicators were what SENELEC was going to
 monitor anyway as a part of its regular performance assessment based on its system. The project’s
 Component 4 also intended to provide support for M&E activities (PAD paragraph 64).



b. M&E Implementation
  There were a few shortcomings in SENELEC’s reporting, including SENELEC’s failure to constantly
  provide semesterly report and the failure of the project’s Steering Committee to meet regularly and
  implement systems to properly track priorities (ICR paragraph 65). Despite these issues, the Bank team
  has been adequately monitoring the project, which includes reporting on the results through
  Implementation Status and Results (ISR) Reports and project supervision missions (ICR paragraph 66).



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR claimed that the project team closely documented project supervision and implementation and
  used the project management tools to draw project stakeholders’ attention to critical issues and seek
  managerial and higher government support. The ICR also mentioned that the Results Framework and
  project indicators were revised throughout implementation to adequately reflect project developments,
  maintain ambitious targets, and include new indicators (Paragraph 67). Due to the shortcomings of M&E
  design associated with the attribution issues as well as the institutional capacity constraints described in
  the supervision section above, it is assumed that there were some limitations for monitoring of results to
  be fully helpful in preventing the impact of project complexity, delay, and institutional and project
  management issues, as pointed out by the ICR (paragraph 68). At the same time, the project team also
  confirmed that the M&E data and experience in the project directly informed the previously planned gas
  to power project and subsequently ongoing access projects, such as the focus on the indicators
  capturing only the results directly associated with the projects to address attribution issue.

  Due to the shortcomings in the M&E design, implementation, and utilization, the M&E Quality is rated
  Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues


                                                                                                     Page 15 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SN - Electricity Sector Support (FY12) (P125565)



a. Safeguards
  The project was assigned a Category B rating (partial assessment) and triggered the Bank’s safeguard
  policies on Environmental and Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4/12). An
  ESMF (Environmental and Social Management Framework) (including a draft ESMP – Environmental and
  Social Management Plan) and RPF (Resettlement Policy Framework) were prepared, as the specific sites
  were not yet selected, in June 2012. Later, based on the ESMF, individual ESIAs and ESMPs for known
  sections of the transmission lines were prepared and publicly disclosed in 2017 (ICR Paragraph 70 and 71).
  In the 2020 restructuring, a change in the safeguard policies was triggered with three additional safeguards
  policies: Natural Habitats (OP 4.04), Forest (OP 4.36), and Physical Cultural Resources (OP4.11).

  During the project’s implementation, the safeguard compliance issue under Component 1 was identified in
  2016. The Bank took several actions, including a Safeguard Action Plan, independent E&S audits, an ESIA
  and RAP for the Hann-CDB Line, and a project suspension threat. However, at completion, the project was
  still not in compliance with the World Bank policies and the resettlement actions under the Hann-CDB RAP
  (Resettlement Action Plan) were still pending; however progress was made in terms of the resettlement of
  households and affected businesses (ICR Paragraph 61, 69-74).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  Project financial management focused on addressing SENELEC’s capacity constraints through the
  appointment of a competent financial management officer and preparation of the Project Implementation
  Manual, among other measures. Despite the overall satisfactory submission of accounting and audit
  reports, the residual risk was indicated as Substantial (ICR paragraph 75).

  Regarding the financial covenants, there were three covenants related to (i) tariff adjustments and
  compensation for SENELEC, (ii) management of SENELEC’s accounts receivable, and (iii) maintenance of
  EBITDA over debt service ratio. The project team confirmed that, for (i), the regulator, in general,
  calculated the allowed revenue requirement and informed the government and SENELEC of the
  compensation needed. In addition, for (ii) and (iii), the project team confirmed that the project partly
  complied with, although sometimes after delay, throughout the years. Regarding the auditor
  recommendations, there was one audit recommendation pending, which was recommending Ministry of
  Finance to require SENELEC to reimburse counterpart funding used for a different purpose from the
  original purpose. The team also confirmed that the auditor opinions were unqualified and external audits
  were conducted on a timely basis.

  Procurement

  Procurement was overall Unsatisfactory. Despite the efforts to mitigate various risks associated with the
  procurement activities, such as recruitment of additional dedicated staff, building procurement capacity in
  SENELEC, and support to improve contract management capabilities, there were persistent delays in the
  procurement and implementation of the contract during project implementation, including the delays in the
  uploading and sharing of documents in the Systemic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP). As
  discussed by one of the lessons, one of the main causes of the delay was the complexity of national


                                                                                                 Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN - Electricity Sector Support (FY12) (P125565)



   procurement procedures, including many layers of approvals, processing time required for various
   contracts, and lack of proper oversight by a higher authority (ICR Paragraph 76 and 91). The team
   confirmed that the World Bank procurement guidelines were followed and there was no instance of mis-
   procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The activities under Component 3 included the following: “Long-term strategic outlook included Studies on
   financial restructuring of utility and long-term sector strategy and governance (original loan),” “MT/LT
   strategic studies (integration of renewables, distribution masterplan, etc.),” and “Studies on sector
   governance (SENELEC’s unbundling, electricity tariffs, performance contract, etc.).” Although these
   activities under Component 3 were expected to contribute, rather indirectly, to PDO1 and PDO2, they were
   also expected to contribute to higher and broader levels of outcome, such as the energy sector’s overall
   development in the medium and long term. As briefly mentioned in the Risks to Development Outcome
   section above, the energy sector still faces various issues, including financial deficit. However, due to the
   lack of specific indicators and challenges to attribute sector level performance to specific projects (with
   smaller project size), the results of Component 3 and its contribution to the higher-level outcome are
   difficult to measure.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR identified several lessons and recommendations arising from the experience of project
implementation, and the most salient lessons are paraphrased as follows;

Joint or co-financing with other donors needs to benefit from careful design to avoid creating
a context of additional administrative burden. The PoC with EIB took 2–3 years to negotiate and
there was still no clarity on practical coordination or approach to simplify review and clearance. In
future, it would be more efficient to ensure regular donor coordination meetings and agree for all


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SN - Electricity Sector Support (FY12) (P125565)



donors to rely on one’s supervision to avoid parallel processes adding an additional layer and
significantly higher risks of delays.

Simplified national procedures should be discussed and arranged during project preparation
and arrangements should made to accommodate more efficient processing for the project.
Procurement delays were quite significant and there were many layers of approval, review, and then
registration for the various contracts with processing times that were neither swift nor consistent.
Given the number of contracts to be processed and the importance of relying on existing systems, it
would have been useful to have determined clear procedures and reliable timing for the various
steps to be monitored by a higher authority within the ministry responsible for oversight.

Project indicators should be selected carefully to ensure that these can be fully attributed to
the project and capture the results adequately. While there may be common indicators used, the
design and scope of the project, the simplicity and flexibility of the indicators, and the ability to
capture data that is specifically relevant for the project (and not just the sector) are key to ensure
that the project can demonstrate tangible and qualitative impacts. In this case, the losses indicator
and quality of service indicators were relevant but had attribution issues, so there is scope to explore
alternative measures. There should also be consideration for further reinforcing and building the
M&E capacity of the PIUs.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Overall, the ICR was well written, providing a comprehensive picture of the project’s implementation, which
went through several restructurings, as well as objective views on the issues and challenges that the project
faced, including the project’s complicated design, executing agencies’ capacity constraints, and attribution and
results framework’s attribution issues. It also provided valuable lessons. However, there were some
shortcomings, such as limited elaboration on the implementation of Component 3, lack of analysis on
implementation efficiency, and unclear descriptions under Components 1 and 2. Despite these shortcomings,
the ICR’s quality is considered to be overall Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 18 of 19
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
SN - Electricity Sector Support (FY12) (P125565)




                                                                                Page 19 of 19
