     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Plan Belgrano WSS Development Project (P125151)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023929

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P125151                                    Plan Belgrano WSS Development Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Argentina                                  Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)             Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-80320,IBRD-87310                      30-Apr-2017                                      200,312,500.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 05-Apr-2011                                30-Jun-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                   Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          200,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                           200,312,500.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                       200,312,500.00                                             0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator       Group
 Dileep M. Wagle            Vibecke Dixon                 Ramachandra Jammi            IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The original project development objective, as in the Loan Agreement, as well as on p.6 of the PAD, was “to
   increase sustainable access to sanitation and water supply services in the Norte Grande Region of Argentina,
   by providing investments in infrastructure and supporting institutional development”.




                                                                                                Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Plan Belgrano WSS Development Project (P125151)



   The revised PDO, as per p.5 of the Loan Agreement for the Additional Financing in 2017, was “to increase
   access to water supply and sanitation services and improve the operational and financial performance of the
   water supply and sanitation services (WSS) Service Providers in the Project Area”

   For purpose of analysis, the objectives will be parsed as follows:

   PDO1: "To provide sustainable access to sanitation services in the project area".
   PDO2: " To increase access to water supply in the project area"
   PDO3: "To improve the operational and financial performance of the water supply and sanitation services
   (WSS) Service Providers in the Project Area”



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  20-Dec-2010

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Water Supply and Sanitation Infrastructure (Estimated cost at appraisal: US$209 million,
   of which US$169.5 million from IBRD. Actual cost at closing: US$224.6 million, of which IBRD: US$174.6
   million). The component was to finance demand-driven subprojects consisting of the rehabilitation,
   upgrading and/or reconstruction of (a) wastewater collection, conveyance, treatment and disposal systems;
   (b) water supply systems, including production and distribution systems considered Category A from an
   environmental impact assessment perspective.

   Component 2: Institutional and Operational Development and Technical Assistance (Estimated cost at
   appraisal: US$15 million, financed by IBRD; Actual cost at closing: US$ 14.7 million). The component
   was to carry out: (a) tailored institutional and/or operational strengthening programs and provision of
   technical assistance (TA) to participating WSS providers to improve their institutional organization,
   investment planning, management capabilities and technical, operational, commercial and financial
   efficiency; (b) technical studies required to support the preparation and implementation of subprojects,
   including feasibility studies, engineering designs, economic/financial analysis, environmental and social
   impact assessments, etc.; (c) communication plans, dissemination and knowledge-sharing activities related
   to the project, and training and capacity building for the institutional strengthening of UCPyPFE and
   participating provinces.

   Component 3: Project Management and Supervision (Estimated cost at appraisal: US$15 million; Actual
   cost at closing: US$10.2 million). The aim of the component was to support (a) specialized independent



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Plan Belgrano WSS Development Project (P125151)



   technical, environmental and social supervision of subproject’s implementation; and (b) project audits and
   monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities; and provision of administrative and operational support.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost and Financing

   The cost of the project was initially estimated at US$ 240 million, based on an IBRD loan of US$200 million
   and US$40 million equivalent of Borrower contribution. An additional financing (AF) of US$125 million was
   approved during 2017, to help scale up activities under all three components with no change in Project
   design, and allow WSS providers in the Plan Belgrano provinces to increase their financial and operational
   sustainability. The name of the Project was changed at this time from “The Second Norte Grande Water
   Infrastructure Project” to “The Plan Belgrano WSS Services Development Project”, so as to align with the
   Government of Argentina’s (GoA’s) flagship Plan Belgrano and the objectives of the National Water
   Sanitation Plan, adopted in February 2016. The AF was however cancelled at the request of GoA as a
   consequence of a rigorous fiscal consolidation program and budget restrictions that had become necessary,
   on account of a series of macroeconomic imbalances combined with high external financing. At closing, the
   project’s costs amounted to US$250 million, including Borrower contribution of US$50 million.

   Borrower contribution

   A Borrower contribution of US$40 million equivalent was envisaged at appraisal, as part of the project’s
   financing. This was increased by closing to US$50 million equivalent.

   Dates

   The project was approved on April 5, 2011, becoming effective on February 07, 2012. A Mid-Term Review
   was held on May 29, 2015. The original closing date of April 30, 2017 was extended on account of the AF
   (which was subsequently cancelled), initially to April 30, 2020, then again to June 30, 2022, to allow for
   completion of critical water supply works (Wichi II), and finally to June 30, 2023.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context

Between 2002 and 2008, Argentina’s economy was growing at a rate of 8.5 percent per annum,
accompanied by a marked reduction in the country’s debt-to-GDP ratio, from 66.4 percent in 2002 to 47.1
percent in 2010. With the onset of the global financial crisis in 2008, GoA prioritized investments in
infrastructure as a key element of a counter-cyclical economic recovery plan. Infrastructure investment,
which had reached 4.67 percent of GDP in 2008, continued to grow strongly despite the economic
slowdown, and became a key element in the Government’s strategy to overcome potential bottlenecks to
competitiveness.


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Plan Belgrano WSS Development Project (P125151)



The Norte Grande region (NGR) epitomized the marginalization and underdevelopment of the northern
parts of the country. The region, which covered one-third of the national territory and comprised some 7.5
million people (or over a fifth of the population), produced only 10 percent of the country’s GDP and 8
percent of its total exports. In contrast to declining national poverty levels, poverty in the NGR stood at 48
percent of the population, half of whom were living in extreme poverty.

As regards the water and sanitation services (WSS) sector, at appraisal, with only 80 percent piped water
supply, 48 piped sewerage coverage and 10 percent of collected wastewater receiving treatment, Argentina
lagged other upper middle-income countries. Sector policies had changed repeatedly over the prior two
decades, with a freeze on water tariffs – imposed in 2001 – affecting the financial sustainability of
utilities. Many of the water concessions of the 1990s were ultimately terminated, resulting in financial and
operational difficulties for some of the companies and a weakening of sector institutions. The NGR suffered
particularly acute problems in the WSS sector, being affected by low coverage rates, poor service levels,
contamination of water sources, limited funding for investments, and governance and institutional
challenges. Service provision models for the sector were wide-ranging: seven out of nine provinces having
had concession contracts with private operators, all of whom were negatively affected by the economic and
social crisis. Nearly 15 percent of the population (over 1 million people) lacked piped water supply and 61
percent (over 4.5 million people) lacked piped sewerage services. Four of the nine provinces in the NGR
ranked the lowest in the nation, and only two provinces were above the national average.

In 2004, GoA initiated a Norte Grande Development & Integration Program, as part of a national strategy for
the historical redress of the region. The program included planned investments inn energy, transport, WSS
and productive sector competitiveness. The current Project was the second of two operations for the water
sector, initially conceived as a single US$400 million operation. The two operations were approved by the
Board within four months of each other; hence, implementation was practically in parallel, and carried out
by the same Project Implementation Unit (PIU). The first project was focused on water supply and urban
drainage, and the second on sanitation infrastructure, which called for somewhat more complex technical,
economics and safeguards solutions.

Alignment with Country Strategies

The Project’s development objectives were consistent with those of the World Bank Group (WBG)’s
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Argentina, FY19-22, and the PLR which extended the CPF by
two years. Objective 5 of Focus Area 2 focused on Improving Service Delivery through enhanced inter-
jurisdictional coordination, which specifically included ‘Improved Water Services in Northern Regions’ as an
objective. For the WSS sector, the CPF program would support operationalization in 10 provinces of the
Management and Results Plan (MRP) introduced under the 2017 National Water and Sanitation Plan to
improve the provision of WSS in terms of quantity and quality. In addition, Focus Area 3 was broadened in
the PLR to align with the “green, resilient and inclusive development” approach by helping reduce local
pollution and better managing natural resources and building a more sustainable economy. A Water
Security Report for Argentina prepared by the World Bank in 2021 indicated that the country’s GDP could
be 2.7 percent higher by 2030 in a water security active scenario (including investments in WSS). The
PLR, in its Objective 9: ‘Supporting a Resilient Economy’ sought to build resilience by increasing access to
WSS, and incorporating resilient infrastructure to adapt to climate events specific to the northwestern
region.

The PDO was also aligned with the World Bank’s 2018 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Argentina,
which included access to WSS as an essential element to the convergence of living standards and access

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Plan Belgrano WSS Development Project (P125151)



               to economic opportunities of the population (especially the indigenous population, which lagged inn terms of
               access to basic services). Both the SCD and CPF (plus PLR) emphasized the need for more effective
               water management as part of adaptation policies in key sectors. The Argentina Water Security Report
               highlighted the cost of existing water security gaps on the country’s economy, and proposed a series of
               investments and water governance reforms, with which the Project development objectives are aligned.

               Based on the above, Relevance is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             “To provide sustainable access to sanitation services in the project area”

                             Rationale
                             Rationale

                             Theory of Change (TOC)

                             The operation was designed as a framework project, comprising several WSS subprojects drawn from a
                             pipeline of potential investments. The project was expected to provide technical assistance (TA) to support
                             pipeline development and subproject preparation and strengthen the capacity of the participating utilities. At
                             appraisal the project was structured around two objectives, leading to two possible long-term outcomes, with
                             a third objective being introduced at restructuring for the proposed additional financing.

                             Causal linkages between the project’s activities and planned outcomes were fairly direct. Activities supported
                             by the project included among other things the construction and/or rehabilitation of wastewater collection,
                             construction of wastewater treatment plants and disposal systems and upgrading of water supply systems,
                             combined with TA, training and operational strengthening programs and technical studies, plus independent
                             technical, environmental and social supervision of subproject implementation. These in turn were expected to
                             lead to the main outcomes of improved sustainable access to sanitation and water supply services, and
                             (introduced at the time of the AF) to improved operational and financial performance of the WSS providers in
                             the project area.

                             Indicators used to measure the achievement of objectives were fairly straightforward. Achievement of project
                             outcomes was measured by indicators measuring numbers of people provided with access improved
                             sanitation and water services under the project, plus a core indicator measuring the number of direct project
                             beneficiaries. Sustainability of water utilities was measured by the number of service providers achieving a
                             90 percent O&M cost recovery rate. The project however found it difficult to identify sufficient eligible

                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Plan Belgrano WSS Development Project (P125151)



subprojects; hence, consistent with the framework nature of the operation, targets and indicators had to be
tweaked and adjusted through restructuring in 2015, after the Mid-Term Review (MTR). In 2017 however an
additional financing (AF) was introduced, leading to further upward adjustment of targets and indicators. After
the AF was cancelled soon thereafter, subsequent restructurings (2019 and 2022) led to many of the targets
being adjusted downwards once again.

Outputs

The project faced some problems in identifying subprojects that could meet the eligibility criteria set out at
appraisal. Two subprojects were finally selected, both in Chaco Province, one for a sanitation system for
Metropolitan Resistencia, consisting of the construction of main sewage collectors and the Wastewater
Treatment Plant (WWTP), using an upflow anaerobic sludge blanket digestion); the other for constructing the
second stage of the Wichii water supply system (Wichii II), built under the parallel project, expanding to more
beneficiaries. As such, key outputs under the objective of providing sanitation services in the project area
were:

1. A Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP) constructed in Resistencia. It should be mentioned that although
the expected inflow quantity was reached the volume of BOD eliminated by the treatment plant was of the
order of only 600 metric tons a year, well short of the target of 2,500 mt. (According to the ICR, p.35, it is
expected that given sufficient time for operation with this inflow, the target would be achieved).

2. 27 km of sewage network was constructed in Resistencia, along with drainage work in Yerba Buena,
consisting of 3 temporary retention areas. However, because minor works were not completed on schedule
to connect the existing sewerage network with the new sewerage collectors, only one-third of the
beneficiaries were connected to the WWTP, which was operating at reduced flow. The ICR reports (p.18)
that these minor works were finally completed after project closing, just prior to completion of the ICR itself,
enabling the WWTP to operate at near-full capacity (and BOD elimination to reach the target level).

Outcomes

A key measure of the success of this objective was an increase in the number of people in urban areas
(within the NGR) having access to sewerage and wastewater treatment services as a result of the
infrastructure built by the project (this was modified slightly to “improved sanitation facilities” and then to
“improved sanitation services” under the project, as a result of the restructuring in 2015 and with the
additional financing in 2017). As the project was designed as a framework project, it was expected that
activities would be defined during implementation, depending on eligible subprojects identified and
finalized. Accordingly, the original target of 418,000 beneficiaries, set at appraisal, had to be modified at
restructuring (2015), as the Santiago del Estero Sanitation & Wastewater System, tentatively identified at
appraisal, was not selected in the final list of subprojects. The target for this indicator was modified to
210,000 beneficiaries (including 10,000 rural), with eventual achievement reaching an estimated 248,500
beneficiaries by the time of the ICR (November, 2023), well in excess of the target.

A related measure of the number of new household sewerage connections arising benefiting from
rehabilitation works built under the project was dropped at restructuring in 2015, as the project did not build
domiciliary connections. Another indicator to be dropped related to the number of service providers
supported under the project – this being in order to harmonize with those under the Norte Grande Water
Infrastructure project.


                                                                                                     Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Plan Belgrano WSS Development Project (P125151)



The overall achievement here, under the project, was the building of a new, modern sanitation system with
increased access to sewerage services, and improved sanitation services and wastewater treatment. Based
on the revised indicators, targets were fully achieved. However, taking into account the fact that the initial
target was set at an ambitious level (albeit based on tentative assumptions of subproject selection),
achievement of this objective is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
“To increase access to water supply in the project area”

Rationale
There was no assigned PDO indicator introduced at appraisal to measure the performance of the project in
meeting the objective of increasing access to water supply in the project areas. It was only at restructuring for
the AF in 2017 that indicators were added to measure the number of people provided with access to
improved water services under the project, as well as the number of direct project beneficiaries. After
cancellation of the AF, the indicators were adjusted in 2019 to reflect the only water supply subproject that
was actually funded, namely Wichii II.

Outputs

- Some 31.1 km of water supply pipes had been built under Wichii Stage I. The second stage, under the
project, added 49.5 km, to a grand total of 80.6 km by September 2022, thereby attaining the target of 80 km.

- One amphibious dredger was acquired to remedy the inefficient water intake on the Bermejo River.

- 1000 rainwater harvesting systems were constructed in remote areas, in addition to 272 piped water supply
connections in El Sauzal, 80 in Wichii and 1,243 in Fuerte Esperanza (completed after project closing), all in
Chaco.

Outcomes

The project brought an increase in access to improved water to 11,646 beneficiaries. The original target set
at the time of the additional financing, to reflect a planned scaling-up of activities, was 250,000
beneficiaries (this was subsequently reduced substantially when the AF was cancelled – reflecting the fact
that investments planned under the AF would not be undertaken)

Direct project beneficiaries resulting from the project similarly had a target set at AF of 450,000
beneficiaries (similarly scaled back to 223,200 beneficiaries with the cancellation of the AF). Based on the
number of rainwater harvesting systems and piped water supply connections installed, an estimated 260,170
people benefited from the project – or about 58 percent of the target.



                                                                                                   Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Plan Belgrano WSS Development Project (P125151)



Based on the above, taking account of the fact that the target was initially set at an ambitious level (albeit
based on tentative assumptions), efficacy for this objective - for the period between 2017 and 2019
restructurings - is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
“To increase access to water supply in the project area”

Revised Rationale
There was no assigned PDO indicator introduced at appraisal to measure the performance of the project in
meeting the objective of increasing access to water supply in the project areas. It was only at restructuring for
the AF in 2017 that indicators were added to measure the number of people provided with access to
improved water services under the project, as well as the number of direct project beneficiaries. After
cancellation of the AF, the indicators were adjusted in 2019 to reflect the only water supply subproject that
was actually funded, namely Wichii II.

Outputs

- Some 31.1 km of water supply pipes had been built under Wichii Stage I. The second stage, under the
project, added 49.5 km, to a grand total of 80.6 km by September 2022, thereby attaining the target of 80 km.

- One amphibious dredger was acquired to remedy the inefficient water intake on the Bermejo River.

- 1000 rainwater harvesting systems were constructed in remote areas, in addition to 272 piped water supply
connections in El Sauzal, 80 in Wichii and 1,243 in Fuerte Esperanza (completed after project closing), all in
Chaco.

Outcomes

The project brought an increase in access to improved water to 11,646 beneficiaries. The original target of
250,000 beneficiaries, set at the time of the additional financing, was reduced at restructuring in 2019 (when
the AF was cancelled) to 11,700 beneficiaries, which it more or less achieved.

Direct project beneficiaries resulting from the project similarly had a scaled-back target in 2019 of 223,000
beneficiaries, once the AF was cancelled. Based on the number of rainwater harvesting systems and piped
water supply connections installed, an estimated 260,170 people benefited from the project – well in excess
of of the target.

Based on the above, taking account that the targets were revised downwards to levels that were then fully
attained, efficacy for this objective – is rated High.



                                                                                                     Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Plan Belgrano WSS Development Project (P125151)




Revised Rating
---


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
“To improve the operational and financial performance of the water supply and sanitation services (WSS)
Service Providers in the Project Area”

Rationale
The project was expected to support WSS providers in participant provinces to improve their institutional
organization, investment planning and management. The outcome of this objective was to be measured by a
PDO indicator relating to O&M cost recovery on the part of the service providers, as well as some
intermediate results indicators.

Outputs

The decision-making processes on service delivery in a federal state like Argentina depended on coordination
between various jurisdictional levels (national, provincial and municipal). A key reform for inter-jurisdictional
coordination lay in holding provinces accountable for results they achieved with resources transferred to
them. In the WSS sector, this was done using the Management & Results Plans (MRPs), established as part
of the 2017 National Water & Sanitation Plan (NWSP), to improve the provision of WSS services. As such:

- The share of billed connections that were metered and read (measured over the total number of
connections billed by user type – residential and non-residential), which had been 41 percent in 2016 rose to
50.1 percent by June 2023, against a target of 50 percent, adjusted in 2019 from a target of 60 percent set at
the time of the AF.

- Six new operators obtained new lab equipment for water quality control (target was 6). All the operators (5
utilities in the provinces of Chaco, Catamarca, Formosa, Salta and Tucumán, plus the water regulatory entity
of Corrientes province) had already received small, portable water quality testing kits and the bulk of the lab
equipment. Earlier, all water quality analysis had to be carried out by external laboratories, lengthening the
response time of the utilities. The new arrangements meant that these WSS operators were no longer
dependent on external laboratories, reducing analysis times (from 2 weeks to immediate results), and
increasing sampling frequencies.

- Seven operators incorporated new vacuum trucks (target was 6). The beneficiary provinces were Jujuy,
Catamarca, Formosa, Salta, Chaco, La Rioja and Tucumán. These trucks were used for safe and efficient
waste collection and disposal, thereby providing a complement to the sanitation service.

Outcomes

The efficacy of this objective was measured primarily by the number of service providers achieving a 90
percent O&M cost recovery ratio. This would be measured as collected revenue from WSS bills over O&M
costs. All the main utilities of the participating provinces were supported through the project (via MRPs,
expert visits, purchase of equipment, technical workshops and south-south exchanges). There were also
efforts to increase tariffs. Notwithstanding this, in terms of results, all supported utilities did not succeed in

                                                                                                       Page 9 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Plan Belgrano WSS Development Project (P125151)



                            covering their O&M costs. Four WSS operators reached the 90 percent level in 2020 (target was 4), but only
                            3 of them remained at or above this O&M cost recovery level by the close of project (hence: 75 percent
                            achievement rate).

                            Based on the above, the efficacy of this objective is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project contributed substantially to the achievement of the development objectives by increasing access
                            to sanitation services in the project area (PDO1), as well as towards improving the operational and financial
                            performance of the WSS providers in the same area (PDO3). Since this was designed as a framework
                            project, the project’s outcomes, indicators and targets – especially for PDO1 - were expected to be modified
                            through the implementation period in response to emerging needs. The project’s achievement of objectives
                            for PDO2, indicators for which were introduced only with the introduction of the AF, is rated Modest under the
                            indicators originally set at restructuring in 2017, and High once the indicators were significantly revised at
                            restructuring in 2019. Based on this, overall efficacy is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency

   Since no specific intervention was evaluated at appraisal, given that subprojects were identified during
   implementation, economic evaluation at the time of the ICR was conducted on two subprojects, selected under
   the eligibility criteria set out in the Operations Manual (which provided that projected economic returns should be
   higher than a threshold rate of 10 percent). The two subprojects were both located in Chaco Province: (a) the
   water supply system for Wichii II, extending the aqueduct to Fuerte Esperanza, and (b) sewerage collectors and
   WWTP construction in the metropolitan area of Resistencia. Taken together, the two subprojects accounted for
   about US$189 million. On this basis, the ex-ante economic rate of return (ERR) was estimated at 14.9 percent,
   against an ERR at project closing estimated at only 10.5 percent.

   Operational/Administrative Efficiency



                                                                                                                             Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Plan Belgrano WSS Development Project (P125151)



Notwithstanding the cancellation of the AF, the overall timeline of the project was 12 years, with three
extensions of closing date – constituting an implementation delay of over 6 years. While the framework nature
of the project at preparation did contribute to slowing down its implementation to some extent, other factors also
played a role, including: (a) a lack of counterpart funding due to the lack of national budget, which resulted in
work stoppage during 2019 and 2020; (b) institution changes following the change in government in 2015,
resulting in PIU understaffing, staff turnover, and confusion in roles and responsibilities, which led to significant
procurement delays; (c) the impact of the Covid-19 emergency from March, 2020 onwards, affecting work plans
and completion dates; (d) foreign currency restrictions arising from Argentina’s significant depreciation of the
peso vis-à-vis the US dollar, resulting in delays in purchase of imported equipment; and (e) delays caused by
severe weather, combined with the absence of paved roads. All of this had a negative impact on the project’s
administrative and operational efficiency.

Taking account of the sub-par performance of both economic and operational & administrative efficiency, the
project’s overall efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   14.90
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                10.50
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s development objective was highly relevant to the World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework
FY19-22 (extended 2024 by the PLR), as well as to the World Bank’s Water Security Report for Argentina (2021)
and was aligned with the Government’s Norte Grande Development & Integration Program. The project was
substantially effective, overall, in its objectives of increasing access to sanitation services and water supply, as
well as improving the operational and financial performance of WSS service providers, in the project
area. Project Efficiency was however rated Modest. Since there was a substantial change in indicator targets for
PDO2, resulting from the introduction and then subsequent cancellation of the AF, application of a split rating
may be appropriate. This is presented in the following table:

      Application of Split Rating




                                                                                                       Page 11 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Plan Belgrano WSS Development Project (P125151)



                                                                              Objectives and Targets post-
                                       Objectives and Targets prior to
                                                                              restructuring in 2019 (Cancellation of
                                       restructuring in 2017 (AF)
                                                                              AF)
Relevance of PDO                                                      High
Efficacy of PDO
               PDO1                Substantial                                Substantial
               PDO2                                                           Modest           High
               PDO3                Substantial                                Substantial
Efficiency                                                         Modest
Outcome Rating                     Moderately Satisfactory                    Moderately Satisfactory
Numerical Value of Outcome Rating*          4                                            4
Disbursement ($USm.)                     116.75                                  38.45           44.8
              (Share)                       59%                                    19%            22%
Weighted value of outcome rating
                                          2.36                                  0.76              0.88
(Numerical value x Disbursement %)
                                   2.36 + 0.76 + 0.88 = 4
Aggregate Outcome Rating
                                   (Moderately Satisfactory)

 * On a six-point scale (where: 1 = Highly Unsatisfactory … 6 = Highly Satisfactory)



Based on the above, the project’s Overall Outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The overall risk of the project was rated Substantial in the ICR. Uncertainties existed regarding institutional
capacity and sustainability in the long run. By project closing, some minor activities were still pending
completion in line with commitments to the Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), though counterpart funds were
available for the ongoing contract to execute pending works, and milestones had been reached. According
to the ICR (pgs. 30-31), the largest risk to sustaining the achievements of the project’s development
objectives related to the continued improvement of SAMEEP (the provincial WSS provider in Chaco), which
had the mandate and responsibility for operating almost all infrastructure financed by the project, and was
increasingly taking charge of large WSS systems built in the province.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Plan Belgrano WSS Development Project (P125151)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  In preparing the project, the World Bank team collaborated with the client to identify and design the
  operation in keeping with the objectives of the Government’s Norte Grande Development Program. The
  task team, which included technical, fiduciary and safeguards specialists, structured the operation as a
  framework project, with several subprojects aimed at benefiting low-income populations. Since
  operational risk was considered relatively high at appraisal, various mitigation measures were
  proposed. While the overall design of the project is considered appropriate and aligned with the
  assessed risks (ICR, p.30), its scope was too ambitious, as seen from subsequently-reduced indicator
  targets – though to some extent this reflected the goals and aspirations of the project framework. That
  said, results indicators showed some shortcoming: for instance, the initial lack of a direct indicator to
  monitor water access, rectified only at the time of the AF, was puzzling. In addition, several indicators
  underwent considerable tweaking and adjustment throughout the implementation period, making it more
  difficult to accurately gauge the project’s performance.

  On the basis of the above, the project’s quality at entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (pg. 30), the Bank team made significant efforts to ensure that implementation stayed
 on track and that developmental results were achieved. Some 26 supervision missions were carried out
 over the 12-year implementation period, with technical experts being mobilized to assist on project
 activities via site visits, multi-disciplinary reviews and technical assessments. The project had a number of
 task team leaders (TTLs) over its implementation period, which was not unusual given the length of the
 period. However, the presence of field-based staff helped ensure that continuity was maintained and that
 project performance was monitored and managed proactively, as evidenced by the several restructurings
 (including introduction of AF and subsequently its cancellation) that were undertaken during the period.

 Based on this, quality of supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Plan Belgrano WSS Development Project (P125151)



a. M&E Design
 The Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) plan for tracking the achievement of outcome and intermediate
 indicators was largely in keeping with standard World Bank practice. Indicators were generally clear and in
 keeping with standard World Bank practice. However, although the results framework – as designed at
 appraisal – was aligned with the project’s objectives and well-designed, there were shortcomings (ICR,
 para 86). These included the absence of PDO indicators to monitor water access, and of intermediate
 indicators to report on construction completion.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E arrangements were adequate and satisfactorily implemented. Indicators and targets were adjusted
  (and readjusted) during the four restructurings that were implemented to try and improve their relevance
  to the PDO. M&E data collection, analysis and reporting were made more systematic and effective in
  reporting on the progress of the operation (ICR, para 87). Reports were submitted on a timely basis,
  allowing the project’s progress to be monitored and emerging issues to be addressed. However, the
  multiple changes that the project underwent during its implementation increased the difficulty in
  monitoring the operation as a whole towards achieving its developmental objectives.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (para 88), project-generated data were used to support implementation,
  dissemination of progress and results, and to derive lessons. The project’s implementation monitoring
  was also done via the information provided by the PIU.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category A, due to potentially significant environmental and social impacts
   arising from the operation of urban sewage collection, wastewater treatment and disposal into the Parana
   river. The following safeguards were triggered under the Bank’s Safeguards Policy: OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats), OP 4.09 (Pest Control), OP/BP 4.11 (Physical
   Cultural Resources), OP/BP 4.37 (Dam Safety), OP/BP 4.36 (Forests) and OP/BP 7.50 (Projects on
   International Waterways). Although no details were provided in the ICR itself, the team subsequently
   clarified that all safeguards policies were complied with. As such, an Environmental and Social
   Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared, providing a baseline and platform for the environmental
   control monitoring of the sanitation system, so as to assess and manage the potential environmental and
   social risk. Strict protocols were adhered to regarding the separation and disposal of toxic waste. An
   Indigenous and People’s Planning Framework (IPPF) and a Resettlement and Land Acquisition Policy
   Framework were both also prepared during design. To promote the inclusion of indigenous peoples, the
   project also committed at the policy level to include them as direct beneficiaries as one of the eligibility

                                                                                                 Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Plan Belgrano WSS Development Project (P125151)



   criteria for subprojects, and at the subproject level through the IPPF, which guided the preparation of a
   specific Indigenous People’s Plan (IPP) and was applied during implementation.


   At project closure, a Post Closure Action Plan (PCAP) was developed to ensure that compliance with the
   WBG’s environmental and social policy would be maintained for the remaining work linked to the IPP
   (including completion of 180 rainwater harvesting systems).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management
   According to the ICR (page 30), financial reports and audits were received, reviewed and found
   acceptable, and that no accountability issues had arisen throughout project life. The financial management
   (FM) of the project closed with a Satisfactory rating. The ICR does not however provide any details on the
   nature of financial management arrangements, the timeliness of financial reports (IFRs) and audits,
   whether all financial covenants had been met, or on whether all audit opinions were unqualified.

   Procurement

   The project’s procurement performance was assessed by the ICR (p.30) as Satisfactory. However, it is
   noted (ICR, p. 28) that there were significant delays in procurement processes and contract management,
   which arose as a result of the sudden transfer of fiduciary, procurement and safeguard responsibilities from
   the PIU to the Directorate-General for Sectoral and Special Programs and Projects during implementation
   – creating confusion regarding roles and responsibilities. Notwithstanding this, all bidding processes
   complied with World Bank norms and no mis-procurement was declared during implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   Strengthening of Local Organizations: A partnership with local non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
   was established to improve citizen engagement with project beneficiaries. As part of the IPP, it became
   possible to expand benefits beyond water access. Activities implemented as part of the socio-
   environmental management plan and the IPP included strengthening of local organizations to help take
   care of reforested areas (e.g. through tree-planting), capacity-building on agricultural practices, and
   valorization of certain seeds into flour. Similarly, local organizations were strengthened, making it possible
   for women to organize cooperatives focused on handcraft making.



11. Ratings



                                                                                                    Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Plan Belgrano WSS Development Project (P125151)



                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                 While the M&E system did have
                                                                                 some shortcomings, these were
                                                                                 not significant enough to affect
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Substantial
                                                                                 the project’s ability to sufficiently
                                                                                 measure and report on project
                                                                                 performance
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

1. Successful implementation of a framework project calls for long-term planning: As
demonstrated by the project, framework project implementation can be risky and lengthy. The
experience of the project was that start-up and preparatory activities took relatively long, with works
starting only two and a half years after project approval. A key lesson is that contingency scenarios
are needed in order to mitigate against the risk of political, economic and management changes
taking place during implementation.

2. Providing widespread access to water to rural indigenous populations calls for creative
and low-cost solutions that go beyond large-scale infrastructure projects: The project
demonstrates that the use of small-scale solutions, such as rainwater harvesting, can play an
important role, especially in remote areas with dispersed populations. Use of such low-cost and
simple design solutions not only helped address the problem of water scarcity but also empowered
local communities to become more self-sufficient and resilient in accessing clean water. The
involvement of local organizations and NGOs with local expertise not only facilitated the
implementation of the project but meant that solutions were more likely to meet their needs and be
sustained over time.

3. Improving the sustainability of WSS services can be a long process that calls for a more
conducive environment for efficient resource allocation and service delivery: The project
showed that it was essential to take a comprehensive approach that included both a focus on
service providers’ improvements and efforts to enhance the enabling environment. This called for
addressing coordination mechanisms at the national, federal and local levels, and investing in
building capacity and governance of WSS providers.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No


                                                                                                     Page 16 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Plan Belgrano WSS Development Project (P125151)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is generally well written, concise and internally consistent. The theory of change is appropriate and a
fair amount of detail is provided on the issues affecting the preparation and implementation of the project. The
achievement of objectives is adequately analyzed, given the several restructurings that the project underwent,
leading to various changes in the results framework. However, the analysis of the M&E framework lacks
sufficient detail, especially in light of the Modest rating assigned. The same is true of the sections on risks to
development outcomes, as well as the Bank’s supervision performance and fiduciary compliance, especially in
supervising safeguard compliance and in monitoring compliance with financial covenants, audit
recommendations and timeliness of financial reporting.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                     Page 17 of 17
