     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Niger PARCA (P164563)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0024095

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P164563                                    Niger PARCA

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Niger                                      Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-63080,IDA-D3690                        30-Sep-2023                                         72,308,424.30

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 12-Sep-2018                                30-Sep-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           80,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            80,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        72,308,424.30                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Maria Shkaratan             Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Original Project Development Objective (PDO) was “to improve access to basic services and economic
   opportunities for refugees and host communities in select areas of the Republic of Niger” (Financing
   Agreement, page 6). The PDO was stated identically in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 1).

   The PDO was not revised.



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Niger PARCA (P164563)



   For the purposes of this Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR) review, the objective will be
   assessed as follows:

   PDO 1: To improve access to basic services for refugees and host communities in select areas of the
   Republic of Niger.

   PDO 2: To improve access to economic opportunities for refugees and host communities in select areas of
   the Republic of Niger.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  21-May-2021

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Original components

   Component 1 Community Infrastructure for Improved Access to Basic Public Services (cost at
   appraisal: US$43.5 million; actual cost: US$38.64 million) was to finance construction or rehabilitation of
   328 community infrastructure sub-projects, including: schools; health centers; community centers; water
   supply and sanitation infrastructure; transportation infrastructure (rural roads, small bridges, and culverts);
   agricultural infrastructure (irrigation schemes, water supply for livestock and aquaculture, storage facilities);
   and rural markets and community storage. The sub-projects were to be designed to increase resilience to
   climate change risks (such as water scarcity and soil degradation). The sub-projects were identified using
   geo-spatial analysis and in consultations with the local governments (LGs) and communities. The sub-
   projects were to be labor-intensive and employ local labor force selected through the Bank’s community-
   based targeting mechanism. The component was also to support the following activities related to
   infrastructure sub-projects: needs and beneficiary assessments, technical designs, and quality control.

   Component 2 Support for Economic Opportunities (cost at appraisal: US$25.5 million; actual cost:
   US$25.01 million) was to finance the development of income-generating activities (IGAs) for refugees,
   internally displaced persons (IDPs), and host communities. The focus was on stimulating private
   investments, restoring productive assets, and increasing productivity through skills development, increased
   access to markets, diversified livelihoods, improved inputs, and increased resilience to economic and
   climate shocks. There were two sub-components: (i) support to agricultural production, including crop
   production, livestock, poultry, agro-processing, and aquaculture (financing productive inputs, assets,
   training, and awareness building); and (ii) support to entrepreneurship: individual cash grants (US$200
   each) to finance IGAs.


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Niger PARCA (P164563)



Component 3 Coordination and Institutional Development (cost at appraisal: US$5.0 million; actual
cost: US$3.58 million) was to finance capacity building at the following levels: community (local), municipal
councils, departmental authorities, regional councils, and central government authorities. At the community
and municipal levels (the main focus of the Project), support would be provided to integrate the crisis and
recovery priorities into Commune Development Plans (PDCs) and to implement the PDCs through
municipal Annual Investment Plans (PIAs). At mid-term review of the Project, it would be determined
whether the developed communes’ PIAs are of sufficient quality for selecting Component 1 investments on
their basis. At the regional and department levels, support would combine provision of technology for
Project monitoring (geo-enabled cell phone- and tablet-based system) and training to use it. At the central
level, support would be provided to the Project Steering Committee to better coordinate activities in crisis-
affected areas. At strategic and policy level, support would be provided to the High-Level Tripartite
Committee on the Humanitarian-Development Nexus (CTHN) to ensure effective integration of humanitarian
and development responses. This would include support to the Ministry of Interior to enhance its ability to
collect the forced displacement (FD) data (through the Agence Nationale d'Enregistrement et
d'Identification, ANEI).

Component 4 Project Management (cost at appraisal: US$6.0 million; actual cost: US$6.68 million)
was to finance the overall Project management, fiduciary, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E).

2. Changes to components, results framework (RF) indicators, institutional arrangements, and
component costs during implementation

First restructuring of May 2021 involved changes to the following: (i) RF indicators; (ii) component 2 sub-
components; and (iii) institutional arrangements. One of these changes (a target reduction of an
intermediate results indicator (IRI) due to costs increase) entailed a reduction in the Project’s scope. The
details are as follows:

    o One IRI target was lowered, entailing a reduction in the Project scope:

      The target for the IRI “Number of newly built or rehabilitated kilometers of rural roads” was reduced
       from 250 kilometers to 150 kilometers due to increased construction costs (caused by the security
       situation in Diffa and the increased prices for the imported construction inputs) (Restructuring paper,
       page 13).

    o One IRI target was increased:

      The target for the IRI “Number of meetings of the Technical Committee of the Humanitarian-
       Development Nexus at inter-ministerial level” was increased from 2 meetings to 3 meetings.

    o Four sub-indicator targets were lowered, with no reduction of the Project scope because the
       related main indicators’ targets remained unchanged. Specifically:

      The targets for the PDO sub-indicator “Beneficiaries with improved access to economic opportunities
       (Refugees)” and for the IRI sub-indicator “Number of beneficiaries provided with cash grants for
       agricultural production and other income-generating activities (Refugees)” were reduced from
       31,250 people to 20,850 people to reflect the actual structure of the population (one-third of the
       targeted 62,500 beneficiaries (note that this overall target remained unchanged), or 20,833 people,
       were refugees, below the 50 percent estimated at appraisal) (Restructuring paper, page 11-12).

                                                                                                 Page 3 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Niger PARCA (P164563)



      The target for the IRI sub-indicator “Number of beneficiaries employed through labor-intensive works
       (Refugees)” was reduced from 11,500 people to 7,700 people to reflect the actual structure of the
       population (one-third of the targeted 23,000 beneficiaries (this overall target remained unchanged),
       or 7,667 people, were refugees, below the 50 percent estimated at appraisal) (Restructuring paper,
       page 12).
      The target for the IRI sub-indicator “Number of beneficiaries employed through labor-intensive works
       (Women)” was reduced from 11,500 people to 2,300 people because the original assumption that
       one-half of the 23,000 beneficiaries of labor-intensive works (note that this overall target remained
       unchanged) would be female was unrealistic, especially in the cultural context of Niger
       (Restructuring paper, page 12).

    o A new IRI was added to the RF: “Number of cash grant recipients trained under the project”, with
       two sub-indicators: for refugees and for women.
    o The two subcomponents of Component 2 - the agricultural and non-agricultural IGAs - were
      merged into one due to the following: (i) the beneficiary-driven IGA choices (including across
      agricultural and non-agricultural activities; (ii) limited access to land for beneficiaries; and (iii) an
      overlap of inputs and activities across the two sub-components.
    o Institutional arrangements were modified to improve Project implementation efficiency. At
      approval, the Project implementing agency was the government entity Secrétariat Exécutif de la
      Stratégie pour le Développement et la Sécurité dans les Zones Sahélo-Sahariennes du Niger or
      Executive secretariat for Strategy for Development and Security in Sahel-Saharan areas of Niger
      (SE/SDS). It was supported by IDA-financed technical consultants who, among other tasks, were
      charged with strengthening the operational capacity of the SE/SDS, aiming at a full transfer of
      Project management to the SE/SDS in the third year of implementation. However, the slow progress
      with capacity building efforts, as well as the low efficiency of the SE/SDS with respect to Project
      operations and decision making, was hindering Project implementation, and the original
      implementation arrangements were reviewed. As a result of the review, a newly created SE/SDS
      Technical Unit, comprising IDA consultants only, was made fully responsible for the day-to-day
      implementation and administration of the Project, while contract approvals remained a responsibility
      of the SE/SDS.

Second restructuring of May 2022 involved the following changes: (i) to components and to the allocation
of funds across components; and (ii) to the RF indicators.

    o Changes in components: cancellation of some (mostly Component 1) activities and a scale-
      up of Component 2 activities. The cancellations were mainly for construction sub-projects,
      including: (i) 52 classrooms in Diffa and Tillaberi; (ii) a road section in Tahoua; and (iii) 16
      agricultural infrastructures in Diffa and Tillaberi. The main reasons were: (i) increased insecurity at
      the Project’s sites and beneficiaries’ desertion from the sites; (ii) a significant delay in commencing
      some of the Component 1 infrastructure sub-projects; and (iii) price increases.
    o Reallocation of funds across components due to the cancelled Component 1 activities and
      savings under Component 3. A total of US$4.85 million was reallocated from Component 1,
      including: US$4.5 million to mobile cash transfer and training under Component 2, and US$0.35 to
      Project management under Component 4. In addition, US$0.6 million was reallocated from
      Component 3 to Component 4 (using Component 3 savings).




                                                                                                  Page 4 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Niger PARCA (P164563)



       o Increase in the RF indicator targets in relation to the changes in components. Some of the
         Component 2 targets were increased. While there was a reduction of many Component 1 targets,
         one of them was increased. Specifically:

        The targets for Component 2 PDO indicator “Beneficiaries with improved access to economic
         opportunities (Number)” and two Component 2 IRIs - “Number of beneficiaries provided with cash
         grants for agricultural production and other income-generating activities” and “Number of cash grant
         recipients trained under the project” - were increased from 62,500 people to 83,500 people. The
         targets for the related sub-indicators for refugees were increased from 20,850 people to 23,500
         people. The targets for the related sub-indicators for women were increased from 31,250 people to
         41,750 people.
        The Component 1 IRI “Number of newly built or rehabilitated other infrastructure” had its target
         increased from 70 to 85.

       o Reduction in the RF indicator targets in relation to the changes in components. Component 1
         targets were reduced to reflect changes in components. Specifically:

        The target for Component 1 IRI “Number of beneficiaries employed through labor-intensive works”
         was reduced from 23,000 people to 15,000 people. The related sub-indicator target for refugees was
         lowered from 7,700 people to 3,000 people.
        The target for Component 1 IRI “Number of newly built or rehabilitated classrooms” was lowered
         from 200 classrooms to 148 classrooms.
        The target for Component 1 IRI “Number of newly built or rehabilitated kilometer of rural roads” was
         lowered from 150 kilometers to 66.5 kilometers.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The appraisal estimate was US$80.0 million, and the disbursement at closure was US$75.17
  million. The amount at closure included US$1.26M that were still in the PTU’s Designated Account, to be
  returned to IDA (ICR, page 43). At IEG’s request, the team confirmed that the repayment to IDA was still
  pending at the time of the conclusion of this review, and the FM team was working on resolving a system
  glitch to finalize it. The rest of the difference between the appraisal estimate and the actual disbursement is
  explained by the coup d’etat of July 2023, which triggered O.P. 7.30 “Dealings with De Facto Governments”,
  suspending Project disbursements (ICR, page 24, 27).

  Project Financing: The Project was financed by two IDA credits. For the first credit (IDA-D3690), the
  appraisal amount was US$40.0 million and the actual amount at closure was US$40.15 million. For the
  second credit (IDA-63080), the appraisal amount was US$40.0 million and the actual amount at closure was
  US$32.16 million.

  Borrower/Recipient contribution: There was no Borrower’s contribution.

  Project Dates: The Project was approved on September 12, 2018 and became effective on March 26,
  2019. The MTR review was on November 17, 2021. The Project was restructured twice: (i) on May 21, 2021
  and (ii) on May 27, 2022. The original closing date was September 30, 2023. There were no extensions,
  and the Project closed on the original closing date.


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Niger PARCA (P164563)



   Coup d’etat of July 2023. The coup d’etat, which overthrew a democratically elected regime, affected the
   Project in many ways including through security deterioration, which made the implementation of some
   activities (including cash transfers) impossible, and due to border closures and trade restrictions, which
   delayed the delivery of key supplies and the finalization of some activities. The coup d’etat triggered the
   WB’s OP 7.30 titled “Dealings with De Facto Governments”, leading to a suspension of Project
   disbursements, which remained in place until Project closure. (ICR, page 24, 27)

   Split evaluation and attributing outcomes to the two Project objectives. Due to a reduction of the RF
   indicator targets both at the first (May 2021) and the second (May 2022) restructurings, a split evaluation,
   with two revisions, with be undertaken. The outputs under Component 3 Coordination and Institutional
   Development support both Project objectives, however, they align more with Objective 1, which supports
   improved service provision because Objective 2 is focused on community level development. Therefore, the
   efficacy of the Component 3 outcomes will be analyzed under Objective 1.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context. At appraisal, Niger was one of the poorest countries globally, with a per
capita income of US$390 (2015), a 45 percent poverty incidence (2014), and ranking second to last out of
188 countries in the United Nations Human Development Index. Food crises were frequent, fueled by the
country’s exposure to droughts. The country was also exposed to a regional conflict, while remaining
internally stable due to social cohesion and political settlements. Regional stresses significantly affected
Niger: since 2011, armed attacks on the country’s territory had been increasing, especially due to the crises
in Mali and Libya, and the Boko Haram regional crisis. The country is part of the international efforts against
Boko Haram and, at the time of appraisal (September 2018), Niger was hosting 280,000 displaced people,
including 158,000 refugees, 109,000 IDPs, and 16,000 Nigerian nationals who had returned from Nigeria
due to conflict. The inflow of forcibly displaced people concurred with a deterioration in the security situation
and placed additional pressure on the poorest regions of the country. While the legal and institutional
environment in Niger was supportive of the refugees and IDPs, the government lacked fiscal and
administrative resources and relied heavily on development community to assist the forcibly displaced
population. (PAD, pages 6-9) The situation was deteriorating during the years of Project implementation,
and the total number of forcibly displaced people in Niger increased to 705,968 people by September 2023
(ICR, page 7).

Relevance to Government Strategies at approval. The Project was aligned with the government priorities
at appraisal, specifically, with the following strategic axes of the Government’s Sustainable Development
and Inclusive Growth Strategy 2035 (SDIGS-Niger 2035): (i) Security of the Territory, which aimed at
ensuring the safety of the population and property; (ii) Revitalization and Modernization of the Rural Areas,
which aimed at a sustainable increase of agricultural production and productivity; and (iii) Modernization of
Government Institutions, which aimed at ensuring that citizens enjoy quality public services. The Project
aimed to contribute to the Government’s commitment to progressive reforms related to forced
displacement, which was communicated to the WBG by the Minister of Planning in a letter of June 20,
2017. (PAD, page 9; SDIGS Niger 2035)



                                                                                                       Page 6 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Niger PARCA (P164563)



Relevance to Government Strategies at closure. At closure, the Project was aligned with the 2023
Government of Niger National Strategy on Sustainable Solutions for Internally Displaced People in Niger,
which the Project informed and which subsequently informed the government’s Strategy of Stabilization of
Fragile Area, which was to be adopted at the time of the ICR completion. (ICR, page 14)

Relevance to the World Bank Group's (WBG’s) Assistance Strategies at approval. At appraisal, the
Project was aligned with the World Bank Group’s (WBG’s) Niger’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
FY2018-22, which proposed that three filters be applied to all interventions: (i) gender (empowering women
and girls); (ii) fragility (mitigating risks of conflict); and (iii) spatial inequity (focus on high-poverty and high-
conflict regions) (ICR, page 14). The Project was also aligned with the following three objectives under the
CPF Focus Area II Improved Human Capital Social Protection for FY 18-22: (i) manage forced
displacement (objective 5); (ii) increase access to quality health services (objective 3); and (iii) increase
access to quality education services (objective 4). In addition, the Project was aligned with the CPF Focus
Area I Increase Rural Productivity and Incomes through planned interventions in two of the four focus
regions identified in the CPF (Diffa and Tillaberi). The Project was also aligned with the CPF’s strategic
approach of consolidating safe havens and at-risk zones by ensuring critical basic infrastructure and
services (including schools, health centers, water points, small roads, and social services) and creating
economic opportunities (including Labor Intensive Public Works), productive inclusion, and training) for
vulnerable youth, women, and displaced persons. The Project was aligned with the IDA18 strategic focus
on supporting refugees and host communities and mitigating crises, as reflected in the new IDA18 Regional
Sub-Window for Refugees and Host Communities and a special Risk Mitigation Regime (RMR) allocation to
mitigate the escalation of existing crises and contribute to the reduction of key fragility and conflict risks.
(PAD, page 9-10)

Relevance to the World Bank Group's (WBG’s) Assistance Strategies at closure. At closing, the
project remained aligned with the WBG strategies, specifically, with the WBG Performance and Learning
Review, which extended the CPFFY18-22 to FY2023 (disclosed in May 2022). The Project responded to
the Focus Areas 1 and 2 objectives of: (i) improved availability of productive, climate-resilient infrastructure;
(ii) increased access to quality education and training services; and (iii) improved social protection systems
and youth employment in rural and at-risk areas. The Project was also aligned with the IDA19 Prevention
and Resilience Allocation (PRA) objectives of: (i) improving youth and women’s socio-economic integration;
(ii) mitigating multidimensional insecurity, with a participatory approach to security management and
stronger state presence in remote border areas and at-risk zones; (iii) preventing and managing conflicts
related to natural resources, with a focus on intra-communal tension and population growth; and (iv)
improving governance to manage conflict prevention and resilience.

Related World Bank operations.

At the time of the Project appraisal, the Niger portfolio included several operations that could create
synergies with the reviewed Project because they targeted the chronically poor and vulnerable households
in disadvantaged areas, overlapping with the areas hosting refugees. Specifically, the list included the
following operations: (i) the Safety Net Project (P123399), aiming to establish and support an effective
social safety net to increase access of the poor to cash transfers and cash-for-work programs, including in
Tahoua, Tillaberi regions; (ii) the Youth Employment and Productive Inclusion Project (P163157), aiming to
expand off-farm income generating activities for youth in Tahoua, Tillaberi, and Diffa regions; (iii) the Skills
Development for Growth Project (P126049), benefitting youth aged 15-18 across the country; (iv) the
Community Action Project, phase 3 (P132306), targeting small-scale rural producers in disadvantaged
areas; (v) the Disaster Management and Urban Development Project (P145268); (vi) the Regional

                                                                                                           Page 7 of 24
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Niger PARCA (P164563)



               Education Project (P147674); (vii) the Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P153420); (viii) the Support to
               Quality Education Project (P132405); (ix) the Population and Health Project (P147638); (x) the Sahel
               Regional Irrigation Initiative Project (P154482).

               Overall, the Project was aligned with both the Government’s and WBG’s priorities at approval and closure.
               Therefore, the rating is High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve access to basic services for refugees and host communities in select areas of the Republic of
                             Niger.

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change (ToC) for the Project was included in the PAD. It showed direct, logical causal links
                             from inputs (activities) to outputs, to the intermediate outcomes, and to the PDO outcomes of the Project. To
                             achieve Objective 1, the Project supported the following activities: (i) building and rehabilitating community
                             infrastructure; and (ii) capacity building for municipal, regional and central administration. The expected
                             outputs of these activities were: (i) community infrastructure (water points, schools, clinics, markets)
                             constructed/rehabilitated according to the norms; (ii) labor intensive employment provided; and (iii) municipal
                             annual investment plans incorporating IDPs’ and hosts’ needs created. The achievement of the outputs was
                             expected to lead to the following intermediate outcomes: (i) improved access to community infrastructure; and
                             (ii) improved government capacity to plan and deliver their mandate in areas affected by forced displacement.
                             The achievement of these intermediate outcomes would ultimately result in the PDO outcome of improved
                             access to basic services.

                             The ToC provided a comprehensive picture of the logic of Project interventions, listing all main inputs and
                             outputs, intermediate outcomes, and the PDO outcomes. Importantly, it also provided a detailed illustration of
                             the links across the results chain, from inputs to outputs, to intermediate outcomes, and to the PDO
                             outcomes, thus presenting the logic of the Project through specific cause-effect relationships. The ToC had a
                             minor deficiency: the critical assumptions were not listed.

                             Rationale

                             IRI results:

                             Community Infrastructure:


                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Niger PARCA (P164563)



1. “Investments with functional O&M arrangements one year after completion (%)”. The achievement at
closure was 100 percent, against the original target of 85 percent. The target was exceeded.

2. “Number of beneficiaries employed through labor-intensive works”. The achievement at closure was 16,070
people, against the original target of 23,000 people. The target was 70.0 percent achieved
(substantially achieved). The sub-target for refugees was 11,500 people, while the achievement at closure
was 2,331 people; the sub-target was 20.3 percent achieved (barely achieved). The sub-target for women
was 11,500 people, while the achievement at closure was 2,076 people; the sub-target was 18.1 percent
achieved (barely achieved).

3. “Number of newly built or rehabilitated water distribution points”. The achievement at closure was 62 water
points, against the original target of 60 water points. The target was exceeded. The ICR noted that the water
points were built using hydraulic infrastructure (boreholes, mini piped supply systems, and wells) and
provided essential access to potable water, which was previously collected from localities 6 kilometers away,
on average (ICR, page 16).

4. “Number of newly built or rehabilitated classrooms”. The achievement at closure was 148 classrooms,
against the original target of 200 classrooms. The target was 74 percent achieved (significantly achieved).

5. “Number of newly built or rehabilitated health facilities”. The achievement at closure was 20 facilities,
matching the original target. The target was reached.

6. “Number of newly built or rehabilitated other infrastructure”. The achievement at closure was 99 sub-
projects, against the original target of 70 sub-projects. The target was exceeded by 41.4 percent. The ICR
noted that this included 25 housing units for teachers, eight administrative/training centers, and 23 market
infrastructures, including the Telemces market which helped revitalize the surrounding Tillia commune and
boosted own-source revenues of the local government of rural Tillia (ICR, page 16).

7. “Number of newly built or rehabilitated kilometers of rural roads”. The achievement at closure was 66.5
kilometers, against the original target of 250 kilometers. The target was 26.6 percent achieved (barely
achieved). The ICR noted that this led to a reduction in travel time between Taza and Tillia from 8 to 3.5
hours and to improved access to the Telemces cattle market in the Tahoua region, which was developed
under the Project (among other benefits) (ICR, page 16).

Institutional Development:

8. “Operationalization of MIS for enhanced data collection on forced displacement (Yes/No)”. The target was
not achieved.

Note: The phrasing of this indicator as quoted above was introduced at the first restructuring of May 2021,
modifying the original phrasing "Improved MIS for enhanced data collection on forced displacement". This
modification added clarity without changing the meaning of the indicator (Restructuring paper, page 16);
therefore, it is reasonable to use the modified phrasing in the discussion of the Original Project.

9. Number of meetings of the Technical Committee of the Humanitarian-Development Nexus at inter-
ministerial level”. The achievement at closure was 2 meetings, matching the target. The target was reached.




                                                                                                     Page 9 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Niger PARCA (P164563)



10. “Number of municipal councils consulting their refugee and local populations annually in developing their
annual investment plans”. The achievement at closure was 15 councils, matching the target. The target was
reached.

Project Management:

11. “Percentage of grievances registered, related to delivery of project benefits, are addressed”. The
achievement at closure was 99 grievances, against the original target of 80 grievances. The target was
exceeded by 23.8 percent.

12. “Share of beneficiaries interviewed that feel project investments reflected their needs”. The achievement
at closure was 83 percent, against the original target of 80 percent. The target was exceeded by 3.8 percent.

PDO outcomes:

1. “Beneficiaries with improved access to community infrastructure (Number)”. The achievement at closure
was 869,940 people, against the original target of 470,000 people. The target was significantly (by 85
percent) exceeded. The sub-target for refugees was 141,000 people, while the achievement at closure was
244,856 people; the sub-target was exceeded by 73.7 percent. The sub-target for women was 235,000, while
the achievement at closure was 297,305; the sub-target was exceeded by 26.5 percent.

2. “Number of direct beneficiaries”. The achievement at closure was 1,126,037 people, against the original
target of 1,000,000 people. The target was exceeded by 12.6 percent.

3. “Number of municipal annual investment plans incorporating risk management aspects, including needs of
refugees and host communities”. The achievement at closure was 15 plans, the same as the original target.
The target was reached. In relation to the institutional development objectives, the ICR noted that the Project
addressed the capacity of 15 municipalities in decision making on the forced displacement (FD) crisis, and at
Project closure, the beneficiary local governments were routinely including refugee and IDP needs into their
planning and budgeting. Enhanced data collection and a data system for the FD-related identification and
enlistment at the General Directorate of Civil Status and Refugees was developed. The local governments
were provided with equipment and training. The Impact Evaluation demonstrated that the Project’s
entrepreneurship package led to increased trust towards leaders (vertical cohesion) and the community
(horizontal cohesion). (ICR, page 18)

Rating. The Original Project under Objective 1 almost fully achieved its objectives, and the efficacy
rating is Substantial, with moderate shortcomings. All five PDO indicator targets were exceeded or
reached; and 10 out of 14 IRI targets were exceeded, reached, or significantly reached. Out of the four IRI
targets that were not achieved or barely achieved, two were less important because they constituted sub-
targets for an indicator which target was reached; and one (kilometers of built/rehabilitated roads) was not
reached due to a deteriorated security situation in the Project areas.



Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                 Page 10 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Niger PARCA (P164563)




OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve access to basic services for refugees and host communities in select areas of the Republic of
Niger.

Revised Rationale
Please see the discussion of the Objective 1 ToC under Original Project.

The following list comprises indicators with targets that were modified at the first restructuring (May 2021).
Only IRI indicator targets were modified.

IRI results:

Community Infrastructure:

1. Sub-indicator “Number of beneficiaries employed through labor-intensive works (Refugees)”. The revised
sub-target was 7,700 people, while the achievement at closure was 2,331 people; the sub-target was 30.3
percent achieved (partially achieved).

2. Sub-indicator “Number of beneficiaries employed through labor-intensive works (Women)”. The revised
sub-target was 2,300 people, while the achievement at closure was 2,076 people; the sub-target was 90.3
percent achieved (significantly achieved).

3. “Number of newly built or rehabilitated kilometer of rural roads”. The revised target was 150 kilometers,
while the achievement was 66.5 kilometers; the target was 44.3 percent achieved (partially achieved).

Institutional Development:

4. “Number of meetings of the Technical Committee of the Humanitarian-Development Nexus at inter-
ministerial level” The achievement at closure was 2 meetings, against the revised target of 3 meetings. The
target was 60.6 percent achieved (partially achieved).

Rating. The Revision 1 Project under Objective 1 almost fully achieved its objectives, and the efficacy
rating is Substantial, with moderate shortcomings. All PDO indicator targets were achieved; and 10 out of
14 IRI targets were exceeded, reached, or significantly reached. Out of the four IRI targets that were not
achieved or barely achieved, two were less important (in one case, it was a sub-targets for an indicator which
target was reached; and in the other case, it was an output level indicator (number of meetings)), while one
target (kilometers of built/rehabilitated roads) was not reached due to a deteriorated security situation in the
Project areas (a force majeure factor).



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 2
Revised Objective

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Niger PARCA (P164563)



To improve access to basic services for refugees and host communities in select areas of the Republic of
Niger.

Revised Rationale
Please see the discussion of the Objective 1 ToC under Original Project.

The following list comprises indicators with targets that were modified at the second restructuring (May 2022).
Only IRI indicator targets were modified.

IRI results:

1. “Number of beneficiaries employed through labor-intensive works”. The achievement at closure was 16,070
people, against the revised target of 15,000 people. The target was exceeded. The revised sub-target for
refugees was 3,000 people, while the achievement at closure was 2,331 people; the sub-target was 77.7
percent achieved (significantly achieved).

2. “Number of newly built or rehabilitated classrooms”. The achievement at closure was 148 classrooms,
matching the revised target of 148 classrooms. The target was reached.

3. “Number of newly built or rehabilitated other infrastructure”. The achievement at closure was 99 sub-
projects, against the revised target of 85 sub-projects. The target was exceeded.

4. Number of newly built or rehabilitated kilometer of rural roads”. The achievement at closure was 66.5
kilometers, matching the revised target of 66.5 kilometers. The target was reached.

Rating. The Revision 2 Project under Objective 1 almost fully achieved its objectives, and the efficacy
rating is Substantial, with moderate shortcomings. All PDO indicator targets were achieved; and 12 out of
14 IRI targets were exceeded, reached, or significantly reached. While the Institutional Development PDO
target was reached, both IRI targets that were not achieved were for Institutional Development indicators,
reflecting that the Project had some challenges with the implementation of its institutional development
activities.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve access to economic opportunities for refugees and host communities in select areas of the
Republic of Niger.

Rationale
The theory of change (ToC) for the Project was included in the PAD. It showed direct, logical causal links
from inputs (activities) to outputs, to the intermediate outcomes, and to the PDO outcomes of the Project. To
achieve Objective 2, the Project financed the following activity: support to agricultural production and
entrepreneurship. The expected output of this activity was: increase in agricultural and income generating

                                                                                                Page 12 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Niger PARCA (P164563)



activities. The achievement of this output was expected to lead to the following intermediate outcome:
restored assets and improved productivity. The achievement of this intermediate outcome would ultimately
result in the PDO outcome of improved access to economic opportunities.

The ToC provided a comprehensive picture of the logic of Project interventions, listing all main inputs and
outputs, intermediate outcomes, and the PDO outcomes. Importantly, it also provided a detailed illustration of
the links across the results chain, from inputs to outputs, to intermediate outcomes, and to the PDO
outcomes, thus presenting the logic of the Project through specific cause-effect relationships. The ToC had a
minor deficiency: the critical assumptions were not listed.

Rationale:

PDO outcome:

“Beneficiaries with improved access to economic opportunities (Number)”. The achievement at closure was
77,874 people, against the original target of 62,500 people. The target was exceeded by 24.6 percent. The
sub-target for refugees was 31,250 people, while the achievement at closure was 31,047 people; the sub-
target was 99.4 percent achieved (almost fully achieved). The sub-target for women was 31,250 people, while
the achievement at closure was 34,254 people.

The ICR reported that the geographic scope was expanded to include three additional areas (1 in south
Tahoua region, and 2 in the Maradi region) in response to the 2021-2022 acute food crisis. Impact Evaluation
demonstrated that the beneficiaries enjoyed an increase in disposable household income by 6 percent on
average, in livestock ownership by 17 percent, in profits from non-farm businesses by 5 percent, and in
schooling expenses by 14 percent, while the outstanding debt decreased by 58 percent (ICR, page 17).

Note: This PDO indicator measured the same result as the IRI indicator “Number of beneficiaries provided
with cash grants for agricultural production and other income-generating activities”, therefore, the discussion
of these results has been combined. Also please note that the phrasing of this IRI indicator as quoted here
was introduced at the first restructuring of May 2021, merging the original two indicators: “Number of
beneficiaries provided with cash grants for agricultural production” and “Number of beneficiaries provided with
cash grants for other income-generating activities”. This adjustment was made due to the following: (i) Project
design promoting beneficiary-driven IGA choices (including across agricultural and non-agricultural activities);
(ii) limited beneficiary access to land; and (iii) an overlap of inputs and activities across the agricultural and
non-agricultural sub-components. This adjustment did not change the scope or ambition of the Project;
therefore, it is reasonable to use the modified phrasing in the discussion of the Original Project while adding
up the targets for the original two indicators.

Rating. The Original Project under Objective 2 almost fully achieved its objectives, and the efficacy
rating is Substantial: all targets were either exceeded or almost fully reached (more than 99 percent of the
target was achieved).



Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Niger PARCA (P164563)




OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve access to economic opportunities for refugees and host communities in select areas of the
Republic of Niger.

Revised Rationale
Please see the discussion of the Objective 2 ToC under Original Project.

The following list comprises indicators with targets that were modified at the first restructuring (May 2021) and
the IRI that was added at the same time.

IRI result:

The new IRI “Number of cash grant recipients trained under the project”. The achievement at closure was
81,310 people, against the target of 62,500 people. The target was exceeded by 30.1 percent. The sub-target
for refugees was 20,850 people, while the achievement at closure was 31,139 people; the sub-target was
exceeded by 49.3 percent. The sub-target for women was 31,250 people, while the achievement at closure
was 35,483 people; the sub-target was exceeded by 13.5 percent.

PDO outcome:

Sub-indicator “Beneficiaries with improved access to economic opportunities (Refugees) (Number)”. The
revised sub-target was 20,850 people, while the achievement at closure was 31,047 people; the sub-target
was 48.9 percent exceeded.

Note: This PDO sub-indicator measured the same result as the IRI sub-indicator “Number of beneficiaries
provided with cash grants for agricultural production and other income-generating activities (Refugees)”,
therefore, the discussion of these results has been combined.

Rating. The Revision 1 Project under Objective 2 fully achieved its objectives, and the efficacy rating
is High. All targets were exceeded.



Revised Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To improve access to economic opportunities for refugees and host communities in select areas of the
Republic of Niger.

Revised Rationale
Please see the discussion of the Objective 2 ToC under Original Project.

The following list comprises indicators with targets that were modified at the second restructuring (May 2022).


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 24
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Niger PARCA (P164563)



                            IRI result:

                            “Number of cash grant recipients trained under the project”. The achievement at closure was 81,310 people,
                            against the revised target of 83,500 people. The target was 97.4 percent achieved (almost fully achieved).
                            The revised sub-target for refugees was 23,500 people, while the achievement at closure was 31,139 people;
                            the sub-target was exceeded by 32.5 percent. The revised sub-target for women was 41,750 people, while
                            the achievement at closure was 35,483 people; the sub-target was 85.0 percent achieved (significantly
                            achieved).

                            PDO outcome:

                            “Beneficiaries with improved access to economic opportunities (Number)”. The achievement at closure was
                            77,874 people, against the revised target of 83,500 people. The target was 93.3 percent achieved
                            (significantly achieved). The revised sub-target for refugees was 23,500 people, while the achievement at
                            closure was 31,047 people; the sub-target was exceeded by 32.1 percent. The revised sub-target for women
                            was 41,750 people, while the achievement at closure was 34,254 people; the sub-target was 82.0 percent
                            achieved (significantly achieved). ICR reported that while the second restructuring of May 2022 was
                            accompanied by a significant increase in the Objective 2 targets, the ongoing activities could not be
                            completed as per those targets by closing, “largely due to operational factors following the July 2023 coup
                            d’etat” (ICR, page 18).

                            Note: This PDO indicator measured the same result as the IRI indicator “Number of beneficiaries provided
                            with cash grants for agricultural production and other income-generating activities”, therefore, the discussion
                            of these results has been combined.

                            Rating. The Revision 2 Project under Objective 2 almost fully achieved its objectives, and the efficacy
                            rating is Substantial, with moderate shortcomings. Both the PDO indicator targets and IRI targets were
                            either exceeded of significantly achieved (a drop in performance as compared with the Original Project and
                            Revision 1 Project under Objective 2): the target increase that was implemented at second restructuring of
                            May 2022 across the Objective 2 PDO indicators and IRIs was not achievable due to the force majeure
                            factors (coup d'état).



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Original Project:

                            For the Original Project, the rating for efficacy is Substantial: under Objective 1, all PDO indicator targets
                            were exceeded or reached, while almost all IRI targets were exceeded, reached, or significantly reached; and
                            under Objective 2, all targets were either exceeded or more than 99 percent achieved.


                                                                                                                              Page 15 of 24
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             Niger PARCA (P164563)




         Overall Efficacy Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Revision 1 Project:

         For the Revision 1 Project, the efficacy rating is Substantial: under Objective 1, all PDO indicator targets
         were achieved, while almost all IRI targets were exceeded, reached, or significantly reached; and under
         Objective 2, all targets were exceeded.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR2_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 2
         Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rationale
         Revision 2 Project:

         For the Revision 2 Project, the efficacy rating is Substantial: under Objective 1, all PDO indicator targets
         were achieved, while and almost all IRI targets were exceeded, reached, or significantly reached; and under
         Objective 2, both the PDO indicator targets and IRI targets were either exceeded of significantly achieved.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rating
         Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic analysis

1. At appraisal, economic analysis estimated an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 22 percent and the
net present value (NPV) of US$18.2 million. Sensitivity analyses provided EIRR estimates ranging from 16
percent to 20 percent. The analysis used a discount rate of 15 percent over 15 years. Since the EIRR was
above the opportunity cost of capital (represented by the discount rate), the Project was expected to be
economically viable. The benefits considered in the analysis were: (i) improved water supply and sanitation,
reduced water collection time, increased time for schooling and work; (ii) greater access to health care and
education, and related productivity gains; (iii) improved productivity and incomes due to newly
constructed/rehabilitated economic infrastructure (roads, markets, irrigation, agricultural facilities); and (iv)

                                                                                                        Page 16 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Niger PARCA (P164563)



increased agricultural productivity due to the provision of improved inputs, restored productive assets, diversified
livelihoods, and increased resilience to shocks. The economic analysis was rerun at the second restructuring,
resulting in the EIRR of 24 percent and the NPV of US$22.0 million.

2. At closure, the ex-post economic analysis replicated the ex-ante approach (including the 15 percent discount
rate and accounting for the measurable benefits under Components 1 and 2) but used actual Project cost. The
EIRR turned out to be 47 percent, and the NPV was US$53.2 million. The ICR reported that the higher EIRR
and NPV, as compared to the ex-ante results, are due to a significant increase in the number of Project
beneficiaries (869,094 people versus 470,000 people originally targeted) and the lower than expected cost of
Components 1 and 2.

Administrative efficiency

The Project was implemented within the original financing envelope and without extensions. The adjustments
made to the RF targets were consistent with the adjustments of components and the reallocation of financing
across components. Only one PDO indicator target (out of four) was revised. Project implementation
experienced delays in the first two years following Project effectiveness. To resolve the underlying issues, the
first restructuring of May 2021 involved a modification of the institutional arrangements: the day-to-day
implementation and administration of the Project was transferred from the original implementing agency SE/SDS
to the newly created SE/SDS’s Technical Unit, comprising IDA consultants only, while contract approvals
remained a responsibility of the SE/SDS. This modification was timely and led to increased Project efficiency.
Overall, the two restructurings were effective and supported the reallocation of funds across components and
adjustments to activities that were necessary considering the external factors (worsening security situation and
political crisis (coup d'état)) while staying within the original overall Project design. The ICR underscored that the
on-time delivery of expected results, with Project costs in line with regional benchmarks, was remarkable given
the FCS operating context (ICR, page 19).

Considering economic efficiency, both at appraisal and at closure, and a strong implementation record, Project’s
efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        86.30
 Appraisal                                                   22.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        86.10
 ICR Estimate                                                47.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


                                                                                                       Page 17 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Niger PARCA (P164563)



6. Outcome

                        Original          Revision 1        Revision 2
                        Project:          Project:          Project:
Relevance of objectives High
Efficacy:
Objective 1             Substantial       Substantial       Substantial
Objective 2              Substantial      High              Substantial
Overall efficacy         Substantial      Substantial       Substantial
Efficiency              Substantial
Outcome                 Satisfactory      Satisfactory      Satisfactory
Outcome value           5                 5                 5
Amount disbursed (US$
                        13.40             47.95             73.91
mn)
Disbursement percentage 18.1%             46.7%             35.1%
Weight value            0.91              2.34              1.76
Total weight            5.00
Overall outcome rating  Satisfactory

The Overall Project Outcome rating is Satisfactory because all three projects – Original, Revision 1, and
Revision 2 – were rated as Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional. The original Project design envisaged capacity building within the SE/SDS, followed by a full
transfer of Project management to the SE/SDS in the third year of implementation. However, the capacity
building efforts were not successful, and the SE/SDS could not take on the responsibilities for Project
management. Low institutional capacity creates a risk to the sustainability of Project outcomes, as it relates
to maintaining the built/renovated infrastructure and to a continued support for the creation of economic
opportunities at the community level.

Financial. The infrastructure built or rehabilitated under Component 1 will need regular maintenance to
remain functional. Government capacity to finance maintenance is limited, and without continued donor
support, there is a risk to the operational quality of the infrastructure.

Political. The volatile political situation and increased violence in specific areas of the country prevented the
Project from implementing some of the planned activities in the locations with reduced security. The July
2023 coup d’état overthrew a democratically elected regime and triggered the WB’s OP 7.30 “Dealings with
De Facto Governments”, which remained in place at Project closure. This political situation and the FCS


                                                                                                      Page 18 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Niger PARCA (P164563)



context of the country’s development creates a risk to the sustainability of the outcomes of development
assistance overall and of the reviewed Project in particular.

Government ownership/commitment. The July 2023 coup d’état and a related change in government
created a risk to a continued support of the Project objectives and to its outcomes’ sustainability.

Exposure to natural disasters. The Project was affected by natural disasters, including flooding which had
a damaging impact on six Project sites (communes). In 2021/2022, a delayed rainy season negatively
affected the harvest, contributing to the food crisis in all Project’s regions. Considering climate change, such
events are expected to increase in both severity and frequency, creating a risk to both Component 1 and
Component 2 outcomes.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The ICR reported that quality at entry was adequate. The Project’s design followed a three-pronged
  approach that was effective in the FCS context and mitigated tensions between forcibly displaced people
  and host communities. Project design utilized: (i) a spatial approach that was status blind, (ii) evidence-
  based decision making to identify investments, and (iii) a participatory approach that engaged all
  stakeholders. Project design integrated international lessons from operating in an FCS context. Lessons
  taken into account in Project design included the following: a simple, realistic design; stakeholder
  inclusion; consideration of the political economy and investment sustainability; and strategic sequencing
  of preparatory activities, including robust preparatory studies to identify intervention sites and establish
  pre-prioritized investments lists via geo-location. The Project collaborated effectively across sectors
  within the WB, and with United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), inter-ministerial
  government entities, and local governments. The usage of a robust Geo-enabled Monitoring and
  Evaluation System (GEMS) supported timely decision making. The Project’s design anticipated
  implementation challenges, equipping Project implementation with flexibility and agility to make and
  execute adjustments and still achieve expected outcomes. (ICR, page 26)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR reported that the supervision was effective and adequate for the FCS operating context and
 transient beneficiary group; the WB team successfully implemented both restructurings and adjusted during
 the COVID-19 pandemic. The team was able to efficiently operate in the FCS context and adapt the Project
 as required during the July 2023 political crisis (coup d'état). The team was proactive in flagging
 implementation issues and proposing mitigation measures to adapt to the changing context. Fifteen
 missions were conducted over the 5-year implementation period; regular bi-monthly progress meetings and
 technical component meetings took place; and the Aide Memoires and the Implementation Status and

                                                                                                     Page 19 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Niger PARCA (P164563)



 Results Reports (ISRs) were produced timely, providing candid and detailed progress updates. The team
 composition was stable, with the same TTL and the core team throughout Project duration. The team
 included members with a solid FCS working experience. The Project was closed on time and implemented
 within the original financing envelope.

 However, there were two deficiencies. First, the Project experienced delays in the first two years of
 implementation, mainly due to the inefficient original implementation arrangement. Second, there was a
 procurement-related deficiency, and during an 18-month period from May 2020 to November 2021, the
 rating for procurement was Moderately Unsatisfactory due to persistent shortcomings. Both issues were
 successfully addressed during the first restructuring of May 2021: the new implementation structure
 supported improved Project efficiency, and the procurement rating increased to Moderately Satisfactory
 and further to Satisfactory, which was maintained during the last year of implementation.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The original RF reflected the logic of Project interventions in the PAD and was linked to the PDO and the
 ToC. The ToC was sound and reflective of the RF. The objectives of the Project were clearly specified, and
 the indicators encompassed both PDO objectives (outcomes). All RF indicators had baselines, targets, and
 were time-bound. The M&E plan was well defined. The ICR stated that the RF was simple and well-
 designed and used a relatively small number of well-defined and relevant performance indicators, enabling
 data collection, monitoring, and analysis (ICR, page 24). The indicators mostly remained unchanged during
 implementation: only one IRI was added; one IRI slightly rephrased for clarity; and two IRIs were merged
 into one, mainly to reflect the beneficiaries’ preferences under Component 2 community sub-projects’
 implementation. The indicator targets were also set at an adequate level, and their adjustment during the
 two restructurings was applied mostly in relation to the security situation and the related need to cancel
 some of the Component 1 activities while increasing activities under Component 2.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR reported that during implementation, M&E systems were applied as per the original design and
  adjusted as appropriate. The modifications to the RF strengthened the Project’s results tracking to align
  targets with expected outcomes, without changing the overall RF logic. Institutional responsibility for M&E
  was clearly established at appraisal, with the Project Technical Unit (PTU) given the responsibility for
  information collection and reporting through regional PTUs. The Project considered the security situation
  and used the enhanced Geo-enabled Monitoring and Evaluation System (GEMS) and its Kobo Tools
  Box, allowing for a remote digital data collection. The Project invested in training and equipment of local

                                                                                                  Page 20 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Niger PARCA (P164563)



  entities to use GEMS, avoiding travel for M&E data collection to sites in the areas of low security. GEMS
  reporting was complemented by routine PTU monitoring (while considering the level of security), in close
  coordination with UNHCR, enabling Project results to be consolidated across intervention sites and
  regions. (ICR, page 24)



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reported that the M&E system enabled robust, systemic tracking of Project progress and was
  able to flag key issues for rapid remediating actions. It was used to inform Project management and
  decision making in a timely manner, enabling reporting of all 18 Project sites (including 11 fragile and
  difficult to reach sites). The data were reported up to the central level, and the GIS maps were regularly
  updated to monitor Project activities across the 1,185 georeferenced sites for monthly implementation
  progress. GEMS helped increase the accountability of reporting and provided a platform for real time
  monitoring, backup, and sub-project mapping. The Project’s M&E data also supported the IDA19
  Prevention and Resilience Allocation (PRA) for Niger. (ICR, page 25)

  Given the well designed RF, as well as use of innovative tools such as GEMS for remote data collection
  and GIS maps given the security situation, the M&E quality is rated as High.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards. At appraisal, the Project was classified as Environmental
   Category B-Partial Assessment due to the small-scale infrastructure works under Component 1 and the
   provision of agricultural inputs under Component 2. The following safeguard policies were triggered: OP
   4.01 "Environmental Assessment" (due to the works involved in the sub-projects under Component 1), OP
   4.09 “Pest Management”, OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources, and OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary
   Resettlement. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Project Pest Management
   Plan (PPMP), and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) were prepared, reviewed, cleared by the Bank
   and the Government, and disclosed on June 7, 2018, prior to Project appraisal. (PAD, page 37). The Project
   complied with the safeguards during implementation, resulting in a consistent Satisfactory rating (ICR, page
   25)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management (FM). The ICR reported that the Project demonstrated continuous FM compliance.
   The FM rating was mainly Satisfactory throughout Project implementation, and appropriate control
   procedures were in place. The rating was Moderately Satisfactory once, prior to the first restructuring; this
   was due to the following: (i) the Project's weak financial performance (9.3% disbursement rate in

                                                                                                    Page 21 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Niger PARCA (P164563)



   November 2020); (ii) a qualified audit opinion for the Project preparation advance; and (iii) the absence of a
   monitoring system to identify overdue justified advances. These weaknesses were addressed by May 2021
   (the date of the first restructuring), and full financial management compliance (with a Satisfactory rating)
   was reestablished and maintained until Project closure. (ICR, page 25)

   Procurement. The ICR reported that the procurement rating fluctuated during Project implementation.
   While the rating was Moderately Satisfactory from April 2022 to July 2022 and Satisfactory from November
   2022 to the Project’s closure in September 2023, previously, there was an 18-month period from May 2020
   to November 2021 when it was Moderately Unsatisfactory due to persistent shortcomings, including the
   following: (i) untimely bid evaluations by the PTU, mainly due to the unclear division of responsibilities
   between the PTU and the line ministry, and the limited availability of the members of the bid evaluation
   committees, which were appointed by the ministry; (ii) weak PTU capacity to manage the procurement plan
   via the WB’s STEP system; and (iii) the PTU’s excessive workload of preparing two other WB operations in
   2019-2021. After the first restructuring in May 2021, procurement responsibilities were clarified; the PTU’s
   management of contracts and STEP improved; and the PTU’s workload reduced as the other two
   operations took effect. In addition, throughout its preparation and implementation, the Project was affected
   by the following shortcoming in the WB procurement performance, partially explained by a high turnover of
   the WB procurement staff: limited responsiveness and delays in approval of procurement plans, PTU
   recruitments, and completion of prior reviews of procurement documents for larger contracts.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  High                  High

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons were derived from the ICR (based on ICR, pages 27-28):

1. In the FCS context, a geo-spatial/area-based approach to project monitoring and
execution, supported by innovative technologies and integrated in project decision making,
can be an effective project implementation tool. In the reviewed Project, such approach proved

                                                                                                   Page 22 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Niger PARCA (P164563)



to be highly effective and provided several benefits: supported Project flexibility and ability to adapt
to the changing security environment; protected against the possibility of influential stakeholders
directing investments according to their interests; gave the locally elected officials (e.g., mayors) an
opportunity to justify investment choices to their constituents; and provided a secure and efficient
way to transfer cash to beneficiaries in fragile areas. In order to have timely local information about
the dynamic security and forced displacement situation in its sites and quickly adapt to it, the
Project, while operating in three regional implementation offices, used the innovative robust Geo-
enabled Monitoring and Evaluation System (GEMS) as a design and implementation tool.
GEMS helped to identify the location, sector, and size of the infrastructure investments and IGAs,
and later provided real time observations of the Project sites, supporting the need to swiftly switch
sites due to a growing insecurity and/or beneficiary abandonment of the sites. Use of a nation-wide
telecommunication operator for mobile cash transfers allowed the Project to efficiently expand its
geographic reach and increase the number of the IGA activities’ beneficiaries.

2. In the FCS environment, well-designed procurement documents that integrate the cost of
operating in low security situations, use standard construction designs, and are transparent
regarding security, can be essential to attracting private sector companies with a solid
knowledge of the local context and market-competitive pricing. The reviewed Project used
high-quality procurement documents, with a breakdown of works by infrastructure type (education,
health, water infrastructure, etc.) and by municipality; and the bidding documents and contracts that
integrated security costs and were financially viable. The use of standard Nigerien infrastructure
designs promoted timely infrastructure completion, effective operations and maintenance (O&M) and
repairs with materials available at local markets, at local prices and with local know-how. As a result,
the Project attracted responsible service providers who delivered results.

3. Empowerment and engagement of the communities and the government (central, regional,
local) during project preparation and implementation can promote project sustainability
through increased ownership and strengthened state presence in fragile areas. In the
reviewed Project, government and community ownership of investments was critical for the
sustainability of Project outcomes, as it helped to strengthen State presence in fragile areas, thus
stabilizing them. This was achieved via various means, including: signing of the Project-related
memoranda of understanding (MoUs) with the central and local authorities; provision of office
equipment and capacity training for government entities; provision of access to IGAs resulting in
increased disposable household incomes and enhanced socioeconomic activities; provision of
market infrastructure resulting in boosted local government revenues; and the use of a public lottery
to finalize beneficiary lists for the labor intensive public works and the GEMS-based investments,
which supported the legitimacy of related decisions.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



                                                                                                     Page 23 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Niger PARCA (P164563)



The ICR provides sufficient technical details to understand the value-added of the activities and the outcomes
of the Project; a good justification of the PDO relevance; comprehensive and robust evidence on most aspects
of Project’s evaluation; and a clear linking of evidence to findings. The ICR is technical, analytical, and has
internal consistency. The lessons learned are linked to the narrative and the ratings and are useful for future
lending operations in the FCS context. A minor deficiency is that the ICR's efficacy analysis is not entirely clear:
while a split evaluation is applied (as appropriate), there is no separate discussion of the original and revised
projects, making the analysis somewhat confusing. However, overall, the ICR provides candid and analytical
discussion of the Project's achievements and deficiencies, and therefore, the Quality of ICR is rated as
Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 24 of 24
