     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernization of Real Property Register (P151746)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023996

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P151746                                     Modernization of Real Property Register

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Uzbekistan                                  Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-57610                                   30-Sep-2021                                         16,073,236.36

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 24-May-2016                                 31-Aug-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             20,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              16,073,236.36                                              0.00

 Actual                                          16,073,236.36                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Maria Shkaratan             Chikako Miwa                  Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Original Project Development Objective (PDO) was “to establish an efficient and accessible real property
   registration and cadastre system in the Republic of Uzbekistan as part of the national eGovernment structure
   and services” (Financing Agreement, page 5). The PDO was stated identically in the Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD, page 15).

   The PDO was not revised.


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernization of Real Property Register (P151746)



   For the purposes of this Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR) review, the objective will be
   assessed as follows:

   PDO 1: To establish an efficient real property registration and cadastre system in the Republic of Uzbekistan
   as part of the national eGovernment structure and services.

   PDO 2: To establish an accessible real property registration and cadastre system in the Republic of
   Uzbekistan as part of the national eGovernment structure and services.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Original components

   Component A Real Property Registry and Cadastre System Development (cost at appraisal:
   US$13.35 million; actual cost: US$13.31 million) was to support the development and roll-out of the
   Integrated Information System for Real Property Registration and Cadastre (IISRPRC), including the
   infrastructure and operations. This involved the development of a modern Web-based real property registry
   and cadastre application, one-stop-shop client interface, and integrated maps. In addition, the component
   was to finance the renovation of the State Committee for Land Resources, Geodesy, Cartography and State
   Cadastre’s (GKZGDK’s) Data Center.

   Component B Real Property Registration and Cadastre Data Development (cost at appraisal:
   US$4.92 million; actual cost: US$1.91 million) was to support the IISRPRC’s digitalization through the
   provision of the digital attribute and spatial data. This would involve the following activities: (i) digitizing
   registration and cadastre documents; (ii) compiling uniform countrywide digital datasets for a base map and
   property rights units for a cadastre index map; (iii) harmonizing these datasets and populating the
   IISRPRC’s unified central database; (iv) building the GKZGDK’s data planning, management, and
   monitoring capacity; (v) building a mass digitizing technology and providing fundamental spatial datasets;
   and (vi) renovating the GKZGDK’s Oblast production offices.

   Component C Use of Real Property Registry and Cadastre Data (cost at appraisal: US$1.33 million;
   actual cost: US$1.20 million) was to support the on-line use of the IISRPRC’s data by both governmental
   (at central and local levels) and non-governmental stakeholders. Specifically, the component would finance
   the development of: (i) a coordinate reference system (CRS); (ii) a control center for the continuously
   operating reference stations (CORS) network; (iii) a mass valuation system prototype useful for state asset
   management, property taxation, and business purposes (such as real estate transactions); (iv) a geospatial
   data framework strategy and a technological framework for its implementation; and (v) a GeoPortal
   providing "one-stop" solutions for geospatial information and related online services.

   Component D Institutional Development and Project Management (cost at appraisal: US$2.91
   million; actual cost: US$1.67 million) was to support the Project Implementation Unit’s (PIU) in such

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Modernization of Real Property Register (P151746)



functions as project management, fiduciary, and monitoring and evaluation. The institutional development
activities will involve: (i) improving business planning, accounting, statistics collection, and analysis; (ii)
developing service standards and codes of conduct; (iii) improving policy and regulatory environment for
real estate and land markets through studies and legislation drafting; (iv) supporting education and
curriculum development in surveying, cadastre, valuation, land management, and GIS/SDI; and (v) training
the GKZGDK's and other public and private sector personnel in real estate registration, cadastre services
and real estate markets.

2. Changes during implementation

- At the first restructuring of February 2020, the PDO indicators were adjusted, without a
reduction of the Project’s scope or ambition. These changes were based on the recommendations of
the midterm review to improve consistency and measurability of the Results Framework (RF).

     o The IRI “Real property and cadastre records uploaded into the new Real Property and Cadastre ICT
         system” was rephrased (“finetuned” (ICR, page 77)) to “Attribute real property and cadastre records
         uploaded into the IISRPRC”, and its target was increased from 50 percent to 80 percent.
     o   The phrasing of the PDO indicator “Improvement in users’ perception of quality of real property
         registration services” was adjusted to “Users’ satisfaction of the quality of real property registration
         services”, to better measure the outcomes.
     o   The phrasing of the PDO indicator ‘Direct Project beneficiaries’ was adjusted to become more
         specific: ‘Direct Project beneficiaries (joint and individual real property holders) with registered rights
         accessible in digital forms”, and “…the percentage of which are female”.
     o   The baselines and targets of the PDO indicators “Direct Project beneficiaries” and “Direct Project
         beneficiaries, female” were adjusted to reflect that the Project was creating a new system
         (IISRPRC). The original baseline mistakenly included the beneficiaries of the old information system,
         which the Project aimed to replace.
     o   The target of the PDO indicator “Public access to integrated real property registration services
         online” was changed from 50 percent to “Yes”, correcting an error in the results framework (RF)
         design and properly measuring the provision of access (as opposed to the level of its utilization).
     o   The PDO indicator “Registration and information services fees introduced” was moved from the list
         of the PDO indicators to the list of the intermediate results indicators (IRI) to reflect that this is an
         output level indicator.
     o   The IRI “The IISRPRC is integrated with the National Geographic Information System (NGIS)” was
         moved to the list of the PDO indicators to reflect the importance of this result for the achievement of
         the PDO.

- At the second restructuring of July 2021, the following changes were made, including a significant
reduction of an important IRI target, which triggers a split evaluation:

     o The target for the IRI “Attribute real property and cadastre records uploaded into the IISRPRC” was
         reduced from 80 percent to 30 percent.
     o The target for the PDO indicator “Direct Project beneficiaries (joint and individual real property
         holders) with registered rights accessible in digital forms” was increased from the original target of
         800,000 beneficiaries to 2,400,000 beneficiaries to reflect the number of holders and co-holders of
         real property rights whose records could be digitalized. This adjustment did not entail a change in
         Project scope or ambition.



                                                                                                      Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernization of Real Property Register (P151746)



   - The third restructuring (September 2022) entailed a change in costs and components: a partial
   cancellation of Project financing, consistent with the reduction in Project scope (note that none of the
   PDO indicators or IRIs were reduced). The amount of US$3.3 million was cancelled, including US$1.3
   million of the component financing and US$2 million of the contingency funds. There were three main
   reasons for the cancellation. First, there were savings under Components B, C and D. Second, the
   Borrower secured parallel financing from the Russian Federation for the CORS control center and for the
   mass valuation prototype, initially planned under Component C, leading to these (relatively small) activities
   being dropped from the Project. No target was reduced in relation to this change, and no indicator dropped.
   Third, the Recipient requested a release of the unutilized contingency funds. The third restructuring also
   involved a reallocation of financing across Project components.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The appraisal estimate was US$25.0 million, and the actual disbursement was US$18.1
   million. The appraisal estimate included the component cost in the amount of US$22.5 million and
   contingencies in the amount of US$2.5 million.

   Project Financing: The Project was financed by an IDA credit: the appraisal amount was US$20.0 million
   and the actual amount at closure was US$16.1 million.

   Borrower/Recipient contribution: The Borrower’s contribution was expected to amount to US$5.0 million
   at appraisal, and the actual amount was US$2.0 million.

   Project Dates: The Project was approved on May 24, 2016 and became effective on January 12, 2017.
   The MTR review was on November 1, 2019. The Project was restructured four times: (i) on February 6,
   2020; (ii) on July 15, 2021; (iii) on September 26, 2022; and (iv) on December 21, 2022. The original closing
   date was September 30, 2021. The Project was extended three times, for the total of one year and 11
   months (or 23 months), to August 31, 2023, which was the date of the Project’s actual closure.

   Split evaluation. At the second restructuring of July 2021, the target for an important IRI “Attribute real
   property and cadastre records uploaded into the IISRPRC”, was reduced from 80 percent (as established at
   the first restructuring of February 2020) to 30 percent. Such a significant reduction of an important target
   triggers a split evaluation.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context. At appraisal, the country’s top development objectives included protection of
private property, reduction of government control, and minimizing the costs of doing business for the private
sector. As part of this effort, the reforms to modernize real property and cadastre system included the
establishment of the GKZGDK in 2005 to oversee the state cadastre and spatial databases and the start of
a transition to a computerized real property registration in 2007. Recognizing the benefits of up-to-date
information for future development, the government launched its e-Government Master Plan initiative in
2013, with registry and cadastre modernization as a priority. However, the real property market in the

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 21
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Modernization of Real Property Register (P151746)



country was still very limited both geographically and in terms of volume of transactions, and access to
registry and cadastre data was challenging. Private ownership of land (both agricultural and non-
agricultural) was still nonexistent. This impeded the use of land for economic activity and halted
development of land market.

Relevance to Government Strategies. The Project was aligned with the government priorities at both
appraisal and closure. In 2013, transitioning from a paper-based to a computer-based land registry and
cadastre was included in the e-Government Master Plan as a priority, and the IISRPRC and the NGIS were
established. In 2015, a new national Program of Action was approved, with the top two objectives as
follows: (i) to increase economic competitiveness (including: through introduction of information and
communication technologies); and (ii) to remove obstacles to private sector development. One of the seven
goals of the government’s national development strategy for 2022–26 was developing national economy
and ensuring high-growth rates, and it included the following two action areas: (i) to improve investment
climate and business environment and (ii) to attract greater private investment.

Relevance to the World Bank Group's (WBG’s) Assistance Strategies. The Project was generally
aligned with the World Bank Group’s (WBG’s) Uzbekistan Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) FY2012-
2015, specifically, with the following areas: (i) Results Area 2 Enhancing Economic Competitiveness,
specific problem area Restricted Availability of Key Economic, Financial, and Social Data; (ii) Results Area
3.1 Strengthen the foundations for private-led diversification, specific targeted areas of Business
Environment Reforms and Accelerating Innovation and ICT Development; and (iii) Cross-Cutting Result
Area Governance, which includes continued policy dialogue and technical assistance aimed at improving
the quality and public access to basic economic, financial, and social data. The Project was also generally
aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY2022-2026, specifically, with the CPF’s Objective
1.2 Enable private sector growth and investment, which aimed “to strengthen regulatory and institutional
capacity to ensure that regulations and their implementation create a competitive environment for the
private sector” (CPF, page 21).

Related World Bank operations. At the time of the Project appraisal, the World Bank had extensive
experience in supporting client countries in the modernization of their land sector and was financing
investment projects in this sector in the following Europe and Central Asia (ECA) region countries: Croatia,
Bosnia & Herzegovina, Serbia, Georgia, Tajikistan, and Kyrgyz Republic. In 2014-2015, the Bank
implemented the Uzbekistan Land Administration Dialogue Technical Assistance (TA) project, which aimed
at improving the government's capacity to manage the modernization of land administration based on
international experience. The Project was designed based on the aforementioned TA project (PAD, page
15), as “the first phase of a long-term program, and as a key building block of a modern system that
facilitates economic development and good governance by having reliable and accessible records for all
real property”, and was to be followed by a new Bank investment project focusing “on the next level
interventions, including supporting the use of land registry and cadastre data for a variety of market
economy services and fiscal purposes”. (ICR, page 20)

Overall, the Project was aligned with specific government priorities both at approval and at closure and with
general WBG’s strategic priorities at approval and at closure. Therefore, the rating is High.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High

                                                                                                         Page 5 of 21
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Modernization of Real Property Register (P151746)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To establish an efficient real property registration and cadastre system in the Republic of Uzbekistan as part
               of the national eGovernment structure and services.

               Rationale
               The theory of change (ToC) for the Project was not included in the PAD but was developed for the ICR. It
               showed direct, logical causal links from inputs (activities) to outputs, to three intermediate outcomes, and to
               the long-term outcome of the Project. There were three results chains. The first results chain showed that the
               provision of IT equipment and software for the cadastre offices, the digitalization of the property registration
               and cadastre documents, and the production of uniform country-wide digital datasets, merged into the
               IISRPRC, would produce the outputs of a modernized cadastre Data Center and local offices, property data
               and cadastre records’ available in digital format, and a unified national system for property rights registration
               and cadastre services. This would support (together with other outputs) two intermediate outcomes: (i) the
               integration of the property registration and cadastre system with national e-government services and (ii) the
               online accessibility of the digitalized property registration and cadastre services. The second results chain
               showed that the creation of the CRS and a control center for the CORS network, as well as the development
               of the basemaps and a geospatial data framework strategy would produce the outputs of a new geodesic
               reference framework, a standard cartographic protection, and a geodesic coordinate reference system, as
               well as create a functional and e-GOV-integrated cadastre geoportal. This would support (together with other
               outputs) one intermediate outcome: the online accessibility of the digitalized property registration and
               cadastre services. The third results chain demonstrated that recommendations regarding the needed
               improvements to the policy and regulatory framework for property registration and cadastre, re-engineered
               processed for digital operations, and awareness and capacity building initiatives would lead to the streamlined
               procedures of registering property rights and obtaining cadastre services, as well as the increased awareness
               and capacity to provide services. This would support (together with other outputs) two intermediate outcomes:
               (i) the online accessibility of the digitalized property registration and cadastre services; and (ii) the increased
               use of the property registration and cadastre services. Altogether, the three intermediate outcomes would
               ultimately lead to the achievement of the following long-term outcome: efficient and transparent real property
               and mortgage market.

               The ToC provided a comprehensive picture of the logic of Project interventions, listing all main inputs and
               outputs, intermediate outcomes, and the PDO outcomes. Importantly, it also provided a detailed illustration of
               the links across the results chain, from inputs to outputs, to intermediate outcomes, and to the PDO
               outcomes, thus presenting the logic of the Project through specific cause-effect relationships, making it very
               clear. The critical assumptions ((i) Government removed excessive data sharing restrictions and promoted
               interagency coordination, and (ii) e-Government systems and portals are functional and well maintained) were
               also listed, as well as the problem statement and the PDO. A minor deficiency was that the PDO outcomes
               were missing, and the intermediate outcome were directly linked to the long-term outcome.




                                                                                                                    Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Modernization of Real Property Register (P151746)



Objective 1 Original outcomes and outputs were measured using the original indicators, introduced in
the PAD and listed below. Note: Many of the indicators in the original list were dropped or modified, and
their targets changed, at the first and second restructurings (February 2020 and July 2021).

IRI results:

Real Property Registry and Cadastre System Development

1. “Real property registration and cadastre business processes re-engineered for digital operations (Yes/No)”.
The target was reached.

2. “IISRPRC operational in pilot offices (Yes/No)”. The target was reached.

3. “Data center operational, and available digital data uploaded into the unified database (Yes/No)”. This
indicator was revised at the first restructuring, and the achievement at closure was not measured.

4. “New Real Property Registry and Cadastre ICT system operational in State Committee's Regional offices
(including Tashkent City and Karakalpakistan offices) (Yes/No)”. This indicator was revised at the first
restructuring, and the achievement at closure was not measured.

5. “Current real property unit data accessible in digital form. (Percentage))”. This indicator was dropped at the
first restructuring, and the achievement at closure was not measured.

6. “Registered real property data accessible in digital form. (Percentage))”. This indicator was dropped at the
first restructuring (because “property rights recording activities are not part of the Project-financed activities”
(ICR, page 77)), and the achievement at closure was not measured.

Real Property Registration and Cadastre Data Development

1. “Real property and cadastre records uploaded into the IISRPRC (percentage)”. The achievement at closure
was 15.6 percent, against the original target of 50 percent (PAD, page 30) and the baseline of zero. The
target was barely reached. At IEG’s request, the team clarified that the target had to be set before a full
understanding of data quality, which could only be achieved after the completion of data scanning by the
Project. At the first restructuring of February 2020, this target was increased to 80 percent. By the second
restructuring of July 2021, it became clear that the data largely required harmonization before it could be
uploaded into the IISRPRC. At that time, as the ICR and the Restructuring paper state, the target was
reduced to 30 percent (please see under Efficacy, Objective 1 Revision 1), to measure only the records that
could be automatically migrated to the new system, while the rest of the data would require prior
harmonization, which could not be financed by the project and would be conducted by the Government
separately.

Note: The phrasing of the indicator was later finetuned to: “Attribute real property and cadastre records
uploaded into the IISRPRC (percentage)”, and the target and achievement quoted above were applied to the
reformulated indicator. However, since the change was explained in the ICR as “finetuning” (ICR, page 77),
this review applies the same target and achievement to the original indicator.




                                                                                                      Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Modernization of Real Property Register (P151746)



2. “Digital Cadastre Index Map coverage of the inhabited territory of Uzbekistan (percentage)”. The
achievement at closure was 90 percent, against the original target of 70 percent (PAD, page 30) and the
baseline of zero. The target was exceeded.

3. “Target land area with use or ownership real property rights recorded (Hectare)”. This indicator was
dropped at the second restructuring (July 2021) because “property rights recording activities are not part of
the Project-financed activities” (ICR, page 77), and the achievement at closure was not measured.

4. “Real property objects with attribute data recorded and accessible in digital form (percentage)”. This
indicator was dropped at the second restructuring (July 2021) because it “corresponded to the data digitized
prior to the Project in the old IT System” and was “not attributable to the Project” (Restructuring Paper, page
13), and the achievement at closure was not measured.

5. “Real property rights registered and accessible in digital form (percentage)”. This indicator was dropped at
the second restructuring (July 2021) because it “corresponded to the data digitized prior to the Project in the
old IT System” and was “not attributable to the Project” (Restructuring Paper, page 13), and the achievement
at closure was not measured.

PDO outcomes:

1. “Procedures needed to register rights to a real property (number)”. The achievement at closure was five
procedures, against the original target of six procedures and the baseline of nine procedures. The target was
exceeded.

2. “The IISRPRC is integrated with the National Geographic Information System (NGIS) (Yes/No)”. The target
was achieved.

Note: This indicator was introduced in the PAD as an IRI and upgraded to a PDO indicator at the first
restructuring of February 2020 because the result it was measuring was recognized to be critical for achieving
the PDO (ICR, page 76, first Restructuring Paper, page 5).

3. “Improvement in users’ perception of quality of real property registration services (disaggregated by
gender) (percentage)”. This indicator was later revised, and the achievement at closure was not measured.

Rating. The Original Project under Objective 1 partially achieved its objectives, and the efficacy rating is
Modest. While two of the three PDO indicator targets and three of the 11 IRI targets were reached or largely
reached, one important target under the activity “Real Property Registration and Cadastre Data Development”
was barely reached (15.6% compared to target of 80%), and the evidence of the achievement of targets for
half of the original RF indicators was lacking.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Modernization of Real Property Register (P151746)



To establish an efficient real property registration and cadastre system in the Republic of Uzbekistan as part
of the national eGovernment structure and services.

Revised Rationale
Please see the discussion of the ToC under Objective 1, Original Project.

Objective 1 Revised outcomes and outputs were measured using the indicators listed below. Note:
This is the full list of indicators used at closure. It significantly differs from the list of indicators in the original
project because many of the indicators were reformulated and their targets adjusted at the first and second
restructurings (February 2020 and July 2021).

IRI results:

Real Property Registry and Cadastre System Development

1. “Real property registration and cadastre business processes re-engineered for digital operations (Yes/No)”.
The target was reached.

2. “IISRPRC operational in pilot offices (Yes/No)”. The target was reached.

3. “Data Center operational and fully equipped to host IISRPRC (Yes/No)”. The target was reached.

4. “IISRPRC operational in Cadastre Agency (CA) offices (percent)”. The achievement at closure was 100
percent, against the unrevised target of 100 percent and the baseline of zero. The target was fully reached.

Real Property Registration and Cadastre Data Development

1. “Attribute real property and cadastre records uploaded into the IISRPRC (percent)”. The achievement at
closure was 15.6 percent, against the revised target of 30 percent (second restructuring of July 2021, page
14), and the baseline of zero. The target was partially achieved.

2. “Digital Cadastre Index Map coverage of the inhabited territory of Uzbekistan (percent)”. The achievement
at closure was 90 percent, against the revised target of 90 percent (second restructuring of July 2021, page
14), and the baseline of zero. The target was fully reached.

3. “Scanned cadastral files of real property objects (number of files)”. The achievement at closure was
7,362,940 files, against the unrevised target of 3,000,000 files and the baseline of zero. The target was
exceeded.

PDO outcomes:

1. “Procedures needed to register rights to a real property (number)”. The achievement at closure was five
procedures, against the unrevised target of six procedures and the baseline of nine procedures. The target
was exceeded.

2. “The IISRPRC is integrated with the National Geographic Information System (NGIS) (Yes/No)”. The target
was reached.



                                                                                                             Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Modernization of Real Property Register (P151746)



3. “Users’ satisfaction with the quality of real property registration services (percentage of users)”. The
achievement at closure was 86.6 percent, against the revised target of 88.5 percent and the baseline of 81.5
percent. The target was largely achieved. The gender-specific sub-indicator was 85.7 percent at closure,
against the unrevised target of 82.7 percent and the baseline of 75.8 percent. The target was exceeded.

Rating. The Revised Project under Objective 1 almost fully achieved its objectives, and the efficacy rating is
Substantial, with moderate shortcoming. All PDO indicator targets were achieved or largely achieved; and
six out of the seven IRI targets were achieved. However, one target under the activity “Real Property
Registration and Cadastre Data Development” was only partially achieved.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To establish an accessible real property registration and cadastre system in the Republic of Uzbekistan as
part of the national eGovernment structure and services.

Rationale
Please see the discussion of the ToC under Objective 1, Original Project.

IRI results:

Use of Real Property Registry and Cadastre Data

1. “The NSDI strategy adopted by the government (Yes/No)”. The target was reached.

2. “Registration and information services fees introduced (Yes/No)”. The target was reached.

Note: This indicator was introduced in the PAD as a PDO indicator and moved to the IRI list at the first
restructuring of February 2020, to reflect that this is an output level indicator.

3. “New open coordinate reference system established (Yes/No)”. The target was reached.

4. “Methodology for mass valuation using cadastral data developed (Yes/No)”. This indicator was dropped at
the first restructuring (February 2020) since the Project, as designed, did not intend to develop a methodology
for mass valuation but intended to develop a prototype or pilot for mass valuation (ICR, page 78).

5. “Geoportal operational (Yes/No)”. This indicator was replaced at the first restructuring (February 2020), by
an indicator to measure adoption of an NSDI strategy, which was considered to be “more holistic in terms of
geospatial policies” (ICR, page 77), and the achievement at closure was not measured.

Institutional Development and Project Management




                                                                                                 Page 10 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Modernization of Real Property Register (P151746)



1. “Real property registration Public Awareness Campaigns completed (Yes/No)”. The target was reached.

2. “Online operations manual for real property registration and cadastre established (Yes/No)”. The target was
reached.

3. “Code of Conduct, Ethics and Service Standards published for real property registration and cadastre
operations (Yes/No)”. The target was reached.

4. “Laws and regulations proposals for digital real property and cadastre registration submitted for approval
(number)”. The achievement at closure was 13 proposals, against the target of two proposals and the
baseline of zero proposals. The target was exceeded.

5. “Real property register and cadastre personnel trained (number of people)”. The achievement at closure
was 4,104 personnel, against the original target of 3,000 personnel and the baseline of zero personnel. The
target was exceeded. The gender specific sub-indicator (… female personnel trained) reached 437 personnel
at closure, against the original target of 900 personnel (specified at the first restructuring of February 2020,
page 15). The target was partially reached.

6. Project's monitoring and evaluation system and quarterly reporting operational (Yes/No). The target was
reached.

7. “Annual business plan adopted by the State Committee (Yes/No)”. This indicator was dropped at the
second restructuring (July 2021) because the new Implementing Agency was not tasked with the preparation
of the annual business plans according to its organization and statutes (ICR, page 78). The achievement at
closure was not measured.

PDO outcomes:

1. “Direct Project beneficiaries (number of people)”. This indicator was revised at the first restructuring
(February 2020) to correct an error in the PAD’s RF where the baseline and the target included the
beneficiaries of the old information system, which the Project aimed to replace by creating a new system
(IISRPRC) (ICR, page 85), and the achievement at closure was not measured. The project met the revised
target discussed below.

2. “Public access to integrated real property registration services online (percent)”. This indicator’s unit of
measurement (percentage) was replaced at the first restructuring (February 2020) by a binary measurement
(Yes/No) to correct an error in the PAD’s RF where the target for this indicator was “50 percent”, measuring
not the provision of access (binary by nature) but the level of its utilization. The achievement at closure was
not measured. The project met the revised target discussed below which measured whether there was public
access or not.

Rating. The Original Project under Objective 2 substantially achieved its objectives, and the efficacy rating is
Substantial: while most of the (binary) IRI targets were reached, the original PDO targets were not measured.
However, since the PDO targets were improved to correct the indicator target errors rather than reducing the
scope, the efficacy is rated as Substantial.




                                                                                                  Page 11 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Modernization of Real Property Register (P151746)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To establish an accessible real property registration and cadastre system in the Republic of Uzbekistan as
part of the national eGovernment structure and services.

Revised Rationale
Please see the discussion of the ToC under Objective 1, Original Project.

IRI results:

Use of Real Property Registry and Cadastre Data

1. “The NSDI strategy adopted by the government (Yes/No)”. The target was reached.

2. “Registration and information services fees introduced (Yes/No)”. The target was reached.

Note: This indicator was introduced in the PAD as a PDO indicator and moved to the IRI list at the first
restructuring of February 2020, to reflect that this is an output level indicator.

3. “New open coordinate reference system established (Yes/No)”. The target was reached.

Institutional Development and Project Management

1. “Real property registration Public Awareness Campaigns completed (Yes/No)”. The target was reached.

2. “Online operations manual for real property registration and cadastre established (Yes/No)”. The target was
reached.

3. “Code of Conduct, Ethics and Service Standards published for real property registration and cadastre
operations (Yes/No)”. The target was reached.

4. “Laws and regulations proposals for digital real property and cadastre registration submitted for approval
(Yes/No)”. The achievement at closure was 13 proposals, against the unrevised target of two proposals and
the baseline of zero proposals. The target was exceeded.

5. “Real property register and cadastre personnel trained (number of people)”. The achievement at closure
was 4,104 personnel, against the unrevised target of 3,000 personnel and the baseline of zero personnel.

The target was exceeded. The gender specific sub-indicator (… female personnel trained) reached 437
personnel at closure, against the revised target of 450 personnel (third restructuring of September 2022). The
target was largely achieved.

Note: At IEG’s request, the team clarified that the target for the sub-indicator was revised upward, to 1,330
female personnel, at the second restructuring of July 2021, based on the government’s intention to increase

                                                                                                 Page 12 of 21
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Modernization of Real Property Register (P151746)



                            the share of female staff in the CA to 30 percent. This intention was not implemented, and the target was
                            revised to 450 female personnel at the third restructuring of September 2022.

                            6. “Project's monitoring and evaluation system and quarterly reporting operational (Yes/No)”. The target was
                            reached.

                            PDO outcomes:

                            1. “Direct Project beneficiaries (joint and individual real property holders) with registered rights accessible in
                            digital forms (number of people)”. The achievement at closure was 3,460,000 beneficiaries, against the
                            revised target of 2,400,000 beneficiaries (second restructuring of July 2021 (Restructuring paper, page 10)),
                            and the baseline of zero. The target was exceeded. The gender-specific sub-indicator (“…percentage of
                            which are female”) reached 34.4 percent at closure, against the revised target of 20 percent (first restructuring
                            of February 2020 (Restructuring paper, page 9)), and the baseline of zero. The target was exceeded.

                            2. “Public access to integrated real property registration services online (Yes/No)”. The target was achieved:
                            the IISRPRC was integrated in the NGIS Portal for all categories of land and made operational. ICR reported
                            that the Project significantly improved the accessibility of real property registration and cadastre services by
                            creating the online portal, rolling out the system to all 206 CA offices, and providing real estate registration
                            and cadastre services in 207 urban locations and 142 rural locations. The portal supports access to cadastral
                            information, requests for certificates and applications for registration, as well as enables informed property
                            transactions decisions. (ICR, page 11)

                            Rating. The Revised Project under Objective 2 almost fully achieved its objectives, and the efficacy rating is
                            Substantial.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Original Project:

                            For the Original Project, the rating for efficacy is Substantial with moderate shortcomings because an
                            important target under the activity “Real Property Registration and Cadastre Data Development” (Objective 1)
                            was barely reached and due to the lacking evidence of the achievement of half of the targets under Objective
                            1. Objective 2 was substantially achieved.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating



                                                                                                                               Page 13 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Modernization of Real Property Register (P151746)



  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic analysis

Economic or financial analysis was not conducted at appraisal, as stated in the ICR (ICR, page 12). The PAD
contains an annex titled “Economic and financial analysis” (Annex 5), which only lists expected benefits from
Project implementation, provides their verbal description, and refers to calculations made for similar projects.
The PAD also states that “an economic analysis conducted for this project (Annex 5) forecasts similar [to other
projects] returns" (PAD, page 23). This is misleading and convinces the reader that an economic analysis was
conducted while this was not the case, only a verbal description of potential benefits was prepared.

Economic and financial analysis, on the other hand, was implemented at closure using the cost-benefit analysis
methodology. At closure, the results of the analysis were as follows: the EIRR was 44.2 percent and the NPV
was US$18.5 million (ICR, page 13). The benefits were estimated using a discount rate of 14 percent over ten
years. The benefits of the Project, considered in the analysis, were: (i) time savings for users due to the
improved property rights registration procedures (monetized using minimum wage); and (ii) reduced costs of
property rights registration; (iii) increased real estate transactions; (iv) increased mortgage market activity; (v)
increased SME access to finance; and (vi) increased property tax collection. The costs were calculated as the
investments made by the Project and the expected operation and maintenance (O&M) costs for the period of ten
years.

Administrative efficiency

The ICR reported that administrative efficiency was substantial: the Project was implemented within the original
financing envelope, with some savings and no significant adjustment to Project components (only one small
activity “establishment of a control center for the Recipient’s CORS network” was dropped (and financing
reduced accordingly)). This was done at government request, due to a parallel financing for this activity from
another donor. Financial savings were achieved partially due to efficient procurement. The Project team was
able to reallocate funds across components and make some adjustments to activities (such as mass valuation)
to respond to evolving client needs while staying within the original overall Project design. (ICR, page 13)
Overall, the complexity of the project was adequate, and the risks were mostly identified (with the exception of
the risks listed in the next paragraph). The Project benefited from Government commitment.

The closing date was extended three times, for the total of 23 months. Some of the factors of the extensions
were internal, and some were outside of the Project’s control. Specifically, the Project was affected by two major
Government’s administrative reforms, in 2017 and in 2021. The 2021 reform led to a change in the implementing
agency and created bottlenecks for the Project-related government decision making. In addition, the first two
years of Project implementation were affected by the insufficient capacity and limited availability of the
implementing agency due to its focus on another donor’s project. The impact of COVID-19 also led to delays.

The Project was able to utilize the extensions to increase the level and sustainability of its outcomes, leading to
the following: the CA’s capacity was improved; targets were surpassed 2.5 times in such an important area as
the digitization of all cadastral and registration files; and 11 regulations beyond the Project’s target were
adopted. Also, due to the extensions, the Project was able to support the enactment of the Presidential Decree


                                                                                                      Page 14 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Modernization of Real Property Register (P151746)



designating IISRPRC as the official registry for real property rights, which was essential for the sustainability of
Project outcomes. (ICR, page 14)

Considering economic efficiency at closure and a strong implementation record, while taking into account
closing extensions, Project’s efficiency is rated Substantial, with moderate shortcomings.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        100.00
 ICR Estimate                                                44.20
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Original Project:

Relevance of objectives: High

Efficacy: Substantial with moderate shortcomings

Efficiency: Substantial

Outcome: Moderately Satisfactory (a value of 4).

Revised Project:

Relevance of objectives: High

Efficacy: Substantial

Efficiency: Substantial

Outcome: Satisfactory (a value of 5).

The Overall Project outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory. Significant changes to Project indicators and
targets were made during both the first and the second restructurings, and therefore, the revised project was

                                                                                                       Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernization of Real Property Register (P151746)



evaluated based on the results that were anticipated at the second restructuring. The disbursed funds before
the second restructuring of July 2021 were as follows: US$9.51 million or 59 percent of the IDA disbursements
(US$16.1million) at closure. The overall Project outcome equals to: 4 * 0.59 + 5 * 0.41 = 2.10 + 2.375 = 4.41,
which rounds up to 4 or Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional. The digitalization supported by the Project needs to be maintained by the Government after
the Project closure through continued IISRPRC operations. The risk of failure of such continuation is
evaluated as low due to a recent institution building: a competent ICT Center – Geoinfocom - was
established under CA to further support the cadaster digitalization process; a dedicated team was put
together; 4,000 personnel were trained; 13 legal acts were approved, providing a legal framework for the
reforms’ continuation; and IISRPRC became the official registry for real property rights.

Financial. The digitalization supported by the Project needs to be maintained by the Government after the
Project closure, and this requires financing. This risk was mitigated: government financing to update the
basemap was secured. In addition, while the Project has supported the key building block of the real property
registration and cadastre system, a follow-up WB Project Uzbekistan’s Geospatial Data and Sustainable
Cities was under preparation (at the time when the ICR was finalized), supporting the use of land registry
and cadastre data for a variety of market economy services and fiscal purposes. (ICR, page 20)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The ICR reported that quality at entry was adequate. Project preparation was based on lessons learned
  from similar projects in Central Asia, as well as on the country specifics, based on the WB operations in
  the country. Policy, institutional and stakeholder engagement aspects were accounted for.
  Environmental, social, and fiduciary arrangements complied with the Bank requirements. The Bank team
  was adequately staffed, including specialists on the ground, and resourced. There was a continuity in the
  Bank’s core team. Risks were correctly assessed and mitigated. (ICR, page 19)

  However, the RF design had significant deficiencies, and the MTR recommended substantial changes to
  the RF to improve its consistency and measurability. Following the MTR, the RF was considerably
  modified, with multiple PDO indicators and IRIs re-phrased, replaced, or dropped. Also, the information
  about the quality and completeness of the existing cadastre data during project preparation was not
  sufficient to estimate the corresponding data harmonization needs and consider them in the Project
  design, and the ICR acknowledges that it would have been beneficial if both the World Bank and the
  Client were better informed about the issues with data and had agreed-on plans on how to address them
  at start, to avoid project restructurings (ICR, pages 20-21). There were shortcomings in implementation

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernization of Real Property Register (P151746)



  readiness. In the first two years of its implementation, the Project was affected by the insufficient capacity
  and limited availability of the implementing agency” and there was “no substantive progress recorded
  within the first 1.5 years since the Project approval” (ICR, page 67).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR reported that the supervision was effective. The World Bank team provided close and continuous
 implementation support. Experienced international and local land administration experts supported the PIU.
 The Bank team regularly visited the country or conducted virtual meetings, instrumental in ensuring the
 required technical quality of implementation. The ISRs, Aide Memoires, and Management Letters were
 prepared timely and contained candid and thoroughly compiled information throughout the life of the
 Project. The Bank team communicated with the client often and discussed any possible problems quickly,
 offering solutions. The team also accommodated the changing circumstances through timely Project
 restructurings, including the partial cancelation of funds, reallocation of funds across components, and
 extensions of the closing date. (ICR, pages 19-20)

 However, the closing date was extended three times, for the total of 23 months. As discussed in section 5
 Efficiency, some of the factors of the extensions were internal (within Project control), and some were
 outside of the Project’s control. At the same time, the Project was able to utilize the extensions to increase
 the level and sustainability of its outcomes (please see details provided in section 5 Efficiency) and to make
 significant improvements to the RF.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 In general, the original RF reflected the logic of Project interventions in the PAD and was linked to the PDO
 and the ToC. The ToC was sound and reflective of the RF. The objectives of the Project were clearly
 specified, and the indicators encompassed both PDO objectives (outcomes). The indicators mostly had
 baselines, targets, and were time-bound. However, the original RF had deficiencies, requiring multiple
 changes, which were implemented during the first and the second restructurings (September 2020 and July
 2021). The changes were needed for the following reasons: (i) several indicators were formulated in such a
 way that they were not attributable to the project, or not specific enough, or the measurement had
 deficiencies; (ii) several indicator targets were not realistic (these targets were later either increased or

                                                                                                     Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernization of Real Property Register (P151746)



 reduced); (iii) several indicators were either overlapping with other indicators, or introduced by mistake, or
 introduced as a core indictor, while the list of core indicators later changed (these were later dropped or
 replaced). The level of the RF deficiency can be understood based on the following information: the RF
 required such changes (implemented after MTR) that half or the PAD’s RF indicators under Objective 1
 were modified or dropped, while both PDO indicators under Objective 2 were modified. By component,
 most significant changes were made to the IRIs for Component B Real Property Registration and Cadastre
 Data Development: three of the original indicators were dropped at the second restructuring of July 2021 as
 no longer relevant, targets of another two were significantly adjusted (one reduced and one increased), and
 only one IRI (“Scanned cadastral files of real property objects (number of files)” remained as originally
 designed. While only a few IRIs for Components 3 and 4 underwent changes, it is worth noting that most of
 them used a binary measurement (Yes/No), reducing the clarity of monitoring.

 Overall, the scope of changes to the RF was such that the RF’s monitoring function was partially impaired,
 and evaluating Project efficacy for this review required a significant effort of tracing the indicator
 modifications over time, from the PAD to the restructuring papers, and to the ICR. The level of
 transparency of the RF data as presented in the ICR was insufficient for the purposes of this review, which
 is linked to the insufficient ICR transparency in presenting supporting evidence in the discussion of Project
 efficacy.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR reported that during implementation, the M&E focused on: (i) regular monitoring of Project
  results by the PIU using the established computerized M&E system; and (ii) periodic customer surveys to
  monitor customer satisfaction and compliance with service standards as well, and the impact of cadastre
  renovation on users. Overall, four customer surveys were carried out during implementation. The PIU
  was collecting data and presenting it in quarterly progress reports, which were submitted to the
  government and the Bank. Outcome indicators were monitored on a semi-annual basis. (ICR, page 18)

  As clarified in section 9.a, the RF had to be significantly adjusted during the M&E implementation, with
  many indicators being rephrased, targets modified, and new indicators added.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reported that the RF and the overall M&E findings were mostly well utilized to monitor outputs.
  The RF was also helpful in highlighting areas that were not achieving expectations. Indicators were
  consistently monitored and reported during the regular WB implementation support missions and
  presented in aide-memoires and implementation status reports (ISRs). (ICR, page 18)

  Given the significant shortcomings in M&E design, the M&E quality is rated as Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest



                                                                                                   Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernization of Real Property Register (P151746)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards. At appraisal, the Project was classified as Environmental
   Category B and triggered OP 4.01 "Environmental Assessment" since minor civil works under Component B
   (related to the renovation of the cadastre offices) could generate minor, short-lived, and primarily limited to
   the Project sites environmental impact such as dust, noise, solid wastes, and traffic disruption (also, worker
   safety). An Environmental Management Framework was prepared. The envisioned civil works did not take
   place, and the Project did not generate any environmental issues. No negative social safeguard-related
   impact was expected, and the Project did not trigger any social safeguards. The Safeguard rating was
   Satisfactory throughout Project implementation. (ICR, page 19)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management (FM). The FM rating was mainly Satisfactory throughout Project implementation,
   and appropriate control procedures were in place. A World Bank FM specialist regularly carried out
   implementation support missions to review Project accounting and reporting arrangements, organization
   and staffing, internal control procedures, planning and budgeting, counterpart funding, funds flow and
   disbursement and external audits. The quarterly Interim Unaudited Financial Reports were timely
   submitted to the Bank for review, and there were no inconsistencies for follow up. The accounts were
   audited by a certified auditor, and no irregularities were found. (ICR, page 19)

   Procurement. Procurement rating was Moderately Satisfactory throughout Project implementation.
   Procurement processes were implemented based on the Annual Operations Plan (POA) and the
   procurement plan. The procurement plan was updated frequently, albeit with some delays in updating the
   Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement System (STEP), which was the primary reason for the
   Moderately Satisfactory (and not Satisfactory) rating. Regular Bank supervision missions supported Project
   implementation and monitoring, and the PIU had sufficient procurement capacity, which was enhanced by
   the training delivered by the Bank during the life of the Project. (ICR, page 27)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                   Shortcoming in efficacy based
Outcome                         Satisfactory             Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                   on application of split evaluation

                                                                                                      Page 19 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Modernization of Real Property Register (P151746)



                                                                                   approach where targets were
                                                                                   reduced in the second
                                                                                   restructuing.
                                                                                   Shortcomings in implementation
Bank Performance                Satisfactory             Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                   readiness and M&E at entry.
                                                                                   Significant shortcomings in M&E
Quality of M&E                  Substantial              Modest
                                                                                   design
Quality of ICR                  ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons were derived from the ICR (based on ICR, pages 20-21):

1. Having sufficient information about the quality and completeness of the existing cadastre
data during project preparation can be critical for developing an adequate project design and
avoiding project restructurings in projects aimed at modernizing real property registration
and cadastre. This information is needed to assess risks, outline mitigation measures at project
design stage, and either include these measures in project activities or address them outside of the
project using such tools as technical assistance (TA), Advisory Services and Analytics (ASAs), and
Development Policy Operations (DPOs). The Project experience demonstrated that it would have
been highly beneficial if both the World Bank and the Client were better informed about the issues
with data and had agreed-on plans on how to address them, including through: (i) conducting
studies and piloting; (ii) mobilizing human and technical resources for property surveys; (iii)
improving the legal framework; (iv) endorsing guidelines for a range of technical tasks to be
conducted by cadastral agents and at higher levels.

2. While designing the RF, especially for projects of an innovative nature, selecting indicators
that are not manageable for the Client (such as too complex or overly technical indicators)
might create complications and lead to a significant RF adjustment during restructurings. In
Project’s experience, existing data availability and data collection and reporting capacity of the Client
would have been important to consider, as well as making sure that the definitions of indicators and
data collection methodologies were explicit and clear to the Client.

3. When multiple donor and government-funded activities are implemented in parallel,
coordinating them and facilitating technical discussions and, whenever possible, supporting
joint development of the technical aspects of projects can enable synergies. From 2013 to
2018, the Korean Eximbank was supporting the Government in establishing the NGIS, and a pilot to
develop IISRPRC was a part of that operation. However, the pilot did not align with the criteria
determined in the Bank Project reviewed here. Due to this misalignment, the Project had to allocate
significant time and resources for the operationalization of the NGIS and its integration with the
IISRPRC.

4. Advocating for policy solutions identified during project implementation can be beneficial
for the sustainability of project outcomes and for laying out a foundation for continued
reforms. During the Project's execution, the needed sectoral legislative changes were identified,
and 13 key legislative measures were introduced, aimed at improving the following: registration
processes, safety and accessibility of cartographic and geodetic materials, geodetic and

                                                                                                     Page 20 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Modernization of Real Property Register (P151746)



cartographic activities for spatial data management, land records and state cadastre maintenance.
Furthermore, they introduced measures to protect property rights, increase the capitalization of
private property, ensure transparency in property rights registration, and promote the management
of spatial information. Due to these efforts, the Project served as a platform for advocating policy
solutions, which added value to the sustainability of Project outcomes.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides technical details to understand the logic of the Project, the factors of Project performance, the
outcomes of the Project, and various aspects of Project implementation. It provides a good justification of the
PDO relevance, evidence on various aspects of Project’s evaluation, and suggests lessons that include a
candid reflection of the Project experience and are useful for future lending operations. The team was also
responsive to IEG’s requests to provide additional information.

At the same time, the ICR could have been more transparent in the presentation of the supporting evidence for
its analysis of Project efficacy. Specifically, the efficacy analysis in the ICR is largely based on the revised RF,
while the scope of the RF revisions during the first and second restructurings was such that the project requires
a split evaluation.

Overall, the ICR provides candid and analytical discussion of the Project's achievements and deficiencies, and
therefore, the Quality of ICR is rated as Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 21 of 21
