     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ho Chi Minh City DPO 1 (P160480)



                                                                            Report Number: ICRR0023974

1. Program Information



 Country                                Practice Area (Lead)
 Viet Nam                               Governance

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                      Approved Operations
 2                                       2

 Operation ID                            Operation Name
 P160480                                 Ho Chi Minh City DPO 1




 L/C/TF Number(s)                       Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-64090                              30-Apr-2020                                       125,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                     Closing Date (Actual)
 16-May-2019                            30-Apr-2020
                                        IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                         125,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Revised Commitment                          125,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Actual                                      125,000,000.00                                           0.00




P171216_TBL
 Country                                Practice Area (Lead)
 Viet Nam                               Governance

 Operation ID                           Operation Name
 P171216                                HCMC DPO-2 ( P171216 )




                                                                                             Page 1 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ho Chi Minh City DPO 1 (P160480)




  L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
  IBRD-92810,IDA-64090                                                                                               0

  Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
  29-Jun-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                                 0.00

  Revised Commitment                            100,000,000.00                                                 0.00

  Actual                                                    0.00                                               0.00



 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Dimitri Tsarouhas            Vandana Chandra              Donna Kaidou Jeffrey             IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The first Ho Chi Minh City Development Policy Operation (HCMC-DPO-1) aimed “to contribute to (i) Integrated
and transparent spatial information for urban management; (ii) strengthened management of public assets and
liabilities; and (iii) enhanced delivery of priority municipal services,” (Program Document [PD] 1, p. v). Although a
second operation was approved by the Board on June 29, 2021 it never materialized due to “legal changes in the
central guiding framework [of Vietnam] which no longer allowed for subnational budget support financing,” (ICR,
p. 13). Nevertheless, the ICR assesses both operations. As stated in the ICR, (p.4, footnote 1) “though it did not
become effective, [DPO-2] was approved and ratings are based on achievements through DPO-2 approval and
the updated results framework…” Therefore, and wherever possible, this ICRR will assess both DPOs.

For the purpose of this ICRR, the objectives of the series (against which outcomes will be assessed) are taken to
be the following:

      PDO1: To strengthen the development of integrated and transparent spatial information for urban
       management;
      PDO2: To strengthen the management of public assets and liabilities;
      PDO3: To enhance the delivery of priority municipal services.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ho Chi Minh City DPO 1 (P160480)



The operation was structured around three pillars encompassing the operation’s objectives, namely (i) integrated
and transparent spatial information for urban management; (ii) strengthened management of public assets and
liabilities; and (iii) enhanced delivery of priority municipal services (PD, p.v).


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

HCMC-DPO1 consisted of an IDA credit of US$125 million. The operation was approved on May 16, 2019,
became effective on April 29, 2020 and closed as envisaged on April 30, 2020.

The originally envisaged Second Ho Chi Minh City Development Policy Operation (HCMC-DPO-2) consisted of
an IBRD loan of US$125 million. Although it was approved by the Board on June 29, 2021, it never became
effective due to legal changes in Vietnam’s laws which no longer allowed subnational budget support funding.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Vietnam is considered a development success story, marked by strong poverty reduction and economic
 growth. It reached middle-income status in 2009. Vietnam is urbanizing, with estimates that the urban
 population will reach 50 percent by 2025. Over the past 30 years, Vietnam has moved from a highly
 centralized hierarchical state toward arrangements that include the decentralization of responsibilities and
 powers to lower levels of government. There has been significant fiscal decentralization. As a result,
 subnational governments (SNGs) are now responsible for over 55 percent of general government spending
 (PD1, p. 14). Subnational spending accounts for over 70 percent of total public investment, 60 percent of
 transport expenditure, 90 percent of education expenditure and 80 percent of health sector expenditure. With
 decentralized revenue and unconditional balancing transfers covering more than 75 percent of core spending
 on average across all provinces, subnational authorities have large discretionary resources at their disposal.
 However, despite broad delegation of functional and financial responsibility to SNGs, the central government
 retains the overall management of human resource functions in the administration. There are few exceptions
 for Ho Chi Minh City (HCMC) and Hanoi, including the unique establishment of the Department responsible
 for urban planning and architecture and ad-hoc provisions on staffing quotas per the cities’ requests.

 Relevance to city development strategy

 HCMC is a dynamic business hub and an important growth pole for Vietnam. Its average GDP growth rate of
 9.3 percent during 2010–19 outpaced the national average of 6.3 percent. HCMC accounts for about 22.5
 percent of Vietnam’s GDP and its per capita GDP—estimated at nearly US$6,500 in 2020 (at the current
 exchange rate)—is about 2.4 times higher than Vietnam’s average (ICR, p.5). A dynamic private sector drives
 over 80 percent of HCMC’s economy compared to less than 70 percent for the country as a whole. HCMC is
 also a leading destination for FDI, accounting for about 13 percent of Vietnam’s total stock of FDI. Its
 revenue base comprises shared taxes, central government transfers, and own-source revenue. Shared taxes
 (trade tax, CIT, and VAT) account for about 80 percent of HCMC’s total revenue, while own-source revenues
 are limited to land-related rights and user fees and charges. Central government transfers accounted for
 about 4.9 percent of total revenues in 2019 (ICR, p.6).



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Ho Chi Minh City DPO 1 (P160480)



Attracted by this dynamic economy, migrants have contributed to the expansion of HCMC’s population by 3
percent per year over the past decade, which has been faster than the national average. As HCMC emerges
into an Asian “megacity,” it is confronting a host of challenges common to large urban areas across the
developing world. At appraisal, the HCMC’s infrastructure was stretched to the breaking point and efficient,
well-planned interventions were urgently needed. As a low-lying metropolis located in the Mekong Delta,
HCMC faces significant and growing flood risk. According to a 2013 World Bank Study, up to 60 percent of
HCMC’s built-up area will be exposed to a 100-cm sea level rise in the next 20 years (ICR, p.24). At the same
time, HCMC faces significant social and infrastructure spending needs to meet the demands of a rapidly
growing urban population and dynamic economy. Per capita spending in HCMC is almost double the national
average and the highest in Vietnam. However, because of constrained fiscal space and rapid population
growth, per capita budgetary spending in HCMC has been growing at a slower pace than in other provinces.
In terms of spending composition, human capital spending (education and health expenditure) absorbs about
33 percent of total spending—higher than the national average (27 percent). Despite a slight downward trend
in recent years, capital spending—in particular in public transport, wastewater, and flood management—
accounts for more than 45 percent of local spending, also well above the national average (29 percent) and
among the highest across provinces.

In late 2016, HCMC adopted seven “breakthrough programs” for the 2016-20 period, aiming to (i) enhance
quality of growth and economic competitiveness; (ii) improve quality of human resources; (iii) reform public
administration systems; (iv) urban regeneration and development; (v) reduce traffic congestion and accidents;
(vi) mitigate urban flooding; and (vii) lower environment pollution. With slowing budget revenue growth and
little revenue autonomy, HCMC was also keen to unlock the value of public assets as a core urban strategy.
The city’s program on the quality of growth and economic competitiveness envisaged cross-cutting
investment climate and service delivery reforms to enhance labor productivity, increase the number of firms
operating in HCMC and reduce poverty. The public administrative reform program aimed to improve the
transparency in administrative processes and increase the efficiency of public service delivery, while the
program on flood mitigation aimed to improve and upgrade storm water drainage, canal embankment, water
supply and wastewater network in all districts. Underpinning such goals is Decision 6179 (2017) adopting a
Smart City Initiative (SCI) aiming to strengthen city governance leveraging digital technologies for better
information sharing, evidence-based policy making and data-driven urban management of the city, and
improved e-services to businesses and citizens.

Alignment with Country Partnership Framework and Development Strategy

The Vietnam Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 2018-2022 foresaw a shift from sector-specific
investments to supporting cross-cutting policy and institutional reforms. Under Focus Area 1 on enabling
inclusive growth and private sector participation, Objective 4 explicitly spelt out the need to improve the
planning, management and delivery of infrastructure in cities (CPF, p.29). The series was the result of the
Bank decision, expressed in the CPF, to shift its engagement from a retail level to a framework approach so
as to transform metropolitan centers into engines of growth, promote service delivery, and accessibility
within urban areas; strengthen capacity for mobilizing and managing financing investment for urban
infrastructure; and apply innovative tools for land management, including scaling up a land-pooling pilot and
testing geospatial technologies.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

                                                                                                  Page 4 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Ho Chi Minh City DPO 1 (P160480)




The two operations had a total of 14 prior actions, of which seven were related to DPO-1 and seven to DPO-
2.

Table 1: Objectives and Prior Actions for HCMC Development Policy Operation Series (HCMC-DPO-1;
HCMC-DPO-2)

DPO1                                                     DPO2
PDO1: To strengthen the development of integrated and transparent spatial information for urban
management for urban management
PA1: HCMC’s People’s Committee has issued Decision PA2: HCMC’s People’s Committee has issued
No. 6179/QD-UBND, dated November 23, 2017,               Decision No. 5086/QD-UBND, dated November 28,
adopting a plan for the development of HCMC as a         2019, regulating the management of HCMC’s
smart city, and adopted Plan No. 1008/KH-UBND, dated shared data warehouse and Decision No. 1123/QD-
March 14, 2018, for the establishment of a shared data UBND dated March 31, 2020, promulgating an
warehouse and development of an open data                institutional sharing framework for the integration of
ecosystem.                                               selected spatial data in the warehouse.
PA3: HCMC’s Department of Planning and Architecture PA4: HCMC’s Department of Planning and
has disclosed vector-based zoning plans of the Central Architecture has disclosed online vector-based
Business Districts and Thu Duc District on-line.         zoning plans for all the districts of HCMC.
PDO2: To strengthen the management of public assets and liabilities
PA5: HCMC’s People’s Committee has instructed HCMC
                                                         PA6: HCMC’s Department of Construction has
Steering Center of Urban Flood Control Program (SCFC)
                                                         submitted for HCMC’s People’s Committee’s
to take the lead in the development of a tariff schedule
                                                         approval a tariff increase schedule for drainage and
for wastewater and drainage services using the cost
                                                         wastewater treatment services over the 2020-2024
recovery approach set forth in Decree 80 (2014), as
                                                         period, as evidenced by Submission Note No.
evidenced by its Decision No. 6261/QD-UBND, dated
                                                         9150/TTR-SXD-HTKT, dated August 12, 2020.
November 30, 2016.
PA7: HCMC’s People’s Committee has issued Decision
No. 3555/QD-UBND, dated July 7, 2017, assigning the
management of state-owned commercial housing assets
to the House Management and Construction Supervision
Center.
PA8: HCMC’s People’s Committee has issued Decision
                                                         PA9: HCMC’s People’s Committee has issued
No. 2885/QD-UBND, dated June 5, 2017, establishing a
                                                         Decision No. 1430/QD-UBND dated April 28, 2020,
task force for subnational debt management; and
                                                         approving a regulation on subnational debt
HCMC’s Department of Finance has issued Decision No.
                                                         management, including borrowing and repayment
1689/QD-STC, dated March 21, 2019, adopting the
                                                         planning and execution, and reporting and
operational regulations for the IT, Statistics, and
                                                         disclosure of public debt information.
Subnational Debt Management Division.
PDO 3: To enhance the delivery of priority municipal services
PA10: HCMC’s Department of Planning and Investment
                                                         PA11: HCMC’s Department of Planning and
(DPI) has issued Plan No. 8308/KH-SKHDT, dated
                                                         Investment has issued Notice No. 1535/TB[1]KHDT
September 5, 2017, consolidating procedures, and
                                                         dated March 5, 2020, institutionalizing key
Decision No. 15/QD-SKHDT, dated January 9, 2018,
                                                         performance indicators to periodically monitor and
enhancing online processing, to shorten time to start a
                                                         evaluate business registration procedures.
business.

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Ho Chi Minh City DPO 1 (P160480)



PA12: HCMC’s People’s Committee has issued Decision
                                                        PA13: HCMC’s People Committee has issued
No. 79/QD-UBND, dated January 9, 2018, assigning the
                                                        Decision No. 14/QD-UBND dated May 29, 2020,
management of the integrated operation of all modes of
                                                        regulating the collaboration between MCPT and
public transport to HCMC’s Management Center of
                                                        transport operators in the delivery of public
Public Transport (MCPT); and HCMC’s Department of
                                                        transport services, including in the areas of
Transport has issued Decision 2294/QD-SGTVT, dated
                                                        subsidies management, fare policy and collection
May 11, 2018, regulating the organization and operation
                                                        system, and service quality management.
of MCPT.
                                                        PA14: HCMC’s Department of Transport has issued
                                                        Notice No. 4834/SGTVT-GTDB, dated April 24,
                                                        2020, approving the use of performance indicators
                                                        and service standards for competitively tendered
                                                        multiyear contracts with bus operators.

PDO1: To strengthen the development of integrated and transparent spatial information for urban
management.

PA1 and PA2: Spatial data such as the master plan, transport sector plan, zoning and land use plans, or
cadastral information were paper-based and were not integrated across agencies or levels of government
(down to and across 24 districts). The official city-wide cadaster map had not been formally and fully updated
since 2005, which made it difficult to reflect changes in land use patterns and sub-divisions in HCMC. The
transport master plan also did not factor in projected urban zoning parameters. The lack of digital data
maintenance, sharing and integration impeded decision-making for urban planning, investment, and
regulation, and reduced the quality of information available to the public. PA1 made a meaningful contribution
to the integration of spatial data across government agencies by initiating a move towards a smart city
through a two-pronged strategy to improve the condition of key geospatial data to meet the demand of urban
management: developing and enforcing open data standards across agencies and districts, producing
updated, digitized and interoperable maps, and strengthening on-line disclosure of especially zoning data to
allow for better comparisons across the city and among different layers of information. PA2 followed PA1 by
taking the next step of implementation of a Spatial Data Architecture & Infrastructure (SDA-I) to bring together
key layers for smart urban planning decisions. The shared data warehouse and open data ecosystem would
enable agencies to coordinate, use, and cross-reference HCMC’s common data assets, enabling key
departments to collaborate more effectively in a common platform to better serve the public, and empower
investors and potential homeowners with accurate information. Relevance of PA1: Satisfactory (S). PA2:
Satisfactory (S).

PA3 and PA4: The zoning function, carried out by the Department of Planning and Architecture (DPA) faced
several challenges. Public disclosure, as required by Vietnam’s 2013 Land Law, was limited with districts
provided zoning maps with delays and in disparate paper-based and digital formats, making them
cumbersome to validate and difficult to overlay over basic spatial reference layers. Citizens, firms, and even
city administrative agencies (e.g., Department of Construction or Transport) did not always obtain consistent
and up-to-date zoning information. In addition, citizens and firms would inevitably apply for construction
permits that were inconsistent with prevailing zoning plans. Opaque zoning plans gave local officials
discretion to alter the zoning parameters without being detected and held accountable. Public disclosure of
zoning plan information would reduce transaction costs in granting construction permits, improve the
transparency of spatial information, and make zoning more credible. PA3 contributed to PDO1 by enhancing
the access of commercial and residential construction permit applicants to transparent spatial information, as
well as integrated spatial information since the disclosed zoning information contained key dimensional

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Ho Chi Minh City DPO 1 (P160480)



parameters, such as maximum building height or land-use coefficients including maximum lot coverage and
setbacks, in a visually and user-friendly manner, and had well-defined technical standards. PA4 built on PA3
by extending online the original pilot in two districts to all HCMC districts, allowing for the further reduction of
transaction costs for firms and citizens, and processing time for local officials, while looking for zoning
information. PA4 would also enable stakeholders to monitor online the compliance of urban zoning plans and
close the feedback loop, thus improving the credibility and quality of urban planning. Relevance of PA3:
Satisfactory (S). PA4: Satisfactory (S).

PDO2: To strengthen the management of public assets and liabilities.

PA5 and PA6: At appraisal, HCMC collected a general environmental protection charge of 10 percent of the
water tariff (excluding tax), irrespective of the actual costs of wastewater services. As a result, the collected
fee only partially covered the cost of wastewater management and treatment. The environmental fee was
collected from users, regardless of whether they were connected to networked wastewater services. The
HCMC Steering Center of Urban Flood Control Program (SCFC) received funding from HCMC to cover part
of the debt service for wastewater and flood management expenditures. However, given the low service fee,
the SCFC was only able to cover the operating costs for the wastewater services. HCMC had an ambitious
plan to increase networked wastewater coverage, but this would significantly increase the total operational
costs for the system. Without additional revenues, this would lead to operational and maintenance deficits,
which would ultimately affect maintenance and service costs and quality. In 2014, the central Government
had issued Decree No. 80 requiring the wastewater tariff to be based on the principle of actual operation and
maintenance costs for drainage and sewerage systems. PA5 made a meaningful contribution to PDO2 by
issuing a decision that included a tariff schedule which would phase-in full cost recovery for the centralized
networked sewerage and drainage system. PA6 would build on PA5 by introducing the tariff schedule to
ultimately support increased service coverage with improved treatment standards to address and eventually
reverse the deteriorating financial sustainability of wastewater and drainage services provision. However,
such an approach would be introduced only gradually, given that PA6 was adopted by DPO-2 at a time when
centralized networked sewerage and drainage had not yet reached all districts. Relevance of PA5:
Satisfactory (S). PA6: Satisfactory (S).

PA7: HCMC’s assets included 19,000 public houses of which about 1,800 were for commercial purposes.
They were managed by 24 SOEs at the district level without a common management framework which
implied that the sale of the houses (and associated land) could not be undertaken through auctions. The
rental prices for houses were usually assigned by the SOEs at the allowed minimum level and often
significantly below the market reference price. In addition, the unclear distinction between ownership and
management functions of public assets in SOEs risked potential loss of state assets. PA7 contributed to
PDO2 by assigning the management of state-owned commercial housing assets to the House Management
and Construction Supervision Center which helped to distinguished between the ownership and management
of public assets and set up a consistent management framework, enabling HCMC’s commercial assets to be
managed under the same legal and institutional framework as assets of other sectors in the market.
Relevance of PA7: Satisfactory (S).

PA8 and PA9: Effective public debt management requires a sound governance framework and capacity to
underpin debt management strategies, increase efficiency, reduce operational risk, and access a broader
range of financial instruments to reduce cost and improve risk management. The 2014 World Bank Debt
Management Performance Assessment (DeMPA) revealed that HCMC lacked adequate capacity to
effectively manage its public debt. There was no dedicated unit to manage public debt, several entities were
involved in subnational debt management activities, and formal coordination processes were missing.

                                                                                                        Page 7 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Ho Chi Minh City DPO 1 (P160480)



Moreover, basic back-office functions, such as maintaining up-to-date and reliable records of outstanding
debt and associated cash flows, were incomplete, and there was no strategy defining the cost-risk profile that
the government wanted to bear, and debt operations tended to be defined on an ad hoc basis. PA8 made a
meaningful contribution to PDO2 by improving HCMC’s debt management system. By approving a high-level
task force comprised of directorial members from various departments involved in domestic and external
borrowing activities enabled the task force to provide oversight in the development of the annual borrowing
plan, decisions on borrowing activities, monitor the implementation of related projects and disbursements,
and advise HCMC’s leadership on related matters. To support the task force, the Department of Finance
dedicated debt management functions to a focal division that would perform front, middle, and back-office
functions in managing HCMC’s debt. PA9 would strengthen HCMC’s debt management governance
framework by integrating business processes that were fragmented across multiple entities under subnational
debt management. PA9 also supported the development of a reliable, complete, and up-to-date database of
debt records, and publication of a debt management bulletin to improve transparency. Relevance of PA8:
Satisfactory (S). PA9: Satisfactory (S).

PDO3: To enhance the delivery of priority municipal services.

PA10 and PA11: HCMC enterprises faced increasing constraints to doing business. Compared to
international peers and top Vietnamese performing provinces, HCMC’s Provincial Competitiveness Index
(PCI) ranking had dropped from the top five to rank eighth in 2016 and 2017, out of 63 provinces and cities.
In 2017, 16 percent of firms in HCMC had to wait for more than one month to start operations, compared to
13 percent in the median province. Rent seeking prevailed in the discretionary handling of administrative
procedures. PA10 facilitated business registration online by consolidating procedures for seal making the
publication of enterprise seal samples and the registration of a business in one step. PA11 would assist in
strengthening the business environment in HCMC through specific support for business registration
procedures and overall support for a mechanism to measure implementation quality of government-to-
business services. The key performance indicators would be divided into (i) the quantity and quality of
handling of business registration procedures (ratios of business feedback with unsatisfaction, delayed
responses, applications filed online); and (ii) enterprise establishment and liquidation (numbers of businesses
newly incorporated, businesses being dissolved or suspended—all by sector, size, location). The regulation
would require setting annual targets for each performance indicator and monthly monitoring frequencies.
Relevance of PA10: Satisfactory (S). PA11: Satisfactory (S).

PA12 and PA13: At the time of appraisal, HCMC’s institutional arrangements were fragmented largely by the
mode of transport with the Management and Operation Center for Public Transport (MOCPT) under the
Department of Transport (DOT) responsible for bus-based systems, and the Management Authority of Urban
Rails (MAUR) for rail-based modes. HCMC’s fragmented institutional structure focused attention on the
supply of capacity, rather than on meeting the mobility needs of male and female city residents. PA12 would
address fragmentation in institutional structures by assigning a clear mandate to HCMC’s Management
Center of Public Transport (MCPT) to fully integrate the public transport systems. PA13 would set up a
coordination mechanism between the MCPT and transport operators, with the MCPT designated as the
agency to implement the automated fare collection system that would be interoperable across public
transport modes, including the metro, BRT, and buses. However, the precise modalities of this coordination
were not specified by the time PD2 was drafted and was to be prepared later by the City Peoples’ Committee
(CPC). Relevance of PA12: Satisfactory (S). PA13: Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

PA14: The bus system was rapidly losing passengers due to increasing congestion, deteriorating service
quality, including poor vehicle conditions and unreliability of scheduling, and public concerns about personal

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ho Chi Minh City DPO 1 (P160480)



 security. The existing bus operating contracts compensated operators for vehicle-kilometers operated
 regardless of the number of passengers carried. As the bus services lost customers, the subsidies provided
 by HCMC increased. In 2019, the annual subsidy provided by HCMC reached VND 1.35 trillion (about US$60
 million), even as the number of passengers was declining. Additionally, there was little to no competition
 among existing operators, and when the city attempted competitive tendering for some routes, they received
 bids only from the existing operators of those routes. PA14 would contribute to better service delivery through
 an MCPT-delivered tender package featuring service quality standards, both as criteria for procurement and
 contractual requirements, and multiyear contracts. Service quality standards would be established regarding
 vehicle condition, reliability/safety of the operation, and customer service and services including awareness
 of, and response mechanisms to address sexual harassment and other incidents that threatened personal
 security or safety of bus users. Operators would be contractually required to take necessary measures,
 including development of an adequate vehicle maintenance regime, a safety management system, handling
 of customer relations, and adequate training of drivers and conductors. In addition, the performance
 indicators also stipulated detailed requirements regarding equipment on the bus such as lighting, air
 conditioning, cameras, and posting of hotline numbers to ensure safety and security on the bus. Relevance
 of PA14: Satisfactory (S).



Rating

Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Table 2: Results Indicators (RIs) by Objective and PAs, baseline and target values, status and
achievement

                                      Baseline   Target                   Actual as
                                                                                     RI
Results          Associated RI        (including (including Actual at % to
                                                                                     achievement
Indicator (RI)   PA(s)      relevance units and  units and    target date targeted
                                                                                     rating
                                      date)      date)                    change
PDO1: To strengthen the development of integrated and transparent spatial information for urban
management
RI1: Topography PA1;        S         No (2017)  Yes (2022) Yes (2022) 100% of High
and cadastral                                                             targeted
maps (updated by PA2                                                      change
DONRE), land
zoning maps
(updated by
DPA), and
transport map
(updated by DOT)
digitized in
interoperable
formats and

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ho Chi Minh City DPO 1 (P160480)



accessible by
authorized staff of
at least the
above-mentioned
agencies.


RI2: Number of
mobile users of
the mobile         PA3;                                                   193% of
                                                900,000        1,742, 573
application and             MU     0 (2017)                               targeted [High]
                                                (2022)         (2022)
website on zoning PA4                                                     change
plans of HCMC
(cumulative).
RI3: Number of
sessions
performed on the
                   PA3;                                                   182% of
mobile application                              5,550,000
                            MU     0 (2017)                    10,103,543 targeted [High]
and website on                                  (2022)
                   PA4                                                    change
zoning plans of
HCMC
(cumulative).
PDO2: To strengthen the management of public assets and liabilities
RI4: Level of
recovery for
                                                                          47%
operation and
                                                                          percent of
maintenance                                                    52
                                   45 percent 60 percent                  target
costs for drainage PA5; PA6 S                                  percent (2             Modest
                                   (2017)       (2022)                    achieved
system and                                                     022)
                                                                          with one
wastewater
                                                                          year delay
treatment
services
                                                                          0% of
RI5: Number of
                                                                          targeted
state-owned
                                                                          change
commercial
building assets    PA7      S      0 (2020)     1 (2022)       0 (2022)               Negligible
                                                                          other
leased through
                                                                          positive
pilot competitive
                                                                          information
auctioning.
                                                                          available
RI6: Online                                                               100% of
publication of an                                                         targeted
annual debt                                                               change
bulletin covering PA8; PA9 S       No (2019)    Yes (2022) Yes (2023) achieved Substantial
all public debt,                                                          (2023) with
with basic cost-                                                          one-year
risk indicators.                                                          delay


                                                                                           Page 10 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ho Chi Minh City DPO 1 (P160480)



PDO3: To enhance the delivery of priority municipal services
RI7: Number of
                                                                                  86% of
days taken to
                   PA10; PA11S        22 (2017)    15 (2022)          16 (2020)   targeted
start operating a
                                                                                  change     Substantial
business.
RI8: Online
publication of the
standard
                                      No
framework for a                                    Framework          Framework 100% of
                                      framework
common fare        PA12; PA13S                     published          published targeted     Substantial
                                      published
collection system                                  (2021)             (2021)    change
                                      (2019)
across different
public transport
modes.
                                                                                  279% of
RI9: Share of bus                                                                 targeted
routes for which                                                                  change.
                                                                      30.7
operators                                0 percent     11 percent                 Exceeded
                  PA14           S                                    percent              Substantial
selected through                         (2020)        (2022)                     with one
                                                                      (2023)
competitive                                                                       year
tendering.
                                                                                  delay.
RI10: Shares of                                                       Satisfied
                                          Satisfied-65
passengers                                              Satisfied-75 94.3
                                          percent;
satisfied with                                          percent;      percent;
                                                                                   2 of 3
services of the                                         Share of      Share of
                                          Share of                                 targets
bus routes                                              women         women
                                          women                                    exceeded,
selected under                                          feeling safe- feeling safe
                                          feeling safe-                            one not
competitive                                             55 percent; 86.4
                    PA14         MS       45 percent;                              achieved, Substantial
tendering, the                                          Increased     percent;
                                          Increased                                more than
share of women                                          ride          Increased
                                          ride                                     66% of
feeling safe and                                        frequency of ride
                                          frequency of                             targeted
therefore                                               females 10 frequency
                                          females                                  change
reporting their                                         percent       of women
ride frequency                                          (2019).       not
                                          (2019).
has increased.                                                        reported.
Note: RI achievement ratings note achievement of the targeted change for the RI. RI achievement ratings in
brackets reflect ratings that may have been adjusted based on weak relevance of the results indicator
(discussed in efficacy section).

The operation consisted of 10 RIs. The relevance of seven is rated Satisfactory, one Moderately Satisfactory,
and two Moderately Unsatisfactory. The overall RI Relevance Outcome is Moderately Satisfactory.

RI1 measured the impact of PA1 and PA2 and entailed a clear set of data on baseline and target. The updating
and digitization of topography, cadastral, zoning and transport maps was expected to contribute to integrated
and transparent spatial information for urban management by allowing city officials to conduct their functions
more efficiently and effectively. Relevance of RI1: Satisfactory (S).


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ho Chi Minh City DPO 1 (P160480)



RI2 and RI3 measured the impact of PA3 and PA4 on the accessibility of online vector-based zoning plans for all
the districts of HCMC. The baseline and data were both clear and directly measurable. However, the measures
were not relevant because the main audience for zoning information was individuals, developers, city officials
and business owners who needed the information to obtain permits. RI2 and RI3 measured the popularity of the
zoning application, website and cumulative number of sessions performed on the zoning website by the overall
population but could not measure how well the database served the applicants who filed for permits or officials
who approved them. The high number of sessions performed may have been linked to factors such as website,
mobile application design or requirements. These were different from the goal of the PA3 and PA4 intended to
strengthen access to an integrated and transparent spatial information base. The RIs also did not measure how
well the zoning information base eliminated HCMC’s officials’ discretionary control over the permitting process. A
more useful indicator would have been the number of construction permits issued. Relevance of RI2:
Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU). Relevance of RI3: Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU).

RI4 was a strong outcome level indicator that directly measured progress of PA5 (initiating the increased
recovery of O&M costs for wastewater treatment services) and under DPO-2, progress in PA6 that would lead to
the approval of an increased tariff structure aimed at greater cost recovery in improving sustainability of waste
water and flood services. RI4 was clearly defined and had a measurable baseline and target. Relevance of RI4:
Satisfactory (S).

RI5 replaced the original RI5 under DPO-1 (increased rental price per square meter of state commercial
housing) because the underlying Trigger 4 for competitive auctions was dropped, which could have led to
increased rents on public assets. The new results indicator was clearly linked to PA7 and measured the number
of state-owned commercial building assets leased through pilot competitive auctioning. Relevance of RI5:
Satisfactory (S).

RI6 recorded the online publication of an annual debt bulletin covering all public debt, with basic cost-risk
indicators and contributed to transparency, a key aspect of strengthened public debt management. It directly
measured the impact of PA8 and PA9 on enhancing the institutional structure of HCMC debt management and
contributed to sound decisions, thereby enhancing fiscal sustainability. Relevance of RI6: Satisfactory (S).

RI7 captured the impact of PA10 and PA11 on improving the delivery of municipal services by measuring
the number of days taken to start operating a business. The PA assisted the HCMC authorities to streamline the
many business registration processes reducing the time to register. Relevance of RI7: Satisfactory (S).

RI8 replaced the DPO-1 indicator, “interoperability of fare collection systems across mass transit systems under
development achieved” due to delays in setting up a new rail network and the need to make the RI more
relevant to the current state of transportation options in HCMC, which was predominantly served by bus options.
The new RI captured the impact of PA12 and PA13 regarding the integration and better organization of bus
transport services between operators and the MCPT. Specifically, it recorded the online publication of the
standard framework for a common fare-collection system across different public transport modes (by
2021). Relevance of RI8: Satisfactory (S).

RI9 measured the impact of PA14 regarding progress in the quality of delivery of bus services achieved through
competitive tendering of multi-year contracts and rewarding bus drivers for good performance. It measured the
share of bus routes for which operators were selected through competitive tendering. It was measurable and
had a clear target. Relevance of RI9: Satisfactory (S).




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 20
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Ho Chi Minh City DPO 1 (P160480)



  RI10 was a composite indicator since it included three distinct performance targets. All three measured the
  impact of PA14, given that customer satisfaction, safety and ridership of females constituted core elements of
  improved service standards that would be expected to lead towards tangible progress in enhancing the quality of
  bus services in HCMC. However, data sources to calculate the RI were not given, and the ICR mentioned that
  the methodology used to assess customer satisfaction with bus services “may need further validation” (ICR,
  p.22). Relevance of RI10: Moderately Satisfactory (MS).




  Rating

  Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To strengthen the development of integrated and transparent spatial information for urban management (PAs
               1-4, RIs 1-3).

               Rationale
               RI1: The target of digitizing the topography and cadastral maps, vector-based zoning plans, and transport
               maps updated in interoperable formats was achieved, and authorized staff has been able to use them to
               improve service provision. Rating: High.

               RI2: The target was exceeded by the end of 2022, with 1,742,573 people accessing the system. The ICR
               mentions that the original target, which was 250,000 after DPO-1, was revised upwards due to substantial
               progress in implementation. Since RI relevance was rated MU, the overall rating for the results indicator is
               adjusted downwards. Rating: Modest.

               RI3: The number of sessions reached 10,103,543, exceeding the target of 5,500,000. The ICR reports a
               continuing upward trend in the number of sessions, reaching 15,600,279 in 2023. The achievement is hereby
               adjusted downwards, due to the MU rating of RI3. This is because the indicator does not directly measure
               progress towards the objective as the metric is not directly linked to the associated PAs. Rating: Modest.



               Rating
               Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                                Page 13 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Ho Chi Minh City DPO 1 (P160480)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen the management of public assets and liabilities (PAs 5-9, RIs 4-6).

Rationale
RI4: Although the level of recovery was 52 percent by 2022, the actual target was reached in 2023 and
slightly exceeded with a one-year delay. Rating: Substantial.

RI5: No property was leased through a competitive tendering process and the target was not reached. Failure
to reach the target was, according to the ICR, the result of a legal problem (that presumably erupted during
implementation). However, the ICR reports progress towards the objective linked to the PA, namely the
professionalization of housing management following the assumption of duties by the Center. 8,125 social
housing assets have been transferred for management to the Center, along with 10 commercial trading floors
and 33 commercial housing assets. The ICR also reports that the cost of managing the assets was reduced
from US$2 million/year to US$1 million/year, and that the central government has prepared a government
decree for nationwide implementation of the planned auctions. Given additional evidence of progress, the
rating for this indicator is adjusted upwards from Negligible. Rating: Modest.

RI6: The target was achieved by 2023, with the online publication of an annual debt bulletin covering all public
debt and including basic cost-risk indicators. The analysis included in the bulletin covers the period since
2020. Rating: Substantial.



Rating
Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To enhance the delivery of priority municipal services (PAs 10-14, RIs 7-10).

Rationale
RI7: The target was substantially achieved, since the number of days taken to register and start a business
was reduced to 16, against a target of 15. Rating: Substantial.

RI8: A standard framework for a common fare-collection system across different public transport modes was
published by 2021, achieving the set target. Rating: Substantial.

RI9: The share of bus routes for which operators were selected through competitive tendering was missed in
2022, with an achievement of 6.5 percent (6 of 91 bus routes for 2022) against a target of 11 percent. The
ICR attributes the missing of the target to the effects of COVID 19. By 2023, however, the target was



                                                                                                 Page 14 of 20
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Ho Chi Minh City DPO 1 (P160480)



                  reached, as 28 of the 31 bus routes were competitively tendered, reaching 30.7 percent. According to the
                  ICR, this improved the convenience of using bus services. Rating: Substantial.

                  RI10: The survey results exceeded the targets for satisfaction with 94.3 percent satisfied (2022) against a
                  target of 75 percent, above the 65 percent baseline, while 86.4 percent of the women reported feeling safe
                  against a target of 55 percent and a 2019 baseline of 45 percent. The target on increasing female ridership by
                  10 percent was not reported; nor did the ICR report an absolute number for the number of women using the
                  bus service with greater frequency. Two of the three targets were met. Rating: Substantial.



                  Rating
                  Satisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Two objectives (PDO2 and PDO3) are rated Satisfactory, and one Objective (PDO1) is rated Moderately
Satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating

Satisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

Since both relevance of PAs and efficacy were rated Satisfactory, the overall outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

The results achieved through the series are generally characterized by a high degree of sustainability, and there
is a relatively low risk of achieved progress being undermined in the short to medium term. Important factors in

                                                                                                                 Page 15 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ho Chi Minh City DPO 1 (P160480)



that assessment include the willingness of HCMC authorities to proceed with many of the realized reforms over
several years, not least as expressed in the HCMC series of plans on growth, sustainable development, and
urban planning, and HCMC engagement with the central government to expand aspects of the program that
have yet to be realized. Nevertheless, and given the rather recent process of devolution and decentralization in
Vietnam, notwithstanding the autonomy offered to HCMC and Hanoi, it remains possible that recent gains made
by the HCMC to autonomously manage fiscal and administrative affairs could be reversed, thereby reversing at
least some aspects of the progress achieved through the series. In that respect, the legal change implemented
by the government, which led to the cancelling of the second operation in 2021, underscores the fragility of gains
made through the decentralization process of the last few years.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

Analytical Underpinnings: Further to the CPF (FY18-22), the series was strongly backed by a combination of
technical reports jointly drafted by the Bank and government, as well as TA. Pillar 1 drew on the Anticorruption
Diagnostics (ACD) 2013, the Integrated Strategy Report (ISR) of 2014, and the 2016 World Bank Vietnam report
titled “Vietnam 2035: Towards Prosperity, Creativity, Equity, and Democracy.” These reports noted that effective
information sharing across agencies would be critical for improving coordination and evidence-based policy
making and that land was among the top five sectors prone to corruption. The Land Governance ASA (2017-
2019) laid out key options and recommendations on credible planning/zoning, enhanced lease revenues/value
capture, and improving commercial and residential titling and construction permits services (PD1, p.23). Pillar 2
was based on the HCMC Debt Management Performance Assessment (DeMPA) of 2014, the Urban
Wastewater Review (UWR) of 2015, the Vietnam Water Utilities Reform of 2015, and the Public Debt
Management Law Review of 2017. These analytical underpinnings highlighted the need to expand the coverage
of networked wastewater drainage and treatment to improve the quality of life of HCMC citizens and reduce the
operational and maintenance deficits which affected asset maintenance and ultimate service cost and quality.
The HCMC Public Expenditure Review (PER) of 2016 underscored the importance of enhancing returns on
municipal assets, especially given the limited revenue autonomy, while ensuring prudent management of rising
public debt and contingent liabilities. The 2014 DeMPA stressed that subnational debt management was still at a
very nascent stage because back-office functions were incomplete, and there was no proper recording of
domestic and on-lent loan agreements. Pillar 3 was based on the 2014 ISR as well as the Provincial
Competitiveness Index (PCI) 2017 and the Doing Business (DB) report of 2018. Both recorded a deterioration in
HCMC’s ratings for national and international business environment indexes. The ISR 2014 proposed to develop
an approach for cost benefit analysis of integrated modal interventions to enable the efficient spatial
development of HCMC, linking up several of the elements in urban transport as well as land use planning.

Quality at Entry: PD1 included a detailed discussion as to the substance of each prior action, its rationale and its
link to the indicative trigger associated with it. This also applied to the unforeseen DPO-2, and was true of PD2.
The PAs were based on lessons learned from previous experience and on prior technical work. The series was
well aligned with HCMC’s development strategy, and the rationale and design of its pillars were based on solid
analytical underpinnings. The program documents generally offered a clear rationale for most PAs and the
expected results, as well as the rationale behind the modifications that were implemented in successive program

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ho Chi Minh City DPO 1 (P160480)



documents. Some changes were introduced during the series. RI5 was dropped as trigger 4 for DPO-2 was
dropped. Trigger 4 was dropped because the COVID-19 outbreak reduced the demand for commercial real
estate in HCMC. Therefore, the Bank agreed to proceed with DPO-2 without this action, with the expectation
that the envisioned competitive auctions would take place when market conditions returned to normal. The new
results indicator 5 became the number of state-owned commercial building assets leased through pilot
competitive auctioning. RI 8 replaced the DPO-1 indicator. Finally, the original RI9 from DPO-1 ( Share of
passengers satisfied with services provided by bus drivers and staff) was replaced by RI10 (Shares of
passengers satisfied with services of the bus routes selected under competitive tendering, the share of women
feeling safe and therefore reporting their ride frequency has increased), which sought to measure the impact of
the associated prior actions, such as the use of performance indicators and higher service standards for
competitively tendered multiyear contracts with bus operators.

Risk identification and mitigation: at appraisal, the series entailed substantial implementation risks given the
novel character of subnational DPOs and the fact that the country’s legal framework could prove a hindrance to
the successful completion of planned reforms. At the end, a legal change inhibited the operationalization of
DPO-2, even though most actions went ahead as planned. This was due to the sustained reform commitment
displayed by HCMC authorities over a prolonged period prior to the start of the series and following extensive
consultations with the World Bank. PD1 rightly assessed the overall risk as substantial, and highlighted
implementation risks as high due to the inherent complexity of some of the reform entailed in the series, not
least in terms of the need to achieve high levels of coordination across agencies. Mitigation measures included a
program design focused on reform actions underpinned by a strong desire to move forward, especially on issues
such as the digitization of zoning plans and the introduction of a new tariff schedule for water and sanitation
services, both of which went ahead. Institutional capacity risks were well mitigated through a rich program of
technical assistance. The ICR talks of macroeconomic risk being rated substantial, yet in fact this risk type was
rightly identified as moderate in both PD1 and PD2, given solid economic fundamentals in HCMC and the
creation of fiscal buffers that allowed city authorities to handle the effects of COVID-19. For reasons which are
not entirely clear given continued dialogue with the city to resolve technical capacity gaps, PD2 raised the
technical capacity risk from moderate to substantial, while rightly lowering institutional risk to Substantial from
High following successful reform efforts after DPO-1.

Stakeholder Consultation: the Bank engaged in systematic consultations during the program’s preparation and
implementation of the program, including with affected groups, while draft regulations were circulated within
government agencies and published on HCMC’s websites for public comments. The City’s People’s Committee,
relevant departments, and the WBG held seminars and workshops with relevant stakeholders on key prior
actions which produced useful, practical comments on the technical and political feasibility of the policy options.
For example, the consultation workshop on the disclosure of zoning plans provided inputs on the types and
forms of information that would benefit commercial and residential construction permit applicants.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale


                                                                                                    Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ho Chi Minh City DPO 1 (P160480)



Monitoring and coordination with partners: Consultation with the Finance Department, the Planning and
Investment Department and the State Treasury and development partners led to an agreement to create a
formal coordination mechanism for subnational debt management activities. Coordination with development
partners, such as the Asian Development Bank and the French Development Bank, proved difficult on transport
due to different partners reliance on different technology standards. Regular consultations were held with
relevant partners, including the IMF, the European Union, the African Development Bank, the Japan
International Cooperation Agency and the Swiss Development Agency.

Adaptation: The WBG adapted to changes during the series, especially regarding the onset of the pandemic and
the non-disbursement of PDO-2 because of a legal change in Vietnam. Dropping trigger 4 was the result of the
pandemic in as far as the auctions of public assets could not proceed, and the relevant indicator was replaced
by a more realistic one, since the expectation of rental price increases became impossible in the short term.
Similarly, the Bank adjusted the transport indicator under pillar 3 when it became obvious that the metro rail
project could not be finalized during the lifetime of the project and the focus should shift squarely on bus
services instead.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Design is rated Satisfactory and Implementation Satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

PD2 included a detailed section about the distributional effects of some of the planned reforms, especially
regarding the planned increase in water tariffs under DPO-2. Simulations based in data derived from the
Vietnam Household Living Standards Survey (VHLSS) suggested an increase in household wastewater bills by
VND 6,700 for the poorest and VND 9,700 for the richest quintiles, which equals 0.05 percent and 0.03 percent,
respectively, of household expenditure. The ICR followed up on the analysis regarding the repercussions of the
increase in water tariffs and pointed to rather negligible increases in household expenditure because of the
reform for the poorest quantile of the HCMC population, namely an increase by US$0.50, equal to 0.092 percent
of expenditure in 2020 and US$1.65, or 0.234 percent of expenditure in 2024. No poverty rates in HCMC pre-
and post-operation were discussed.


                                                                                                Page 18 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ho Chi Minh City DPO 1 (P160480)




b. Environmental

The series did not anticipate a noteworthy environmental impact at design stage. No noteworthy impact was
identified ex post.



c. Gender

At appraisal, the series used survey results suggesting that transport-related areas, including buses, bus stops
and bus interchange, were among the top three unsafe public spaces for women and girls in terms of risks and
prevalence of sexual harassment. One result indicator (RI10) measured, inter alia, the sense of safety onboard
buses by women in HCMC and recorded significant improvement by end of the series although no data was
reported regarding women’s increased use of bus transport.



d. Other

Strengthening HCMC institutions through TA and coordination efforts was at the heart of the series. Important
progress was recorded in strengthening the institutional capacity of HCMC to improve its public asset
management structure through additional staff training, while the same is also true for the capacity developed by
the Management Center of Public Transport (MCPT) to assist better integration of transport modes and
improved coordination across agencies.



10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR provides a summary of the context at appraisal and rationale for the series and discusses the evolution
of the PDOs. It also offers a coherent narrative of the series, the changes that occurred during the series as well
as the results. The ICR discusses all prior actions and their evolution, justifying changes between the two PDOs
in terms of both triggers and results indicators. The quality of ICR evidence with relevance to PAs is generally
good, although many PAs are grouped together and the discussion of the evidence linking outcomes with
interventions is occasionally very brief. The relationship between PAs and the intended outcomes was evident in
most cases. The ICR lacked a discussion pertaining to the critical assumptions underpinning the series, and a
detailed discussion about the consequences of cancelling DPO-2 and how the reform momentum was
maintained on the part of the Bank in its engagement with HCMC authorities. Although the ICR mentions
COVID-19 as a key factor behind implementation delays numerous times, it does not spell out the concrete
effects of the pandemic. The ICR would have also benefited from a richer discussion about the decision-making
structure in HCMC government to justify the series’ reliance on legal changes to effect change.


a. Rating


                                                                                                    Page 19 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ho Chi Minh City DPO 1 (P160480)



Substantial


11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreement/Comments
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG agrees with the ICR lesson pertaining to the value of sub-national DPOs even in the face of legal
uncertainty. Although funding for the second DPO did no go through because of a legal complication, sustained
commitment to reform on the part of subnational authorities, coupled with strong WBG support, paid off in the
form of important developmental advances. The convening power of the World Bank orchestrated through
the DPO helped various reforms to be implemented on a significant scale demonstrating that depending upon
the country context, subnational DPOs can add value to WBG operations and make a significant impact on
its citizens. At the subnational level, WBG and city/regional officials need to work together (horizontally) and
across departments to realize gains and achieve reforms.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                  Page 20 of 20
