     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Access to Sustainable Energy Project (P153268)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0024033

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P153268                                     Access to Sustainable Energy Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Philippines                                 Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A2379,TF-A2497                           31-Jul-2019                                           17,994,961.25

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Apr-2016                                 31-Aug-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             23,833,400.00                                     23,833,400.00

 Revised Commitment                              17,682,246.10                                     19,122,046.10

 Actual                                          17,994,961.25                                     17,994,961.25




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Sriram                      Ihsan Kaler Hurcan            Ramachandra Jammi                IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Balasubramanian




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the European Union (EU) Grant Agreement (p.5) and the Global Partnership on Output-Based
   Aid Program (GPOBA) Grant Agreement (p.5) both dated June 14, 2016, and the Project Appraisal Document
   (p.16), the project objective is “to increase household access to solar powered electricity within select electric
   cooperative service areas.”




                                                                                                     Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Access to Sustainable Energy Project (P153268)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project consisted of three components:

   A. PV Mainstreaming of Solar Home Systems (SHS): (Cost estimated at appraisal: US$15.2 million;
   actual cost: US$12.6 million)

   The component was to support the distribution and installation of 40,500 SHS by participating electric
   cooperatives in their coverage areas through the provision of grants as a capital subsidy. The scheme was
   to be mainstreamed and sustained through a regulatory framework that was to include monthly service fees
   paid by the SHS customers to the electric cooperatives.

   B. Rural Network Solar (RNS): (Cost estimated at appraisal: US$6.9 million; actual cost: US$4.4 million)

   This component was to support the development of small, grid-connected solar power plants to increase
   electricity generation by 14 megawatt (MW) and implementation of an RNS program in remote and isolated
   islands through the provision of grants to selected electric cooperatives and private companies as a capital
   subsidy.

   C. Pre-Paid Metering: (Cost estimated at appraisal: US$0.11 million; actual cost: US$0.0 million)

   This component was to pilot the provision and installation of approximately 1,000 pre-paid electricity meters
   in the project area to improve the electricity cooperatives’ commercial efficiency.

   Revised components:

   The Rural Network Solar component was redesigned because it conflicted with a Department Circular on
   the Competitive Selection Process issued by the Department of Energy (DOE) in early 2018, which states
   that electric cooperatives cannot accrue power from themselves without going through a competitive
   process. While the PAD (p.15) indicates that the electric cooperatives are off-takers in the original design,
   the DOE perceived the electric cooperatives to be the owner of solar power plants to be built under this
   component. Key features of the new design included the evolution of the electric cooperatives as
   developers of solar power plants with the aid of project implementing agency. The financial structure of the
   project was revised to allow the use of the project grants as capital contribution (accounting about 70
   percent of the total project cost). electric cooperatives were to provide land as in-kind contribution
   (accounting for 30 percent of the total project cost).

   The component Pre-Paid Metering pilot was dropped because of the risks related to the customers
   switching back to post-paid meters after a six-month trial period of the pre-paid meters. The possible



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Access to Sustainable Energy Project (P153268)



  adverse financial and economic impact of this risk on the project resulted in the cancellation of this
  component.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost: Cost of the project was initially estimated to be US$22.4 million, and the revised amount was
  US$17.7 million after modifications. The actual project cost was US$18.0 million.

  Financing: The financing source was the EU and GPOBA, which were to contribute US$20.24 million and
  US$3.00 million, respectively. At closing the project disbursed US$15.1 million and US$2.9 million
  respectively.

  Borrower contribution: No borrower’s contribution was expected, and none materialized.

  Project Restructurings:

  The project was restructured five times as the following.

        First Restructuring (May 11,2018): Funds were reallocated to ensure procurement of verification
           agent for photovoltaic mainstreaming (PVM) bidding. Furthermore, the descriptions of the pre-paid
           meters were modified in the eligible expenditures table of the EU grant agreement. Closing date of
           the GPOBA grant agreement was extended from June 30, 2018 to December 31, 2018 and that of
           the EU grant agreement from July 31, 2019 to October 31, 2019. These short time extensions were
           required to ensure the timely completion of all activities that were delayed because of the time
           required by the suppliers of SHS kits to post bank guarantees and modifications applied to the SHS
           kits to be financed by the GPOBA grant and the time required for the decision to auction a larger
           scale solar investment or smaller power plans as originally planned.
          Second Restructuring (January 3, 2020): A retroactive extension of the EU grant closing date from
           October 31, 2019 to September 30, 2021 was approved in order to give additional time for the
           implementation of the project. The project implementation was delayed because of the decision of
           the decision of the Local Government Unit Guarantee Corporation’s (LGUGC) Board of Directors to
           dissolve the LGUGC by December 31, 2019, which resulted in the change of the implementing
           agency from LGUGC to the National Power Corporation (NPC).
          Third restructuring (September 21, 2021): Due to the Covid-19 pandemic and its associated
           implementation delays, the closing date was further extended by a year to September 30, 2022.
           Changes were made in the implementation arrangements that enabled NPC to directly distribute and
           install SHS, development of grid-connected solar plants and installation of pre-paid meters and
           implementation of pre-paid metering pilot.
          Fourth restructuring (November 29, 2022): The closing date of the grant agreement was retroactively
           extended from September 30, 2022 to July 31, 2023 in order to accommodate the above mentioned
           delays in the implementation process to achieve the stated development objectives.
          Fifth restructuring (July 31, 2023): A one-month EU grant agreement closing date extension was
           granted for the completion of four 1 MW solar power plants by August 31, 2023. The works were
           delayed because of continuous rain in the project sites and late delivery of key equipment and
           transformers.



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Access to Sustainable Energy Project (P153268)



   Dates:

   The project was approved on April 28, 2016 and became effective on June 16, 2016. The Mid-Term Review
   was conducted on March 15, 2021. The original project closing date was July 31, 2019, but it was extended
   by approximately 48 months (please see the project restructurings above for the reasons of project closing
   date extensions). The project closed on August 31, 2023.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Alignment with strategy

The project objective is aligned with the World Bank strategy for the Philippines as defined in the Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) FY20-23. The project sought to address the development problem of a lack
of access to electricity in remote areas of the country serviced by electric cooperatives. The project was to
achieve this through capital subsidies for the installation of SHS and the development of solar power plants
to increase the availability of electricity supply. The project objective corresponds to the Focus Area 2 –
Competitiveness and Economic Opportunity for Job Creation of the CPF and supports the achievement of
the Objective 6: Improved efficiency of infrastructure services in selected areas. The project objective also
corresponds to Focus Area 3 – Addressing Core Vulnerabilities by Building Peace and Resilience and
supports the achievement of the Objective 8: Increased availability of basic services in conflict-affected
areas. Through the implementation of solar power, the project objective is also aligned with Objective 10:
Increase resilience to natural disasters and climate change of Focus Are 3 of the CPF (p.20).

The Systematic Country Diagnostic highlighted the importance of improving Philippine’s widespread yet
unevenly distributed electricity access (ICR, p.17). Further to this, it is also linked to the Bank’s country
partnership strategy (CPS FY15-18) aiding the climate change and inclusive growth pillars of the strategy.
The PAD also adds that the subsidy schemes also support other pillars related to increasing renewable
energy capacity, diversifying generation portfolio and expanding rural electrification.

Country context

The project objective is highly relevant to the country context and its policy goals in the short and medium
term. Subsequent policy initiatives by the government including the Philippine Development Plan (2011-
2016) and complete rural grid electrification have focused on boosting solar energy across the country. The
Access to Sustainable Energy Project (ASEP) not only supports these but also synergizes with schemes
such as Philippines Renewable Energy Development in promoting grid electrification across the Philippines.
Further to this, the supply of small solar power plants aids the broader goals of the government mentioned
above. In this context, there is a good fit between the project objective and the broader strategies of the
country’s policymakers in the context of electrification and renewable energy supplies.

Other strategic plans such as the Missionary Electrification Development Plan and the Philippine Energy
plan seemed to be aligned with the broader objective of the project to increase household access to solar
powered electricity. While this objective will help in accelerating the goals to these plans, it is one
component of their bigger vision. The projective objective is also broadly aligned to the national

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Access to Sustainable Energy Project (P153268)



               electrification strategies (targeting universal access by 2030) which aims to enhance electricity access to
               remote areas and provide reliable supply of electricity in the country.

               Previous Bank Experience

               The World Bank has had substantive experience in the field of promoting solar power electricity and
               experience in dealing with electric co-operative areas. Further to this, the Bank assisted rural power project
               in the Philippines (ICR p.8) dealt with piloting PV mainstreaming in six electric cooperatives in Visayas as a
               service-for-free model for RE based electrification. This experience and expertise from this successful
               project were of important value for the ASEP given the similarity in the objectives and outcomes.

               Overall, the relevance of the project objectives is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase household access to solar powered electricity within select electric cooperative service areas.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change

                             The project grants were to be used as capital subsidies for the installation of off-grid SHS, build grid-
                             connected small solar power plants, and pilot the installation of 1,000 pre-paid meters in selected electric
                             cooperative areas. The project outputs would have been SHSs installed in 40,500 households, a 14 MW solar
                             power plant capacity created, and 1,000 pre-paid meters installed. The outcomes expected from the project
                             outputs would have been more than 200,000 people having access to electricity on a fee-for-service basis
                             and increased availability of electricity supplied to the other existing customers connected to the electric
                             cooperatives’ grids without the need to purchase electricity from independent power producers from long
                             distance. The outcome expected from the installation of the pre-paid meters would have been the increased
                             financial viability of the electric cooperatives ensuring cost recovery for operation and maintenance of the
                             electricity services. Through its focus on fee-for-service and electricity security through the construction of
                             solar power plants in the electric cooperative areas, the project was to ensure the sustainability of the
                             electricity supply services in a more affordable way. Overall, the causal links from the project activities and
                             outputs to the expected outcomes were direct and valid, and the achievement of the project outcomes and
                             the objective could have been attributed to the project’s intervention.

                             Outputs


                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Access to Sustainable Energy Project (P153268)




      Solar home systems installed: The project provided capital subsidies for the installation of 40,500
         SHS as planned.
        People provided with new or improved electricity service: The achievement was 202,500 people
         as targeted. However, this indicator is calculated by multiplying the number of SHS by an average of
         five people per household. Therefore, this indicator defines a project output by number of people.
        Generation capacity energy constructed or rehabilitated: The project supported the construction
         of 2 MW solar generation capacity against the revised target of 7 MW. An additional 2.2 MW
         supported under the project is expected to be commissioned in April 2024 (ICR, p.39). Another 3 MW
         solar power plant subproject was dropped due to unsuccessful tendering and insufficient time for
         completion by project closing.
        Private capital mobilized: The project was expected to mobilize around US$14.42 million private
         capital for the development of solar power plant projects. However, because of the revision of the
         second component, the electric cooperatives took responsibility for the development of the solar
         power plants. Therefore, the project did not mobilize any private capital.
        Villages where PV Mainstreaming is implemented with at least one public consultation held:
         The ICR reports that the achievement was 100 percent as targeted. However, it is not clear what this
         achievement is. The PAD and the ICR do not define this indicator.
        Pre-paid meters installed under pilot: The project was to install 1,000 prepaid meters as a pilot. As
         explained in section 2.d. Components, this activity was dropped because of the risk that customers
         could revert back to post-paid metering service after a six-month trial period. The achievement was
         zero.

Outcomes

      Estimated Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emission reduction compared to a business-as-usual
         baseline: Because of the commissioning of the solar power plants, it was estimated that 0.50 metric
         ton of carbon dioxide equivalent GHG emission would have been avoided over a 20-year generation
         lifetime. The achievement at 0.07 metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent of GHG reduction was
         significantly lower than the target because only 2 MW solar power generation capacity was developed
         under the project.

The results framework did not include any indicator to capture the outcomes expected from the installation of
the SHS or the development of the solar power pants developed under the project and their impacts on rural
electrification in the country. To address this shortcoming, the ICR presents two additional indicators:

      Adoption of the delivery model tested in the PVM component by DOE for a larger scale
         deployment of SHS: The electric cooperatives installed the SHS and will continue with their
         maintenance in return for a fee from the customers. The electricity delivery model is called fee-for-
         service, and it resembles to electricity service through grid with the exception that the electric
         cooperatives supply electricity to the customers through SHS in this model. The fee-for-service model
         is successfully implemented under the project. The ICR (p.18) notes that the electric cooperatives’
         ownership of the model was strong; subsidy support was successful in reducing the upfront capital
         cost; and the tariff was set at a level to cover the operation and maintenance costs of the SHS. The
         installation of pre-paid meters would have been expected to further support the sustainability of the
         fee-for-service model because they would have ensured a regular cash inflow to the electric
         cooperatives compared to post-paid metering. Because of the successful implementation of the SHS
         through the fee-for-service model in these remote project areas, the DOE confirmed that the model

                                                                                                 Page 6 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Access to Sustainable Energy Project (P153268)



                                    will be scaled up to achieve universal access to electricity in off-grid areas served by the electric
                                    cooperatives by 2028 (ICR, p.18).
                                   Adoption of the electric cooperative-joint venture (EC-JV) business model tested in the RNS
                                    component in future solar PV plants development in electric cooperatives’ service areas:
                                    Before the project, because of their capital constraints and lack of capacity to develop power
                                    generation projects, the electric cooperatives were electricity off-takers from independent power
                                    producers through long-range transmission network, which increased the cost of electricity and energy
                                    insecurity. Even though the project’s achievement in developing solar power plants was low, it
                                    nevertheless demonstrated that the electric cooperatives could develop these power plants if their
                                    capital constraints are alleviated, and adequate technical assistance is given. Therefore, the limited,
                                    but successful development of solar power plants under the project demonstrated the viability of the
                                    solar power plants embedded into distribution networks within the service areas of the electric
                                    cooperatives. The DOE is expected to adopt the EC-JV business model to scale up the development
                                    of solar power plants in electric cooperative service areas, which would increase energy security,
                                    improve the affordability of electricity service, and contribute to the achievement of universal access to
                                    electricity by 2028 in rural areas. The success of this model led to discussions between the DOE, the
                                    Ministry of Finance, and the World Bank on a potential US$650 million loan to scale up the business
                                    model in other electric cooperatives’ service areas (ICR, p.19).

                            Overall, the project had a mixed success in delivering the project outputs; the project achieved the installation
                            of SHS as targeted but failed significantly short of developing 7 MW solar power generation capacity.
                            However, the successful installation of the SHS under the fee-for-service model and the development of solar
                            power plants by the electric cooperatives are expected to lead to the DOE’s adoption of these models to
                            increase access electricity and enhance energy security while improving the affordability of electricity in
                            remote rural areas of the country. The demonstration impact of the project was significantly high. Therefore,
                            the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective to increase household access to solar powered
                            electricity within select electric cooperative service areas is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            While the project fell short of achieving the project outputs related to the installation of solar power generation
                            capacity and the pre-paid meters, the project successfully installed the SHS and demonstrated the
                            applicability of the fee-for-service model and the development of solar power plants by the electric
                            cooperatives. The Government of the Philippines is likely to scale up these models to increase access to
                            electricity in remote regions to achieve universal access by 2023. Therefore, the overall efficacy of the project
                            in achieving the project objective is rated Substantial.




                                                                                                                                  Page 7 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Access to Sustainable Energy Project (P153268)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis

According to the ICR (p.21), economic analysis was done for the PVM and RNS components of the project. For
the PVM component, the Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) at completion was at 74.3 percent which was
higher than the estimate of 33.4 percent at appraisal. Further to this, at completion, the payback period reduced
to 1.8 years from 2.1 years at the beginning of the project. Improvement in both these metrics are attributed to
lower investment costs on the solar home systems. For the RNS component, the EIRR was 30.9 percent at
completion (post accounting for market driven factors) compared to the initial appraisal EIRR of 17.5 percent.
The Economic Net Present Value (ENPV) was at 9.94 million (post accounting for market driven factors)
compared to the ENPV of 8.4 million at appraisal. However, if the market driven factors are not included, then
the ENPV was just 5.87 million which was much less than what was estimated at project appraisal. The ICR
attributes it to the increase in diesel cost which is considered a major market driven factor. In terms of absolute
economic benefits, the return on investment has been good and efficient along with a favorable investment
climate for such projects. Furthermore, reduced investment costs have also ensured favorable net economic
returns for the mentioned components in the project.

Operational and Administrative Efficiency

Project implementation was adversely affected by shortcomings in operational and administrative efficiency of
the project. Factors such as product supply and quality issues and delays in replacements and logistical
challenges contributed to lower achievement (ICR p.27). Lengthy governmental approval process, lack of
planning among key stakeholders, unsuccessful bidding for project sites and procedural delays were also key
factors in the inefficiencies. Second, the dropping of the Pre-paid Metering (PPM) component due to regulatory
issues indicated operational and administrative inefficiencies and lack of due-diligence. Until 2020, the World
Bank project team was not aware of any of the risks involved in this regulatory component and this became
known only in 2022 even though the Energy Regulatory Commission regulations were published in 2009 and
updated in 2012. Besides the PPM component inefficiencies, there were also delays in the oversight of the
selection of the new implementing agency and the pandemic related delays as well.

Overall, the project’s efficiency in achieving the project objective is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:



                                                                                                      Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Access to Sustainable Energy Project (P153268)




                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    67.10
Appraisal                                                 25.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    70.10
ICR Estimate                                              34.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The objectives were highly relevant to the country context and the World Bank strategy; the relevance of
objectives is rated High. While the project achieved the installation of SHS as targeted but failed significantly
short of developing 7 MW solar power generation capacity, thereby having a mixed success of achieving
desired outputs. However, the project successfully demonstrated the positive impact of the SHS installation
along with the rolling out of the fee-for-service delivery model, along with the development of solar power
generation plants by the electric cooperatives. Therefore, the efficacy of the project in achieving the project
objectives is rated Substantial. There were issues with the implementation of certain components of the project
due to administrative, operational, and regulatory issues. Lack of proper planning and dropping of the PPM
component further exacerbated some of these problems which is reflected in the Modest rating for project’s
efficiency in achieving the project objectives. Overall, the project’s outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The political, social and governance risks are low given the stability of the government and the general
amicable environment in the country. There is also a high degree of consensus on sustaining the key project
outcomes and also broad relevant goals of achieving universal access by 2028. In terms of technical risks,
the ability to operate and maintain SHS and the ability of LGUGC to allocate subsidy awards in a timely
manner was an important risk factor. For the SHS, there have been reasonably good efforts taken to ensure
that is performance is not compromised in the short and medium run. Efforts have been taken to address this
including working with government authorities to devise a good subsidy allocation scheme to facilitate the
same. The financial viability of the electric cooperatives to maintain electricity supply service through SHS
and the grid to which the newly built solar power plants are connected poses a moderate financial risk. There
has not been a financial risk assessment or financial stress test done to understand these risks better. In
terms of natural disaster risk, the Philippines is quite prone to natural disasters such as typhoons and
earthquakes at times. It is imperative that the impact of such prospective disasters on the functioning of SHS
should be understood and proactive steps should be taken to mitigate its effects.




                                                                                                     Page 9 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Access to Sustainable Energy Project (P153268)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Increasing access to electricity in remote areas of the Philippines through the use of renewable energy
  (decreased the country’s dependence on coal-fired generation) in electric cooperatives’ service areas
  was of high strategic importance for the Department of Energy to achieve universal access. The project
  benefited from the experience gained during the implementation of previous access projects in the
  country; hence, it had a simple design focusing on the sustainability of the outcomes by demonstrating
  the successful implementation of fee-for-service model for electricity supply through SHS and the solar
  power plant development to secure the availability of affordable electricity supply. The technical aspects
  of the project were adequate because proven technologies were to be used in SHS installation and solar
  power plant development. The economic analysis concluded at appraisal confirmed the economic viability
  of the project, but the assumptions used in the cost-benefit analysis were not recorded properly. As the
  project implementing agency, the LGUGC was assessed to have sufficient capacity to implement the
  project and comply with the financial management requirements of the World Bank. The project triggered
  the relevant safeguards policies and necessary actions were taken at appraisal for the implementation of
  these policies. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) arrangements were adequate to capture the
  achievement of the project outputs but there were moderate shortcomings in capturing the achievement
  of the expected outcomes (see section 9.a. M&E design). All major risks were adequately identified, and
  mitigation measures were in place but the regulatory risk for the implementation of the third component
  (i.e., installation of 1,000 pre-paid meters) was not identified. The materialization of this risk during project
  implementation resulted in the cancellation of this component, and the project could not install 1,000 pre-
  paid meters. As the ICR (p.33) reports, if this risk had been identified at appraisal, an exemption for the
  project could have been secured or a proper incentive mechanism for the adoption of the pre-paid meters
  could have been built into the project design. Additionally, the status of the electric cooperatives was not
  adequately defined; the project defined the role of the participating electric cooperatives as off-takers of
  electricity from the solar power plants to be developed under the project, but, according to the DOE, they
  were defined as the owners of those solar power plants. This resulted in a major revision of the second
  component, and because of the new financing structure, the scope of the component had to be reduced
  from 14 MW to 7 MW.

  Overall, the quality at entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 a. Quality of supervision

 The World Bank project team conducted thirteen regular supervision missions (about twice a year),
 participated in bi-yearly review missions, and attended Project Steering Committee meetings (ICR, p.34).
 The project team’s supervision of the fiduciary and safeguard aspects of the project was efficient. The
 overall candor and quality of performance reporting in the Implementation Status and Results Reports and
 Aide Memoirs was adequate, but some revisions to the project scope and results framework were not

                                                                                                        Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Access to Sustainable Energy Project (P153268)



 adequately documented or reported, such as the revision of the second component, cancellation of the
 third component, and revisions of two indicators; the unexpected change of the Task Team Leader and the
 project implementing agency resulted in insufficient documentation of these changes.

 Although the project team was proactive in addressing the challenges with which the project was faced
 through formal restructurings, the revisions made to the project components were not processed through a
 formal project restructuring. The project team was late in identifying the regulatory risk related to the
 piloting of the pre-paid meters; when it was identified in 2022, there was insufficient time to re-design the
 third component, and it was decided to cancel third component.

 When LGUGC (the initial project implementing agency) informed the World Bank in October 2018 that its
 board of directors decided to dissolve the corporation by the end of 2019, a new project implementing
 agency selection was started. The Development Bank of Philippines was the front runner in the selection
 process, but the bank withdrew its application in July 2019 arguing a conflict with its corporate mandate.
 The project team could not identify this conflict earlier, which would have ruled out the Development Bank
 of Philippines from the selection process. Because of the lengthy selection process, the project activities
 had to be suspended by about six months.

 Overall, there were significant shortcomings in the proactive identification of opportunities and resolution of
 threats to the achievement of the development outcomes. However, the project team’s focus on the
 development impact of the project was sufficient in a challenging project implementation environment,
 which resulted in the achievement of project outputs and outcomes related to increasing access to
 electricity through successful implementation of the SHS under a fee-for-service model. The project team’s
 supervision was also critical in achieving the successful demonstration of solar power plant development
 by electric cooperatives that is expected to be replicated in the country although the solar generation
 capacity built under the project was much lower than the target. The quality of the project team’s
 supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project objective was clearly defined, and the theory of change was broadly reflected in the results
 framework. The indicators were relevant, time-bound, measurable and specific, but did not fully capture the
 outcomes expected from the project’s intervention. The results framework did not include indicators two
 encompass two important project outcomes, i.e., the successful implementation of the fee-for-service
 electricity delivery model through SHS and the demonstration of the solar power plant development with
 the involvement of the electric cooperatives. Overall, the results framework included indicators capturing
 the project outputs. The baselines were identified. The M&E arrangements were sufficiently embedded

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Access to Sustainable Energy Project (P153268)



 institutionally; LGUGC was to verify the data received from the electric cooperatives and hire an
 independent verification agent if needed.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project implementing agencies (first LGUGC and later NPC) regularly collected data and reported
  them. The project hired an independent agent for the verification of the SHS installation and operation,
  which constituted a basis for the grant disbursements. This ensured reliability of the data. The project
  implementing agencies’ attention to effective M&E implementation was sufficient. However, although the
  project was restructured five times, the weaknesses in the results framework in capturing the project
  outcomes were not addressed. The revision down of the target value for the installed solar generation
  capacity from 14 MW to 7 MW was processed without a formal project restructuring. The M&E functions
  and processes are likely to be sustained because the Department of Energy aims at scaling up fee-for-
  service electricity supply model and solar power plant development by electric cooperatives.



c. M&E Utilization
  The project implementing agencies regularly communicated the M&E findings to project stakeholders.
  The initial M&E findings contributed to an increased effectiveness and efficiency of SHS distribution and
  installation in later stages of project implementation, resulting in successful completion of this activity
  and achievement of the related project output and outcomes. The M&E findings also led to a revision of
  the solar power plant development model and cancellation of the pre-paid meters’ installation, but these
  were processed late in project implementation and not under a formal project restructuring. Although the
  indicators mostly captured the project outputs, there was a significant attempt to provide evidence of the
  achievement of the project outcomes and the project’s impact on access to electricity and electricity
  supply availability in remote areas of the country. The M&E findings have contributed to the
  government’s decision to scale up the fee-for-service model and the solar power plant development by
  electric cooperatives to achieve universal access.

  Overall, while there were moderate shortcomings in the results framework in capturing some project
  outcomes, the M&E system as design, implemented, and utilized was sufficient to assess the
  achievement of the project objective and test the links in the results chain. The overall M&E quality is
  rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Access to Sustainable Energy Project (P153268)



  The project was classified as category FI (Financial Intermediary) under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP
  4.01) and triggered the Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.11) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
  safeguard policies.

  Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): The project was classified as Category FI because the first
  project implementing agency, i.e., LGUGC, was to act as a financial intermediary in the project. There are
  certain quality standards and certifications, as mandated by the ASEP, that needed to be met to get access
  to such financing. Support provided to electric cooperatives and the government authorities also impinged
  upon proposal battery storage and disposal systems. Government regulations also demanded
  environmental assessments with regards to the storage, transport, treatment, and disposal of toxic and
  hazardous waste. Therefore, an Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework (ESSF) was adapted
  from the Philippines Renewable Energy Development Project and disclosed on the World Bank’s InfoShop
  on February 19, 2016. The project’s compliance with this safeguard policy has been satisfactory through to
  project closing.

  Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.11): The project triggered this safeguard policy because there was a
  considerable chance for indigenous people to be present in the project area. The project was to use the
  ESSF to screen its impact on the indigenous peoples. The NPC employed a dedicated safeguards focal
  person. The project prepared Indigenous Peoples Plans for every subproject. The subprojects were
  screened adequately to assess their impact on these peoples. The ICR (p.32) reports that the project had
  no pending requirement under this safeguard policy.

  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): The project triggered this safeguard policy because there could
  be limited land acquisition required for the construction of solar power plants. However, the requirement of
  no involuntary resettlement was one of the criteria for subproject eligibility. Therefore, the project was
  expected to result in no involuntary resettlement. Nevertheless, the ESSF included provisions to address
  involuntary resettlement if needed. There was a possibility that ten informal dwellings would have been
  relocated because they were constructed on an electric cooperative’s property. The subproject was
  redesigned to avoid these informal dwellings. The project closed without any involuntary resettlement.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  The ICR reports that the fiduciary compliance was moderately satisfactory. The risk rating was increased
  from low to substantial during the course of the project “due to the risk that funds may not be fully used
  because of delays in the implementation, possible uncompleted works, and unpaid billings towards the
  project closing date” (ICR, p.32).

  In addition, the fiduciary standards and maintenance of accounting records at LGUGC and NPC were
  considered adequate during implementation with certain operational issues. There were also other
  products by LGUGC that had to be produced including the semestral interim financial reports, annual
  audited project financial statements and annual externally audited entity financial statements which have
  further bolstered the financial record keeping for the project. The LGUGC and the NPC submitted Interim
  Financial Reports and Physical Progress Reports semiannually that included variance analysis of project
  funds and total costs incurred under management fees (ICR p.31). The external auditors’ opinion of the

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Access to Sustainable Energy Project (P153268)



   project’s financial statements was unqualified. There were no known issues of corruption or misuse of
   funds associated with the project. The project team confirmed that all project funds were accounted for at
   project closing.

   Procurement

   At appraisal, procurement guidelines, methods and procedures were laid out along with sufficient risk
   assessment. Procurement compliance was considered to be moderately satisfactory due to the extended
   delays that were caused by the complex coordination mechanisms within the government and its agencies.
   This led to delayed decision making and slow procurement process. The procurement specialist hired by
   the project implementing agency has insufficient experience in procurement. As the ICR (p.33) reports,
   most of the procurement packages could not be finalized according to the schedule because of delayed
   and inaccurate procurement advice. The procurement was also adversely affected during the selection of
   the project implementing agency following the dissolution of LGUGC by its board of directors in December
   2019.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Simplification of project design based on past experience can lead to a more effective
approach. According to the project documents, simplification of project design is one of the
important lessons to be learnt from the project. The efforts to mainstream photovoltaic were further
bolstered by an approved regulatory framework with a simple yet effective design—fixed monthly
tariffs to customers, sustainable revenue flow to service providers for operational support and a

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Access to Sustainable Energy Project (P153268)



design focus on the provision of services which ranges from efficient appliances to radios and fans—
which is derived from global experience through the World Bank. Some of these elements of project
design are visible in the ASEP project but they are component specific and does not necessarily
diffuse into all areas of the project. As such, greater simplification of project design based on past
WBG experiences could be a very key asset for the project per se.

Implementation of a fee-for-service delivery model for household solar systems can be
critical in achieving off-grid electrification outcomes and ensuring sustainability. The
successful demonstration of the fee-for-service delivery model by electric cooperatives showed that
the sustainability of the solar home systems will be more likely compared to households covering the
initial capital cost and maintenance cost of the systems. The mainstreaming of the fee-for-service
delivery model within Philippines is evidenced by the adoption of this model for the full off-grid
electrification in remote areas by the host government. According to the ICR (page 37), the model
ensured strong ownership from the electric cooperatives, adequate subsidies and tariffs along with
pre-installed PPMs to ensure periodic cash flow. It also incentivized the ECs to use SHS for their off-
grid electrification projects with provision of grants for initial capital costs and maintenance of SHS in
key areas. These interventions helped to ensure successful mainstreaming of the fee-for service
delivery model.

Insufficient assessment of legal frameworks can adversely affect the achievement of project
results. The pre-paid metering component of the project was dropped due to regulatory and
ownership constraints. The possibility that the households could switch back to post-paid meters
after a six-month trial of the pre-paid meters (allowed by law) was not identified at appraisal. The
installation of the pre-paid meters was expected to contribute to the financial viability of the electric
cooperatives that would have expected to provide them funds to adequately operate and maintain
the on-grid and off-grid electricity infrastructure.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is fairly detailed and candid in presenting the project’s shortcomings in design and implementation.
The report is internally consistent and follows the majority of the Bank guidance. The narrative is sufficiently
evaluative rather than descriptive. The quality of evidence and analysis is reasonably fair. The ICR provides
adequate evidence to support the achievement of project results. Economic analysis is clearly presented. While
the ICR’s focus is on the achievement of project outputs, because of the limitations of the results framework,
the report makes a genuine attempt to provide evidence for the achievement of the project outcomes related to
the successful demonstration of the fee-for-service electricity supply model and the development of solar power
plants by electric cooperatives. The section on lessons could have included more factual details related to the
issues pertaining to partial implementation of the RNS component and the dropping of the PPM component.




                                                                                                      Page 15 of 16
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Access to Sustainable Energy Project (P153268)




a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                Page 16 of 16
