     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Uttarakhand Disasater Recovery Project (P146653)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024097

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P146653                                     Uttarakhand Disasater Recovery Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                       Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-89210,IDA-53130                        31-Dec-2017                                        319,122,920.46

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Oct-2013                                 30-Sep-2023

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           250,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            338,325,131.19                                               0.00

 Actual                                        319,122,920.46                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero        Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 22) the
   Project Development Objective (PDO) of this Uttarakhand Disaster Recovery Project was "to restore housing,
   rural connectivity and build the resilience of communities in Uttarakhand and increase the technical capacity
   of the State entities to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible crisis or emergency."

   The PDO may be parsed in the following manner:


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Uttarakhand Disasater Recovery Project (P146653)



            To restore housing in Uttarakhand
            To restore rural connectivity in Uttarakhand
            To build the resilience of communities in Uttarakhand
            To increase the technical capacity of the State entities to respond promptly and effectively to an
             eligible crisis or emergency.

   However, this review will assess project performance against the following two objectives parsed out from the
   above PDO statement since the reconstruction of the houses and the restoration of rural connectivity were in
   aid of establishing the resilience of the community in Uttarakhand, indicating that the PDO was to build the
   resilience of the community:

          To restore housing and rural connectivity in the affected areas to build the resilience of communities in
           Uttarakhand.
          To increase the technical capacity of the State entities to respond to an eligible crisis or emergency.

   According to the PDO as stated in the FA, housing and connectivity were to build the resilience of the
   community. The ICR highlighted this explanation in justifying the lack of outcome indicators for the objective
   “to build resilience of communities in Uttarakhand” (ICR, paragraphs 31 and 32). The indicators noted in
   support of this objective were drawn from the outcomes associated with the restructured housing and restored
   connectivity in the area. Hence, the two objectives above sufficiently capture the essence of the PDO stated
   in the FA.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  21-Feb-2019

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Resilient Infrastructure Reconstruction: (US$31 million at appraisal, US$30 million actual) This
   component was to finance two subcomponents: The first was Resilient Permanent Housing to finance the
   construction of around 2,500 multi-disaster resilient permanent houses. Houses to be built fell under three
   categories; (i) those constructed on the land with title deeds and safe for construction; (ii) clustered houses
   for households who lost both houses and land due to the disaster on land available within the village area;
   and (iii) clustered houses relocated to a new area for those who lost both houses and land due to the
   disaster. The government was to provide the land for this third category of clustered house to be developed
   with basic amenities like school buildings, primary health, and community centers, etc. The second
   subcomponent was Resilient Public Buildings to finance the reconstruction and restoration of partially or


                                                                                                       Page 2 of 25
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Uttarakhand Disasater Recovery Project (P146653)



fully damaged structures, equipment and furnishing in public buildings, such as the Panchayati Raj
Institution (PRI), Block and District offices, and other technical education institutes.

2. Rural Road Connectivity: (US$155 million at appraisal, US$88 million in Additional Financing (AF,
consisting of US$70.4 million from IBRD and US$17.6 million in government contributions) was added for a
total of US$243 million; US$207.9 million actual consisting of US$151.6 million from the original credit and
US$56.3 million from the AF consisting of US$45.1 from IBRD and US$11.2 million in
government contributions). This component was to finance the restoration of the connectivity lost due to the
disaster by reconstructing damaged roads and bridges including village roads, Other District Roads (ODRs,
or the link roads between Village Roads and Major District Roads or MDRs), bridle roads and bridges in
accordance with the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) standards. This subcomponent was to
also finance the construction of new bridges and drainage works, retaining walls, breast walls and other
structures to prevent landslides, and minor realignments. Bridle path, or bridleway, equestrian trail, horse
riding path, ride, bridle road, or horse trail, is a trail or a thoroughfare used by people riding on horses. Trails
originally created for use by horses now serve a wider range of users, including equestrians, hikers, cyclists,
and other pedestrians.

3. Technical Assistance and Capacity Building for Disaster Risk Management: (US$38 million at
appraisal, AF added US$20 million (consisting of US$16 million from IBRD and US$4 million from the
government) for a total of US$58 million; US$33 million actual consisting of US$5 million from the original
credit and US$28.5 million from the AF( consisting of US$22.8 million from IBRD and US$5.7 million in
government contributions). This component was to finance the following seven subcomponents to enhance
the capacity of the Uttarakhand Space Applications Centre (USAC): (i) Multi-hazard Risk Assessment,
Modeling and Capacity Enhancement of Uttarakhand Space Applications Centre (USAC); (ii) a Decision
Support System (DSS), an integrated geo-spatial system that use information from multiple sources to
provide access to user-friendly information; (iii) a river morphology study; (iv) a slope stabilization study; (v)
enhance the Uttarakhand State Disaster Management Authority (USDMA) by conducting training programs
and regular drills for the emergency operations center staff and Disaster Management Officers at the District
and State levels; (vi) establish a hydro-meteorological network and early warning system; and (vii) enhance
emergency response capabilities. The AF was to finance two more subcomponents - first, the construction
of a training facility for disaster risk response personnel and second, specialized training equipment on
disaster risk management.

4. Financing Disaster Response Expenses: (US$12 million at appraisal, US$8.7 million actual) This
component was to retroactively finance eligible expenses that the state had incurred in the immediate post-
disaster response period, such as fuel for helicopter rescue missions, hiring of heavy equipment for clearing
of roads, etc.

5. Implementation Support: (US$14 million at appraisal, AF added US$12 million (consisting of US$9.6
million from IBRD and US$2.4 million from the government), for a total of US$26 million; US$29.6 million
from the original credit and US$16.4 million from the AF (consisting of US$13.1 million from IBRD and
US$3.3 million from government contributions), for a total of US$46 million actual) This component was
added to finance costs associated with the operations of the Project Management Unit (PMU) and the
respective Project Implementation Units (PIUs) including consultancy costs for project preparation and
supervision, training, and knowledge exchange programs.

6. Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC): (US$0 million at appraisal, the September
2021 restructuring provided US$10 million and an additional US$6.3 million for a total of US$16.28 million,


                                                                                                      Page 3 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Uttarakhand Disasater Recovery Project (P146653)



  US$13 million from IBRD, actual) This component was to finance the emergency response to a disaster
  reallocating uncommitted funds from other components above.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The original total project cost was US$250 million. Another US$96 million was added as
  additional financing (AF) for a total of US$346 million. At closing, a total of US$319.1 million was disbursed
  consisting of US$224.9 million in credits and US$94.2 million in loans. The balance of US$19.21 million
  was cancelled consisting of the remaining undisbursed balance of SDR 4.4 million from the original credit
  and US$1.5 million from the loan meant for CERC due to savings from exchange rate gains. According to
  the Task Team, the two denominations of the balances is more accurate than denominating the unused
  balance of the project in US$ because of an unclear applicable exchange rate when the original IDA credit
  closed.

  Financing: There were two sources of financing for the project - the International Development Association
  (IDA) provided credits of US$250 million. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
  (IBRD) provided the Additional Financing (AF) of US$96 million loan including US$0.24 million in front end
  fees.

  Borrower Contribution: The government did not contribute to the original project cost but committed
  US$24 million and disbursed US$20.2 as part of its contributions to the AF (ICR, Annex 3).

  Dates: The project was approved on October 25, 2013 and made effective on February 7, 2014. The Mid
  Term Review (MTR) was conducted on November 16, 2015. The project was originally scheduled to close
  on December 31, 2017 but the first restructuring (see below) extended the closing date of the original credit
  by 18 months. The original credit closed on June 30, 2019. The AF was approved on February 21, 2019
  and became effective on April 29, 2019. The original closing date for this AF was March 31, 2022. After the
  following six level 2 restructurings and one Additional Financing (AF) the project closed on September 30,
  2023. The two extensions total 36 months and consisted of the first 18-month extension for the original
  credit and a second 18-month extension for the AF. The restructurings were as follows:

        On June 23, 2017, to extend the project closing date by 18 months from December 31, 2017 to June
         30, 2019 due to (i) infrastructure redesign to improved resilient standards, leading to procurement
         delays; (ii) slowed construction pace from weather and field conditions; and (iii) delays in
         establishing capacity to take on the studies under the technical assistance and capacity building
         component. The credit was closed on June 30, 2019.The undisbursed credit of SDR 4.4 million was
         cancelled on October 31, 2019.
        On February 21, 2019 to provide US$96 million from IBRD in Additional Financing. The AF provided
         additional resources to the following components also noted above: rural roads connectivity,
         technical assistance for capacity building; project implementation support, and contingency
         emergency support.
        On October 31, 2019 the balance of the original credit, SDR 4.4 million was cancelled.
        On November 14, 2019 to update the original results framework that was informed by the August
         2013 rapid damage and needs assessment. Scope and costs were to be finalized during
         implementation. The AF adopted the unrevised results framework with the intention of issuing this
         restructuring paper to make the following changes: adding PDO level indicators for AF-funded


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 25
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Uttarakhand Disasater Recovery Project (P146653)



       activities; replacing some indicators with more accurate ones; and modifying targets of some outputs
       (see Section 4 Efficacy below for more details).
      On October 6, 2020 to finance CERC to augment the ambulance network, procure medical
       equipment and consumables, strengthen medical labs, and enhance human resources capacity for
       COVID-19 emergency response. This restructuring made the following changes to the components,
       costs, targets and output indicators in the results framework, and institutional arrangements:
            o Reduced the targets for the following outputs (i) the number of bridle bridges restored from
                88 to 79; and (ii) the number of restored or built road protection works from 15 to 9. The
                reduced targets were to accommodate the financing of CERC. These targets were to capture
                the completed activities financed under the original credit. The reduced targets were based
                on current commitments, implementation progress, cost variations due to COVID-19
                restrictions, and to cover the liabilities of completed investments under the original credit.
            o Added intermediate results indicators to capture the customized training for all CERC related
                vehicles and equipment; availability of gender sensitive training materials; and the
                construction of the USDMA HQ and EOC building
            o US$10 million of the AF portion of the costs from the following components were reallocated
                to finance CERC: (i) components 1 and 4 above remained unchanged because these were
                completed under the original credit; (ii) component 2 was decreased from US$62.9 million to
                US$50.32 million; (iii) component 3 was decreased from US$33 million to US$24.4 million;
                and (iv) component 5 was reduced from US$11.6 million to US$9.28 million.
            o A Project Implementing Unit (PIU) was created in the Department of Health to
                implement CERC-related activities (see Section 5 Administrative and Operational Efficiency
                below)
      On December 21, 2021 to reallocate an additional US$6.28 million to CERC, reduce the allocation
       for component 2 by US$1.93 million and reduce the target of road protection works (from 9 to 8);
       reduce the allocation for component 3 by US$5.8 million (due to cost variations in training
       needs) and add US$1.45 million to component 5 for added supervision costs brought by extended
       contract periods. A new outcome indicator to capture CERC activities (average monthly beneficiaries
       of CERC-procured equipment) was added; and reduced the target for the share of women working
       at road construction sites (from 10 to 8 percent) because COVID-19 led women migrant labor to
       return to their villages. The project closing date was extended by 12 months from March 31, 2022 to
       March 31, 2023 due to implementation delays caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
      On March 28, 2023 to extend the project closing date by 6 months from March 31, 2023 to
       September 30, 2023 to finalize 7 bridge contracts, the USDMA HQ building contract, and procure 1
       additional MRI machine under CERC. International shipping delays for specialized material for the
       USDMA building during the COVID-19 pandemic and an unforeseen rise in steel prices for
       bridges delayed the finalization of the works. Exchange rate gains resulted in savings to finance an
       additional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) machine. The Project Management Unit (PMU)
       adopted the following measures to ensure the completion of the pending works by September
       2023:(i) enhanced coordination mechanisms with contractors including mobilization of additional
       capacity and working in multiple shifts as required; (ii) enhanced monitoring of construction progress
       via closed-circuit television (CCTV), drones, and digital monitoring system; (iii) deployment of
       additional technical resources to the relevant Project Implementation Units (PIUs) to oversee the
       works; (iv) development of weekly progress targets with contractors; and (v) development of supply
       chain contingency plans.
      On September 22, 2023 to cancel US$1.5 million from CERC. The additional MRI machine
       envisioned to be procured could not be completed before project closure.


                                                                                                 Page 5 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Uttarakhand Disasater Recovery Project (P146653)



   Split Rating: A split rating of the outcome will apply. While the guidelines indicate that “if Additional
   Financing expanded the scope of the project and the targets related to the increased scope were met, the
   project would be assessed on the revised targets" (Guidelines, p. 46); targets of output indicators were
   reduced to accommodate the financing of the CERC. As a result, a split rating of the outcome will apply.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context: The State of Uttarakhand is a Himalayan region mountain state that is regularly affected by flash
floods, landslides, wildfires, glacier lake outbursts, and earthquakes. 13 districts clustered in two regions,
Kumaon and Garhwal, cover a total area of 53,484 sq. km. Agriculture and tourism are its economic drivers.
The state has some of the most important pilgrimage centers known as the “Char-Dham,” the Gangotri,
Yamunotri, Kedarnath, and Badrinath. Most of the state’s landmass falls under Seismic Zone IV or V, the
highest seismic risk zones of the country, and the state has had 11 major earthquakes over the last
century. Uttarakhand’s disaster vulnerability is further exacerbated by climate change. Torrential rainfall, a
glacial lake outburst, and ensuing floods in June 2013, destroyed roads, bridges, and houses. The 2013
floods devastated infrastructure and livelihoods in the state with losses estimated to reach 4–5 percent of
the state gross domestic product. The death toll was over 6,000 and another 300,000 pilgrims and tourists
were trapped in the valleys leading to three of the four Char Dham pilgrimage sites. More than 110,000
stranded pilgrims were rescued, but the government faced an altered topography, vanished road networks,
shifting river courses, and a constant threat of landslides. Uttarakhand lacked a holistic approach that
integrated risk reduction into critical infrastructure planning. For example, disaster-related interruptions in
the transport infrastructure cut off communities from markets, schools, medical facilities, and other
economic opportunities and essential services. Uttarakhand’s mountainous topography is challenging to a
timely emergency response and reconstruction. To ensure all-weather connectivity, new resilient bridges
were required to link locations. Existing bridges required upgrades. Slope stabilization was needed at
critical locations to reduce the risk and impact of landslides and to improve safety. Gaps remained in the
state’s emergency preparedness. USDMA, the agency coordinating all DRM matters, worked closely with
other relevant departments, including the State Disaster Response Force (SDRF, relief and rescue
operations), the Uttarakhand Fire and Emergency Services (UFES, first responder for small-scale disaster),
and the Forest Department (FD, forest fire management). USDMA’s coordinating role needed to be
strengthened through capacity building, enhanced multi-stakeholder Standard Operating Procedures
(SOPs), and mandated responsibilities. Agencies lacked the capacity, infrastructure, training facilities,
equipment, and technology to fulfill their functions effectively across the entire state.

Country and State Plans: The government of India adopted the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction (2015–2030) in March 2015, advocating for an integrated and holistic approach to disaster
management that encompassed prevention, mitigation, preparedness, response, recovery, and
rehabilitation. The national government set up a Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure (CDRI) to
enhance infrastructure resilience to climate and disaster risks for sustainable development. The
government of Uttarakhand adopted a similar vision and priorities in its National Disaster Management Plan
(2016). Uttarakhand established the State Disaster Management Authority (USDMA) under the 2005
Disaster Management Act and creating state, district, and village disaster risk management (DRM) plans.
The 2014 Uttarakhand Action Plan on Climate Change is the state’s key climate change policy document,
presenting climate-resilient development pathways for key sectors. The PDO was relevant to both the

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 25
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Uttarakhand Disasater Recovery Project (P146653)



state's and the national plans by combining disaster recovery efforts with long-term resilience and capacity-
building initiatives. The state launched initiatives for adaptation and resilience, creating the Uttarakhand
State Disaster Management Authority (USDMA), and mandating the preparation of disaster risk
management (DRM) plans across state, district, and village levels.

World Bank Country Partnership Framework: The PDO was relevant to the World Bank Group’s
Country Partnership Framework for India (FY18–22). Together with the October 23, 2023 Performance and
Learning Review this CPF was extended to FY 25. The PDO aligned with the CPF Focus Area 1: Promoting
Resource-Efficient Growth, to enhance the welfare of rural populations (Objective 1.1), and (Objective 1.5):
to improve disaster risk management by supporting resilient infrastructure and state DRM institutions. The
PDO was to strengthen the state's analytical and technical capabilities by prioritizing state-of-the-art tools
including those that provide real-time support for emergency response. The livability of affected districts
was enhanced by rehabilitated roads and bridges, disaster resilient buildings. The PDO was also relevant to
the CPF Focus Area 2: Enhancing Competitiveness and Enabling Job Creation, by enhancing connectivity
and the resilience of transport infrastructure to Improve connectivity and logistics by restoring and
upgrading roads and bridges damaged by the disaster. (Objective 2.3) and further aligned with promoting
inclusive local approaches in risk management.

World Bank Experience in the Country, in the State, and in the Sector: The World Bank financed or co-
financed a number of projects in Uttarakhand: (i) the Uttarakhand Rural Water Supply and Sanitation
Project (UKRWSSP) that covered all 13 districts to improve the effectiveness of rural water supply and
sanitation services; (ii) the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) Rural Roads Project where the
World Bank co-financed a national government program to improve/establish rural roads that would
connect villages to main road networks to facilitate access to markets and services; (iii) the Biodiversity
Conservation and Rural Livelihoods Project to develop and promote new conservation models for
mainstreaming biodiversity conservation in the Askot Wildlife Sanctuary Landscape, Pithoragarh District;
(iv) the Uttarakhand Decentralized Watershed Development Project (Phases I and II) to increase the
efficiency of natural resource use and productivity of rainfed agriculture of participating communities in
selected micro watersheds; (v) the Uttarakhand Climate Responsive Rainfed Farming Project to make
mountain farming emission competitive and profitable in selected micro-watershed. These experiences plus
the World Bank’s global experience in disaster risk reduction and recovery gives the World Bank a foothold
to partner in DRM and climate adaptation in Uttarakhand.

The PDO was pitched at an appropriate level to address the development problems caused by the 2013
floods and the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic. It adequately focused on building the resilience of the community
and state institutions to respond to frequent threats from natural hazards.

The relevance of the objective is rated High.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)



                                                                                                        Page 7 of 25
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Uttarakhand Disasater Recovery Project (P146653)


EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To restore housing and rural connectivity to build resilience of communities in Uttarakhand.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change: The PDO could have been better stated to show how the components would lead to the
               outcome of increased resilience rather than appearing to have been sub-objectives by themselves - i.e., to
               reconstruct housing, or to restore connectivity. Three components were to contribute to achieving the
               objective of building resilience in communities in Uttarakhand. The first would reconstruct houses and public
               buildings in the affected communities in compliance with disaster resilient standards to reduce further
               vulnerability of the residents. The second would reconstruct damaged roads and bridges and restore the
               connectivity of the road network in compliance with disaster resilient standards. This would restore access to
               markets and provide opportunities for overall economic development and access to basic services such as
               health and education services.

               Inputs: were to include the financing for the reconstruction of the damaged housing units, public buildings,
               and the damaged roads and bridges and provision of training in the use of instruments to make the physical
               infrastructure investments less prone to natural hazards. The Task Team added that inputs were to include
               training for the owner driven housing reconstruction on disaster resilience features of the structures,
               awareness raising on grievance redress, advantages of female homeownership, etc.

               Outputs were to include the reconstructed disaster resilient housing units and public buildings, reconstructed
               or new roads and bridges, road protection works including drainage works, retaining walls, breast walls and
               other structures to prevent landslides, and minor realignments. Roads referred to “other district roads,” village
               roads or bridle roads. Trails originally created for use by horses now serve a wider range of users, including
               equestrians, hikers, cyclists, and other pedestrians. Reconstructed or newly built rural roads were to follow
               the standards of the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY), a government of India poverty reduction
               strategy designed to sustainably manage the roads network by inter-connecting rural roads using high and
               uniform technical and management standards.

               Outcome: was to be the reduced vulnerability of the beneficiaries since their reconstructed housing units and
               public buildings were now built according to disaster resilient standards. The indicator in the results
               framework used the share of restored houses that were multi-hazard resilient, and the share of target villages
               with restored connectivity. Most of the outcome indicators are at an intermediate or output level rather than
               measuring results at outcome level, which is what would be expected for an emergency relief project. The
               ICR acknowledged the lack of outcome indicators in building community resilience.

               Critical Assumptions: This was an emergency operation. The August 2013 joint rapid damage and needs
               assessment informed the project scope and original targets. The scope was to be finalized during
               implementation, including updating of costs and targets. The TOC identified two critical assumptions that, if
               realized, were to enhance the achievement of the objective. One was that the state government would set up
               qualified Project Implementation Units (PIUs); and the second was that the state government would allocate
               sufficient operation and maintenance (O&M) resources to maintain the physical investments made under the
               project.




                                                                                                                  Page 8 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Uttarakhand Disasater Recovery Project (P146653)



Overall, the inputs and outputs were sufficient to result in the outcomes identified under the results
framework.

OUTPUTS:

Under restoring the housing and public buildings destroyed by the disaster:

      2,382 disaster resilient housing units were reconstructed (original target 2,500 units, target
       substantially achieved).
      26 public buildings were reconstructed (original target was 26, target achieved). These buildings
       included public schools, police stations, fire stations, food warehouses, a permanent state of the art
       facility for training the staff of the State Disaster Response Force (SDRF) and a disaster resilient
       headquarters for the Uttarakhand State Disaster Management Authority (USDMA). Retrofitted the
       educational buildings.

Under restoring rural connectivity of communities in Uttarakhand

      1,572 km of damaged village/rural roads were restored, meeting the PMGSY standards (original target
       3,600 km, target was not achieved).
      81 bridle bridges were restored (original target was 140, target not achieved).
      No bridle roads were completed under the project (original target was 400 km, not achieved). This
       was later dropped in the 2019 AF (see below). The Task Team clarified that the government
       completed all 400 km of bridle roads using their own resources.
      8 road protection works in selected critical slopes were constructed to protect and improve
       connectivity (original target was 15, target was not achieved.

OUTCOME:

Under restoring the housing and public buildings destroyed by the disaster:

      95.30 percent of the multi-hazard resilient housing units were constructed (baseline 0, original target
       100 percent, almost achieved).
      A cumulative total of all beneficiaries under the components of this objective were 2,382 households;
       1,211 villages with a cumulative population of 747,614.

Under restoring rural connectivity of communities in Uttarakhand

      100 percent of affected villages (original target was 823 villages) had restored connectivity (baseline
       0, original target 100 percent, original target achieved. The Task Team clarified that the original 100
       percent target applied to restoring the connectivity of the 823 villages and that the original target was
       indeed justified after outputs were achieved within 3-4 months of reporting). The State adopted the
       improved road design standards including protection infrastructure and safety measures for all its
       roads.
      9.5 percent of the labor force that worked at construction sites were women, exceeding the original
       target of 8 percent, from a baseline of 5 percent. This indicator was reported as an intermediate or
       output indicator rather than an outcome indicator.


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Uttarakhand Disasater Recovery Project (P146653)




      Unfortunately, no long-term survey was carried out to measure the number of direct and indirect
       beneficiaries.

The following outcomes were reported but were not part of the results framework and had no targets.

      About 2 million people benefited from increased resilience. Evidence cited decreased vulnerabilities of
       the infrastructure after the 2013 floods – after the 2015 flash floods, 2017 monsoon induced floods,
       2019 cloudbursts and flash floods, and the 2023 Rishiganga disaster. Subsequent disasters also did
       not damage the houses completed in 2017
      The ICR reported that communities were engaged across all components to foster an understanding
       and awareness of preparedness. There was no evidence to support this claim. The ICR
       acknowledged the lack of outcome indicators.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve the first original objective is rated Modest. The targets for the
rural connectivity aspects i.e., roads and bridle bridges restored were partially achieved, and no bridle roads
were constructed under the project. Unfortunately, no long-term survey was carried out to measure the
number of direct and indirect beneficiaries of increased rural connectivity. The targets for the outcome
indicators were almost achieved but there remained moderate shortcomings because not all relevant
outcomes were captured by these indicators. Most of the indicators were at an intermediate or output
level. The ICR acknowledged the lack of outcome indicators and presented instead other information to serve
as arguments in favor of heightened community resilience, albeit not included in the results framework.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The objective was not revised.

Revised Rationale
The November 2019 AF added resources to restore the connectivity of the rural roads in the target
community. The reconstruction of bridle roads was dropped because the government decided to finance the
village roads and bridle roads with its own resources since these were simpler to implement and had lower
costs. AF reduced the target for reconstructing damaged village or rural roads to finance Other District Roads
(ODR) because ODRs were more technically complex, and more expensive. Targets were revised.

Revised Theory of Change: The TOC was not revised. AF provided additional inputs for the rural roads to
improve the achievement of restoring the connectivity of the target communities, The number of targeted
villages increased from 823 to 1,203 villages. The first component (housing reconstruction) had been
completed and was not revised in terms of inputs and outputs.

Revised Inputs: Additional financing was provided for rural roads.




                                                                                                  Page 10 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Uttarakhand Disasater Recovery Project (P146653)



Revised Outputs: The reconstruction of bridle roads and some village roads were dropped and replaced by
reconstructing ODRs that linked village roads to Major District Roads (MDRs), State Highways (SH), and/or
National Highways (NH).

Revised Outcome: The target for restored connectivity remained at 100 percent. No changes were made to
housing reconstruction since these were completed prior to the AF.

The critical assumptions were unchanged

REVISED OUTPUTS:

Under restoring rural connectivity of communities in Uttarakhand

      1,572 km of damaged village/rural roads were restored, meeting the PMGSY standards (revised target
         1,572 km, revised target achieved).
      675 km of damaged ODRs were reconstructed. According to the Task Team, the AF target was 675.
         The target was achieved.
        81 bridle bridges were restored (later redefined to include newly built or reconstructed bridle bridges,
         revised target was 88, with 24 financed under the original credit and 64 under the AF, then further
         revised to 79) The revised target was exceeded.
        5 riverbank protection works were constructed in selected stretches to reduce the risk of riverbank
         erosions and connectivity loss (target under the AF was 5, target achieved).
        8 road protection works in selected critical slopes were constructed to protect and improve
         connectivity (revised target was 9, further revised to 8, target achieved).
        Two pilot bio engineering protection measures for slope stabilization were completed, to replace the
         reduced target for road protection works. According to the Task Team, the original target was
         undefined because the AF results framework did not include this output. Implementation added this
         output as an innovative protection measure separate from the eight road protection measures.

REVISED OUTCOMES: No revised outcomes were reported although most of the output target indicators
were achieved or almost achieved.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this first revised objective, after the AF is rated Substantial, with
moderate shortcomings. The revised targets for rural connectivity were achieved. Most of the target outcome
indicators were sufficient to attribute the achievement of the PDO according to the TOC although not all the
indicators were at the outcome level (see Section 9 M&E below).



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase the technical capacity of the State entities to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible crisis
or emergency.

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Uttarakhand Disasater Recovery Project (P146653)




Rationale
Theory of Change: The activities under this objective would enhance the capabilities of government entities
such as the Uttarakhand Space Applications Centre (USAC) to plan and implement risk assessment in risk
mitigation and response. A Decision Support System (DSS) was to be established. A Slope Stabilization
Study was to be prepared. A multi-hazard risk assessment technical advisory group was to be financed and
high-resolution satellite data was to be acquired and processed. A hydro-meteorological network and Early
Warning Systems (EWS) were to be developed and implemented after reviewing the existing capabilities at
the State and National levels. The third component, Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC),
was to be triggered to provide the means to efficiently recover from a disaster.

Inputs consisted of financing of studies and the training of staff to enhance the capacity of the Uttarakhand
Space Applications Centre (USAC) to conduct a multi-hazard risk assessment, and conduct modeling. Other
inputs included training of trainers courses, training programs, and regular drills for the emergency operations
center staff and Disaster Management Officers at the District and State levels. Inputs under CERC were to
include the financing of equipment and training in the use of tools and equipment procured.

Outputs were to include (i) a framework of multi-hazard risk assessment models; (ii) a hazard and loss
database; (iii); and (iv) tools for the optimal use of risk information. Other outputs were to include a multi-
hazard risk assessment technical advisory group, high-resolution satellite data, a GIS database, and other
analytical tools for use by USAC. Other outputs were to be a DSS, an integrated user-friendly geo-spatial
system, a river morphology study, a slope stabilization study, including small demonstrative works to
introduce appropriate slope stabilization technology. Other outputs were the institutional organization of the
USDMA, technical enhancement of the DMMC facilities. Specialized training equipment on disaster risk
management included collapsed structures, medical first response, mountaineering and high altitude and
water search and rescue. Outputs under the CERC were to include intensive care unit beds, test kits, and
personal protective equipment.

Outcomes were to be the enhanced preparedness capacity of the staff of the USAC, the USDMA, and the
technical advisory group. Evidence was to be provided by the number of departments or government entities
that used the data generated by USDMA effectively.

Critical Assumption: A critical assumption was that the state government agencies and stakeholders
would utilize the analytical work generated by the project toward the resilience agenda and to execute future
projects. The government noted that it adopted the standards for the roads and bridges and will apply them to
all future roads and bridges.

Overall, the inputs were sufficient to result in the expected outputs. However, the link between outputs
and outcomes were less clear as identified under the results framework.

OUTPUTS:

      The Integrated Geospatial Platform for Disaster Risk Management (IGPDRM) was established as a
       simplified DSS to provide real-time risk monitoring, assist in effective disaster response, and facilitate
       multi-agency collaboration. This GIS database and analytical tools were installed in USAC (the original
       target was 100 percent; this was not measured and latest replaced by Yes/No which was achieved).
      River morphology study and slope stabilization study were completed as targeted.
      Completed all planned multi-hazard assessments, original target 100 percent, target achieved.

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Uttarakhand Disasater Recovery Project (P146653)




      Weather station, river gauge stations, other hydro-met recording and forecasting equipment were
       installed, as targeted.
      Sets of emergency search and rescue equipment were procured as targeted.

OUTCOMES:

      18 Departments were reported to effectively use USDA information (baseline 0, original target 7,
       target exceeded), The enhanced capacity of the agencies for disaster risk management were noted
       to have resulted in managing their respective response to the various disasters (ICR, Annex 6, Table
       6.4). For example, data informed disaster response such as in Arakot 2019, the COVID-19 pandemic,
       Raini 2021, and heavy rains in Kumaon 2022. The Transport Department used DRDB data to reroute
       traffic in cases of blocked roads. During the COVID-19 pandemic the DRDA data
       helped mark different containment zones. The population and various nearby emergency assets
       mapped in the DRA platform facilitated response planning during the pandemic.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial. The Annex provided
numerous examples of how the different departments used their improved capacity to respond to crisis,
including COVID-19.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To increase the technical capacity of the State entities to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible crisis
or emergency. The objective was not changed.

Revised Rationale
Revised Theory of Change: The TOC was unchanged. The 2019 AF provided additional resources for the
technical assistance and capacity building needs for disaster risk management. Departments using USDMA
generated data was increased from the original target of 7 departments to 10 departments. The October 2021
restructuring activated CERC in response to COVID-19 pandemic. Restructuring reallocated resources to
CERC. The December 2021 restructuring acknowledged some cost savings and foreign exchange gains to
finance additional medical equipment. CERC was triggered in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.

Revised Inputs: AF added US$16 million to support additional training for the State Disaster Response
Force (SDRF). In addition, funds were used to finance the construction of the Uttarakhand State Disaster
Management Authority (USDMA) headquarters and the Emergency Operations Center (EOC)
building. Financing was reallocated to CERC from components 2 under this objective and component 5 of the
second objective below. Inputs also included training in the use of the equipment procured under CERC.

Revised Outputs: The 2019 AF revised the indicator regarding the installation of the GIS database and
analytical tools in USAC with a Yes/No target. The buildings housing the headquarters of the USDMA, and
the Emergency Operations Training Center were added.


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Uttarakhand Disasater Recovery Project (P146653)



Revised Critical Assumptions: The critical assumption above was unchanged.

REVISED OUTPUTS:

     Constructed a new SDRF training facility, the USDMA HQ, and the Emergency Operations Training
       Center as targeted.
     The GIS database and analytical tools were installed in USAC. The 2019 AF revised the indicator with
      a Yes/No target). The revised target was achieved.
     10 female trainees participated in the training conducted by SDRF, achieving the target of 100
      percent.
     Gender sensitive training modules were developed and delivered as targeted.

Under CERC:

     The state’s response to COVID-19 was significantly bolstered by the CERC which was activated in
      response to the COVID-19 pandemic at the Government’s behest aimed at acquiring intensive care
      unit beds, test kits, personal protective equipment.
     40 ambulances, four CT scan machines, equipment for labs, lab technicians, and 1,650 fowler beds
      were procured, all as targeted.
     The December 2021 restructuring added another CT machine, three MRI machines, a digital radiology
      system, and 650 more fowler beds.
     Conducted customized training in the use of the CERC-financed machinery and equipment,
      achieving target.

REVISED OUTCOMES:

     18 Departments used USDA information (baseline 0, revised target 10, target exceeded).
     The 2019 AF noted that an external evaluation was to assess the ability of the departments to make
       use of the information, but he ICR reported that no assessment was done (ICR, paragraph 31).

Under CERC:

     On average, 20,488 people benefited monthly from the use of CERC procured equipment, (the
       original target was an average of 15,000 monthly beneficiaries). The ICR notes that the CERC
       surpassed its beneficiary goal, assisting over 600,000 individuals between October 2020 and
       September 2021. The target was exceeded.

The following were reported but were not part of the results framework and had no targets.

     The USDMA and the District Disaster Management Authority used risk data to increase resilience
       evident in their response to the 2019 and 2023 disasters and the COVID-19 pandemic.
     The World Bank’s 2021 Resilience Rating System rated this project “A minus." This meant that
       transformational activities such as the establishment and equipping of USDMA and the SDRF set the
       foundation for increasing disaster management and resilience in the future.




                                                                                             Page 14 of 25
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Uttarakhand Disasater Recovery Project (P146653)



                              Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this first revised objective, after the AF is rated Substantial. Most
                              of the target outcome indicators were sufficient to attribute the achievement of the PDO according to the TOC
                              although not all the indicators were at the outcome level (see Section 9 M&E below). Cases were presented
                              to justify how relevant agencies used the data generated by USDMA to achieve this objective. The CERC
                              was triggered to respond to the COVID-19 emergency and achieved the desired results.



                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            ORIGINAL OVERALL EFFICACY: The overall efficacy of the project to achieve the original PDOs against
                            the original targets is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings. Most of the original target outcome
                            indicators were almost achieved but there remained moderate shortcomings because these were at an
                            intermediate or output level and not all relevant outcomes were captured by these indicators.

                                   For the original objective 1, the efficacy of the project is rated modest because the original target
                                    output indicators especially related to the rural connectivity were not achieved even as the original
                                    outcome indicator was noted to have been achieved using the original number of target communities.
                                   For the original objective 2, efficacy is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings because the
                                    original outcome indicator did not sufficiently address the outcome of the project inputs and outputs to
                                    enhance capacity.

                            The overall efficacy of the project to achieve the first and second objectives using the original targets is rated
                            Substantial with moderate shortcomings..



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            REVISED OVERALL EFFICACY: The revised overall efficacy of the project to achieve the revised first and
                            second objectives are both rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings because of the lack of some
                            relevant outcome indicators to support the achievement of the objectives.

                                   For the first revision of objective 1 to acknowledge the AF, the efficacy of the project to achieve this
                                     first revision is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings. Output and outcome indicators that


                                                                                                                                    Page 15 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Uttarakhand Disasater Recovery Project (P146653)



          were attributed to the inputs and outputs were substantially achieved, though the outcome indicators
          for resilience could have been better defined and measured.
         For the first revision of objective 2, efficacy is rated Substantial because the outcome indicators
          including the beneficiaries of CERC was substantially achieved.

  The overall efficacy of the project to achieve the PDOs against revised targets is rated Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Efficiency: At appraisal, an economic analysis assessed the rate of return of capital
investments under the original project. A similar economic analysis was conducted during the appraisal of the
AF. Investments included disaster-resilient permanent housing, public buildings, and rural roads and bridges.
The analysis considered US$187 million dollars (or about 83 percent) of the original total project costs
and another US$85 million (or 74 percent) of the AF. The average EIRR at AF was 51.8 percent with the NPV
ranging from US$732.2 million to US$1,470.3 million and a benefit cost ratio (BCR) in the range of 10.9 to 18.4
using the discount rates of 10 percent for the rural roads connectivity/agriculture component and 5 percent
for the capacity building/tourism component. The economic efficiency analysis did not include the contingent
emergency expenditure for COVID-19. Benefits from the resilient infrastructure reconstruction included lives
saved from future disasters, quantifiable economic gains or avoided or minimized earnings losses in the tourism
and agriculture sectors from reduced road and bridge closure disruptions. Rural road connectivity was to benefit
the transport of agricultural products to markets and accelerate growth in international and domestic
tourism. Overall, the project maintained a benefit-cost ratio (BCR) in the range of 10.6 to 16.7 at the discount
rates of 10 for the agriculture component and 5 percent for the capacity building/tourism component,
respectively.

At closing, the economic analysis followed both methodologies, the first used at the appraisal of the original
project, which did not include the use of the economic internal rate of return (EIRRs) and net present values
(NPV) of the project; and the second used at the appraisal of the AF. At closing, the average EIRR for the
project was 56.0 percent with the NPV in the range of US$2.2 to US$4.2 billion. The average BCR at the
appraisals was 10.0 for both the original project and the AF. Exchange rate gains led to savings during
implementation and slightly increased the level of economic efficiency at closing.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: The Project Management Unit (PMU) under the Uttarakhand State
Disaster Management Authority (USDMA) implemented this project. The project implementation units (PIU) of
key departments such as the Bridge, Ropeway, Tunnel, and Other Infrastructure Development Corporation of
Uttarakhand Limited (BRIDCUL), and the Public Works Department (PWD) implemented specific activities under
their respective remits. The PMU was also the PIU for sub-components related to capacity building. The project
established a new PIU under the Department of Health to implement CERC. Reliance on seasonal labor, rugged
terrain, and harsh weather in Uttarakhand challenged the pace of implementation but strategic decisions
mitigated these to generate to long-term value and resource efficiency. These decisions included reallocating
resources from less costly materials, narrow, unpaved, steep, and unstable village roads to ODRs. The more

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Uttarakhand Disasater Recovery Project (P146653)



economical, shorter span truss bridges in targeted locations replaced longer span, more costly suspension
bridges. The cumulative 36-month extension of the project period included 18 months due to COVID-19, the
other months to accommodate delayed completion of construction works (see Section 10 Other Issues,
Procurement below). US$19.21 million was cancelled at closing or about 6 percent of total commitments. The
government committed US$24 million in the AF (20 percent of total costs, except for the CERC component) and
disbursed US$20.2 million at closing.

The project's overall efficiency is rated Substantial. Comparing EIRRs at appraisal and closing was not feasible
because the economic efficiency at appraisal only used cost-benefit analysis and not EIRRs.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives is rated High. The efficacy of the project to achieve the first and second objectives
is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings before restructuring and Substantial after restructuring. The
efficiency of the project is rated Substantial. The overall outcome is rated Satisfactory based on the split
rating below:

                                      Original                                  After the 2019 AF
 Relevance of Objectives                                              High
 Efficacy of the Project to achieve
 Objective 1                          Modest                                    Substantial
 Objective 2                          Substantial with moderate shortcomings    Substantial
 Overall Efficacy                     Substantial with moderate shortcomings    Substantial
 Efficiency                                                      Substantial
 Outcome Rating                       Moderately Satisfactory                   Satisfactory
 Value of Outcome Rating                                 4                                 5
 Amount Disbursed (in US$ millions)   144.44                                    319.12-144.44=174.68

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Uttarakhand Disasater Recovery Project (P146653)



Disbursement Rate (in percent)       144.44/319.12 = 45                        174.68/319.12 = .55
Weight Value                         4*0.45 = 1.8                              5*0.55 = 2.74
Total Weights                        1.8                                                  2.74
Overall Outcome                      4.54                                      rounded to 5 Satisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose risks to development outcome:

      Environmental Risk: Exposure to environmental and natural disasters: This is a high risk. The
       region remains vulnerable to natural hazards. The project reconstructed housing units, public
       buildings, roads, and bridges that were designed to withstand or minimize the impact of the threats
       from recurring natural hazards or disasters. The state agencies and communities collaborated on
       the planning of these investments to emphasize community participation in the adoption of resilience
       measures. An institutional framework for disaster risk reduction is in place. A follow-on project would
       mitigate this risk by further strengthening the institutions that deal with disaster resilience.
      Financial Risk: Lack of financing for operations and maintenance (O&M). This is a moderate
       risk. Technological and analytical interventions enhanced the disaster response capacity of state
       institutions including the USDMA and put in place the enabling environment for disaster risk reduction
       in Uttarakhand. These advancements require financing for operations and maintenance including for
       those completed investments in housing and rural connectivity infrastructure. To mitigate this risk,
       the government has agreed to a follow-on operation, U-PREPARE.
      Technical risks: This is a moderate risk. The technologies, tools, and equipment introduced under
       this project would require periodic updating. The follow-on project may include measures to mitigate
       this risk.
      Ownership Risk: Social, including stakeholder support. This is a moderate risk. There is a risk
       that community participation in the various aspects of designing disaster resilient housing units and
       public buildings may not be sustained over time. Strengthening ownership by the communities on
       their roles in disaster resilience may be mitigated by their participation in future projects like the
       follow-on project, the availability of the Grievance Redress Mechanisms required in Bank-financed
       projects, and the continued commitment of the state to raise awareness in disaster risk reduction.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The World Bank Team designed this project as an emergency operation in response to the June 2013
  Uttarakhand floods. The Board approved the project based on the first findings of the multi-sectoral team
  that conducted a joint damage and loss assessment prepared by the World Bank, with the Asian
  Development Bank, and the United Nations. Scope, costs, and targets were to be finalized during

                                                                                                   Page 18 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Uttarakhand Disasater Recovery Project (P146653)



  implementation. The World Bank team designed this project as a collaborative initiative to complement
  the state government 's restoration program and the Asian Development Bank’s Uttarakhand Emergency
  Assistance Project (UEAP). Reconstruction components were distributed among the three entities. An
  Investment Project Financing (IPF) was the right instrument to address the capital needs of
  reconstructing resilient infrastructure. Technical assistance was to enhance capacity. Design included
  retroactive financing of urgent disaster response activities to reopen critical roadways and facilitate
  evacuation. The World Bank team incorporated lessons from other similar World Bank-financed disaster
  response and recovery projects and complemented physical infrastructure replacement investments with
  strengthening capacity and building institutional systems; incorporating standards to make transport
  connectivity infrastructure resilient against future similar events; and enhancing capacities of communities
  to participate in disaster reduction for effective DRM, particularly in the mountainous and hard-to-reach
  areas like Uttarakhand. The World Bank team designed an institutional arrangement to mitigate
  implementation readiness risks and included innovative direct flow of funds. The PMU had overall
  coordination among various departments and agencies. Specific PIUs were created in the respective
  departments to implement housing, roads, and bridges. The Technical Assistance and Capacity Building
  for Disaster Risk Management (TACBDRM) PIU was to focus on strategic aspects of the infrastructure
  investments. Procurement and safeguards training and including capacity building as a project
  component were to mitigate the risks of safeguards compliance and readiness to implement. The design
  included CERC as a standby to mitigate environmental risks and future disasters. The scope was well
  defined and was to be limited to reconstruction, restoring connectivity, and enhancing technical capacity.
  The results framework and M&E design were inadequate to measure post-disaster recovery investments.
  However, only qualitative measures were to provide evidence for community resilience. The Task Team
  clarified that strengthening community participation was limited to addressing the needs of owner-driven
  housing reconstruction process (e.g., local masons trained in safe and disaster resilient construction,
  awareness raising in addressing grievances, and the benefits of female-headed homeownership), but
  these were not measured as part of building resilience. Measuring the resilience of investments and
  those of the target community remained unaddressed in the restructurings or AFs (see Quality of
  Supervision below).

  Overall, the quality of the Bank team's performance at entry is rated Satisfactory with
  minor shortcomings. The inputs and outputs were designed to achieve the objectives. The complex
  capacity needs of the implementing entity were sufficiently addressed. The government committed 20
  percent in counterpart funds for the AF and lessons learned were adapted to the project's design. Not all
  the indicators in the results framework provided evidence of the outcome of the inputs and outputs toward
  the resilience of the infrastructure investments and its impact on beneficiaries (see Section 9 on M&E
  Design below).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team conducted 21 missions over the project period, including virtual ones during the
 COVID-19 pandemic. Task team leaders and key staff changed several times throughout implementation.
 The task team used in-country staff and experienced consultants to deliver training and timely advice to
 government officials as corrective measures to implementation challenges. Adequate inputs in supervision

                                                                                                   Page 19 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Uttarakhand Disasater Recovery Project (P146653)



 and fiduciary aspects were evident in the use of a comprehensive, multi-layered MIS (including advanced
 tools such as CCTV and drones) to identify sources of delays and facilitate decision-making using details
 from various procurement packages. The real time MIS data verified completed works, released payments,
 informed all stakeholders, and led to a completion of the housing component ahead of schedule by May
 2017. The World Bank team reviewed and approved procurement plans, contracts, conducted post
 procurement reviews, and assisted in various technical evaluations to ensure compliance
 with safeguards. Shortcomings were resolved satisfactorily, such as imposing penalties when contractors
 were delayed. Initial reviews of design and Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for roads and bridges,
 and contract management were outsourced to supplement nascent staff capacity. Capacity improved over
 time. The World Bank team facilitated the adherence to updated codes and standards (especially for roads
 and bridges), resilience, and disaster preparedness across sectors and departments. The World Bank
 team emphasized and enabled integration of technology-based solutions and encouraged engaging with
 both national and international specialized agencies. The World Bank team also organized trips to visit
 Kerala and Odisha State Disaster Management Authorities to inform the design of the USDMA. Quality and
 reliability of data were ensured through improved compliance and feedback systems, coupled with targeted
 training for stakeholders. Design fostered gender inclusivity and community engagement. The logistical
 challenges posed by the state’s geography, such as transporting heavy materials to remote areas with
 rugged terrain, a lack of contractor capacity or interest for bids for certain road works, primarily due to the
 project’s complexity, small scale, and remoteness caused delays. The Bank team organized contractors’
 conclaves and workshops in Delhi and Uttarakhand to generate interest. The COVID-19 pandemic and
 subsequent lockdowns slowed operations. Surging international steel prices, labor shortages, shipping
 delays for essential materials, contributed to the delays and led to extensions of the project period. In
 addition, natural disasters like the Rishiganga flooding in February 2021 also called for emergency
 response, required urgent repairs and resources, diverted attention, and further delayed the project.
 A follow-on operation - the Uttarakhand Disaster Preparedness and Resilience Project (U-PREPARE or
 P179749) is in place.

 Overall, the Bank team's performance at supervision is rated Satisfactory with minor shortcoming. Lack of
 outcome indicators to reflect the resilience achieved by the infrastructure investments, and the enhanced
 capacity of stakeholders to respond to disasters and contribute to the resilience of local communities
 indicated a minor shortcoming since this was an emergency recovery project. The ICR acknowledged this
 shortcoming (ICR, paragraph 28). The Bank team missed the opportunity during the various restructurings
 and the AF to address this shortcoming.

 Overall, the Bank performance at entry and at supervision are both rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization



                                                                                                    Page 20 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Uttarakhand Disasater Recovery Project (P146653)



a. M&E Design
 The components - housing and rural connectivity - would contribute to the PDO of building resilience in the
 affected communities and the institutions of the state to respond, reconstruct and recover. The
 identified indicators did not encompass all expected outcomes of the PDO statement. For example, there
 were no outcome indicators to measure improved disaster resilience. The ICR did acknowledge this
 shortcoming - lack of outcome indicator to measure resilience of communities (ICR, paragraph 54).
 Nonetheless, intermediate results indicators did adequately capture their contributions to achieving the
 expected outcomes. These indicators were specific, relevant, measurable, achievable, and time bound.
 Baselines and targets were available for all indicators. The M&E design also included the MIS system that
 provided real time data and used the latest technology to enrich the M&E system in place. Admittedly, the
 institutional location of the M&E system was nascent and still evolving.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Project Management Unit under the USDMA implemented the M&E system as designed using
  advanced GIS-enabled MIS tools, which provided multiple layers of oversight, including a high-level MIS
  dashboard to inform strategic management decisions and numerous localized monitoring modules.
  These included tools designed specifically for compliance with the labor laws, and the technical
  PRIMAVERA platform for public buildings. Both the PMU and PIUs were well-equipped with advanced
  tools such as CCTV, drones, and digital monitoring systems and used these to monitor the
  implementation of contractors' works. PIUs conducted frequent field visits. Periodic reports were
  completed and disseminated. The indicators in the results framework, including changes in targets were
  measured, reported, and adjusted as needed. The project implemented an MIS that caught challenges
  early, informed the decision-making of corrective measures to resolve these for effective M&E
  implementation.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data was used to facilitate real-time tracking, inform management decisions, and course correction,
  as needed, across various stakeholders. The PIU prepared detailed housing reconstruction reports, but
  no similar reports were prepared for the connectivity component. The M&E mechanisms
  adequately addressed implementation challenges including the efficient tracking and resolution of
  grievances, supported by online documentation. M&E data was used to inform shifts in the direction of
  the project implementation, including reducing targets as CERC was activated or revising sub activities
  such as replacing village and bridle roads with other district roads for efficiency. Strong feedback
  mechanisms to show raising awareness among citizens who provided feedback using multiple media
  were reflected in the 101 consultations conducted exceeding the target of 12. For example, the PMU
  issued completion certificates only after all relevant project requirements (including safeguards) were
  verified completed. In another, the average monthly beneficiaries under the CERC were initially
  misreported but later corrected with more accurate figures. The M&E data was used to provide evidence
  supporting project outcomes except for missing outcome indicators that were noted that did not fully
  capture all outcomes attributable to the project interventions (see Design above). The M&E functions
  under the project informed the design of the M&E system in the follow-on project - the Uttarakhand
  Disaster Preparedness and Resilience Project (UPREPARE or P179749).



                                                                                                 Page 21 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Uttarakhand Disasater Recovery Project (P146653)



  Overall, the M&E design, implementation, and utilization is rated Substantial with moderate
  shortcomings in the lack of indicators to fully capture the expected project outcomes.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards: The project was assigned an environmental safeguard category "B" requiring
   partial assessment. The project triggered the following safeguards: Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP
   4.01), Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04), and Forests (OP) (BP 4.36), subprojects were mostly categorized as
   Environmental Assessment Category "E2," or less sensitive and called for the preparation of Environment
   management plans (EMPs). Regular environmental and social audits and environmental and social
   modules inn the MIS supported compliance with the environmental safeguards (ICR, paragraph
   58). Regular environmental and social audits and MIS equipped with environmental and social modules for
   monitoring. To comply with OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats), the project avoided significant conversion or
   degradation of natural habitats through careful planning. Preventing harmful impacts on forests and natural
   habitats confirmed compliance with OP/BP 4.36 (Forests). Safety protocols during the COVID-19
   pandemic heightened focus on health, safety protocols, and waste and debris management. The active
   involvement of the community and stakeholders and dedicated environmental staff was a marked
   achievement, complemented by the introduction of innovative bioengineering pilots. Road and bridge
   construction were reported to stringently follow environmental and social safeguards, considered material
   durability, and enhanced road resilience.

   Social Safeguards: The project triggered the following social safeguards: Physical Cultural Resources
   (OP) (BP 4.11) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12) Social. The project provided detailed social
   assessments and prepared Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for affected families. The project complied
   with the World Bank's OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement and OP/BP 4.11 on Physical Cultural
   Resources (ICR, paragraph 59). The project deployed an ICT labor compliance tool for real-time granular
   data. The Social Management Plan improved conditions for 30,091 laborers with 210 health camps, regular
   health checkups, and public consultations. Initial noncompliance with the Resettlement Framework, land
   acquisition issues, lack of staff, and an unfortunate fatality were early implementation challenges but were
   eventually resolved. Community outreach benefited the grievance mechanism. All 832 grievances were
   resolved. 168 affected families received resettlement compensation. The 9.5 percent female labor force
   participation was significant but pointed to the need for broader gender inclusion in professional roles. 681
   people participated in training sessions on safeguards compliance.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: The project’s unique approach to the flow of funds, reporting, and risk
   management mechanisms followed the World Bank's financial management policies (ICR, paragraph 60).
   This project used a bank fund flow, releasing funds directly to the PMU (to a special account in a

                                                                                                  Page 22 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Uttarakhand Disasater Recovery Project (P146653)



   commercial bank) before allocating these to field PIUs. Minor financial challenges, such as shortages of
   funds in divisions of the Public Works Department and issues related to contract variations and retention
   money, were identified, and resolved. Project staffing was reported adequate with no observed skill
   deficiencies reported. All interim unaudited financial reports were submitted in a timely manner. The task
   team confirmed that external auditors had no qualified opinions on all audits.

   Procurement: Initial contract management as the implementing agency was only beginning to boost its
   capacity and the subsequent delays in 2020 brought by the impact of COVID-19 challenged initial
   procurement performance. Procurement capacity of PIUs itself improved over time. The World Bank task
   team conducted training workshops and assisted PIUs to address procurement related challenges through
   post procurement reviews, approving procurement plans, contracts, and assisting in technical evaluations.
   and enhanced the MIS system to address delay choke points, for example, imposing penalties in case of
   delays to contractors (see Section 9 M&E Implementation above). Contract management issues included
   time overruns, variations in contract amounts, and expired/invalid contracts. Causes of failed bids were
   analyzed, technical specifications were reviewed, and lessons from past projects were adopted to enhance
   procurement and contract management capacity. The Procurement Plan was implemented using a
   Procurement Plan Execution System and then the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement
   (STEP) system.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The operations offered the following lessons:

      If relevant indicators to measure expected outcomes are lacking, a project misses the
         opportunity to demonstrate, measure, and report on positive achievements at
         outcome level. In this project, reconstruction of housing units was used to provide evidence
         of community resilience. Indicators supported the physical infrastructure investments that

                                                                                                    Page 23 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Uttarakhand Disasater Recovery Project (P146653)



      were completed to show recovery and resilience of communities. However, indicators or
      benchmarks for the other dimensions of resilience were lacking. Communities could have
      used these benchmarks to track progress and suggest areas for improvement. Surveys,
      geospatial data to map and predict community vulnerabilities, community feedback
      mechanisms could also inform the assessment of community resilience. Some of these data
      were available, but not captured. Projects focusing on increasing resilience of communities
      may benefit from using both quantitative and qualitative assessments for a more complete
      view of a community’s capacity to prepare, respond, and recover from disasters.
     Training end users in line departments in the use of sophisticated analytical studies,
      tools, and technologies may lead to more effective use of such tools. In this project,
      adopting the MIS was a significant step in strengthening institutional M&E capacity. However,
      end users were not given sufficient training to build capacity to optimize the potential uses of
      such tools. Training end users in line departments, may lead to more effective use of these
      tools or lead to discovery of other uses to enhance the capacity of line agencies in early
      warning and hydro-met systems. Projects that introduce advanced tools and systems, may
      benefit from involving the staff of the department that will use the technology and
      facilitate their effective use, through user feedback and last-mile connectivity in the use
      of early warning system. This may also foster inter-agency collaboration for timely and
      informed decision-making because comprehensive data is now available to all stakeholders.
     A holistic approach to resilience that considers the interconnected infrastructure
      elements can effectively address system-wide vulnerabilities and enhance overall
      durability. In this project, infrastructure investments consisted of interconnected parts where
      each element was expected to contribute to overall resilience. For roads, the project
      integrated resilient materials. Adequate drainage systems prevented waterlogging and
      damage. For bridges, the approach roads and surrounding areas play a significant role in
      overall functionality and resilience of the structure itself. This broader vision ensures that
      vulnerabilities are not overlooked. The World Bank’s involvement added value in improved
      design standards. Updated guidelines and safety measures are now adopted for other roads
      in the state.
     Innovative approaches, such as gender-focused homeownership, and resilient
      construction techniques, can facilitate more sustainable building practices and
      operational efficiency in disaster management. In this project, the owner-driven, gender-
      focused housing construction approach demonstrated tangible benefits. For example,
      beneficiaries received funds in joint accounts to promote equitable decision-making.
      Another example was the design of the technically advanced USDMA building to be
      earthquake-proof with seismic bearings (called base isolators) and a strong commitment to
      environmental sustainability by receiving a Green Rating for Integrated Habitat Assessment
      (GRIHA) 4-star green building rating. This GRIHA rating is derived from receiving 51 to 60
      percent of applicable points in energy efficiency, waste management, and sustainable
      material use. The SDRF training center is the biggest search and rescue training center in
      North India. The project also introduced innovative bridge construction techniques,
      marking the debut of the prefabricated modular steel bridge in the state. The project
      conducted bioengineering pilots that had the potential for wider adoption.



13. Assessment Recommended?


                                                                                                  Page 24 of 25
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Uttarakhand Disasater Recovery Project (P146653)




  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR outlined a clear picture of the project operations, was internally consistent and results oriented. The
report followed the guidelines. The narratives supported the ratings. The presentation of how the project
interventions resulted in enhancing community resilience was somewhat unclear and reinforced the
misalignment of the outcomes and outputs in the TOC created for the ICR. The theory of change outlined the
causality between inputs and outputs and revealed gaps in the outcome indicators. The evidence was clearly
laid out and the quality of the analyses linked the evidence to the findings. The annexes elaborated on the
various adjustments made in the operations, particularly regarding the activation of the CERC. Together with
the annexes, particularly Annex 6, the report expanded on the project's achievements.

Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 25 of 25
