     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI - FIP (P162789)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0024106

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P162789                                  CI - FIP

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Cote d'Ivoire                            Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A6248,TF-A6861                        31-May-2023                                        14,376,088.56

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Jan-2018                              31-May-2023

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          15,000,000.00                                  15,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           15,000,000.00                                  15,000,000.00

 Actual                                       14,376,088.56                                  14,376,088.56




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Hassan Maher Amin         Avjeet Singh               Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Waly




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Forest Investment Program (FIP) as articulated in the Loan
   Agreement (page 6) and in the Strategic Climate Fund Forest Investment Program Grant Agreement (page
   7) were identical to the one stated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 18) and aimed to:

   "Conserve and increase the forest stock and improve access to sources of income from sustainable
   forest management for selected communities in target zones."


                                                                                               Page 1 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI - FIP (P162789)



   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed according to the following two objectives:

   1. To conserve and increase the forest stock for selected communities in target zones.

   2. To improve access to sources of income from sustainable forest management for selected communities in
   target zones.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  22-Feb-2022

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following three components:

   1. Sustainable Management of the Gazetted Forests (appraisal cost: US$11.94 million, actual cost:
   US$10.60 million). This component aimed to contribute to the implementation of zero-deforestation
   agriculture in Gazetted Forests (GFs) and their sustainable management in an inclusive and participatory
   manner with forest-dependent communities and promoting incentive mechanisms that would provide
   alternative revenues to communities thereby reducing human pressure on protected areas. It included three
   sub-components:

   1.1 Participatory development and implementation of GFs management plans. This sub-component
   aimed to support the National Forest Development Agency (SODEFOR) with the participatory development
   of GF management plans through the mobilization of village associations for GF co-management. It
   would finance awareness-raising activities at the local level through participatory workshops and trainings to
   finalize the establishment of the Local Co-management Committee (CLCG) with support from the National
   Non-Governmental Organization (NGO-Ivorian Observatory for Natural Resources Management) and
   SODEFOR.

   1.2. Development and implementation of an incentive system to reduce pressure on GFs. This sub-
   component would pilot a performance-based incentive mechanism in villages adjacent to selected GFs to
   provide alternative revenues to local communities in order to reduce human pressure on natural resources.
   The project would finance performance-based agroforestry and afforestation sub-projects through: (i)
   provision of upfront subsidies to individuals or communities engaged in the program; (ii) scheduled payment
   triggered by: (a) the effective introduction of a certain number of tree seedlings in farms (for example 50 to
   100 trees by ha – a price tag would be fixed by tree planted); (b) survival rate after a certain period (up to
   five years); and (iii) conservation of the trees in the long term.


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 25
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  CI - FIP (P162789)



1.3. Support to voluntary return from the South West to the Center. This sub-component aimed to
support the current trend of individual voluntary returns from the South West to their native lands in the
Center given the high potential for agroforestry and reforestation there at this time.

2. Support to Sustainable Management of the Tai National Park (appraisal cost: US$2.00 million,
actual cost: US$2.34 million). This component would be implemented through two subcomponents:
2.1. Enhancing surveillance capacity for OIPR. This sub-component aimed to enhance the Ivorian Office
for Parks and Reserves (OIPR) surveillance capacity of the Taï National Park (TNP) to reduce pressure on
the park and maintain its integrity. The component would finance acquisition of surveillance vehicles and
remote sensing equipment including surveillance cameras and drones. It would also finance small works to
rehabilitate access roads in order to facilitate patrolling by park rangers. Surveillance missions operating
costs would also be supported by the project and monitored by the Spatial Monitoring and Reporting Tool
(SMART).

2.2. Support to enhance park communities’ livelihoods. In conjunction with surveillance activities inside
the TNP, OIPR would be engaged in several initiatives with local communities to reduce human pressure on
the park, including awareness raising campaigns, capacity building of local communities to engage in
alternative activities such as vegetable gardening, agroforestry, and reforestation with fruit trees, fodder,
fuelwood trees and other nutritional tree species that benefit women. These initiatives have helped reduced
human pressure on the TNP to a small extent but if scaled up, it would be expected that the impact would
be more visible. The project would therefore support enhancement of these activities to reach a wider
number of local communities to secure park integrity. The sub-component would also finance the
rehabilitation of degraded low lands in the vicinity of the TNP due to illegal gold panning through assisted
natural regeneration.

3. Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (appraisal cost: US$1.06 million, actual cost:
US$2.06 million). The component would be implemented through the two sub-components below:

3.1. Project management. This sub-component would finance the overall daily administration of both WB
and ADB projects to: (i) ensure coordination among the different entities involved with project
implementation in compliance with the WB fiduciary requirements and; (ii) ensure that regular M&E is
carried out and that results are fed back into decision making on project implementation.

3.2. Independent monitoring. To ensure an independent evaluation of the project's results, a civil society
team would be mandated by the project to carry out independent monitoring on the implementation of
several aspects of the project including traceability, monitoring and contracting between SODEFOR and
farmers.

Revised/Cancelled activities.

1. Sustainable Management of the Gazette Forests.

      Cancelled activity: (i) under sub-component 1.1, the activity to reforest 5,000 ha in the three targeted
       GFs in the center was discontinued, cancelling reforestation of 1,600 ha. This modification was
       decided during the first restructuring of the project due to the limited capacities of local communities
       and SODEFOR to both extend the plantations and ensure the maintenance of those already carried
       out. Remaining funds were redirected for maintenance activities of the 3,400 hectares established
       plantations.


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CI - FIP (P162789)



        Revised and moved activity: (ii) under sub-component 1.1 to reforest 15,000 ha through agroforestry
         contracts between SODEFOR with individual Cocoa farmers was changed to agroforest
         concessions with the Cocoa industry and moved to sub-component 1.2. The reason was due to
         reclassification of targeted GFs from Category 2 to Category 3 (degraded by more than 75%), which
         implied that only concessions with the Cocoa industry could be considered going forward.
        Cancelled Sub-component 1.3 (Support to voluntary return initiative from the Southwest to the
         Center) due to non-alignment with the Government's Strategy for the Preservation, Rehabilitation
         and Extension of Forests (SPREF), which planned to undertake involuntary resettlement.

   2. Support to sustainable management of the Taï National Park.

        Revised activity: under sub-component 2.1 Enhancing Surveillance capacity of OIPR to include
         rehabilitation of four park rangers’ quarters and 100 km of access road to facilitate surveillance.
        Revised activity: under sub-component 2.2 Support to enhance park communities’ livelihoods to
         increase the number of Income-Generating Activities (IGAs) by extending them to more park
         dependent communities, especially women and youths.

  3. Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation.

        Revised activity: Increased budget reallocation of US$1 million to sub-component 3.1 (Project
         Management) to ensure sufficient resources to cover project management costs and timely closure
         of project activities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost was estimated at US$15.00 million. The actual cost according to the
  ICR (Data Sheet, page 2) was US$14.38 million or about 96% of the appraisal estimate.

  Financing. The project was fully financed through a Grant worth US$15.00 million from the the Strategic
  Climate Fund Forest Investment Program. The actual amount disbursed according to the ICR (Data Sheet,
  page 2) was US$14.38 million.

  Borrower Contribution. The project was fully financed through a Grant as noted above and no borrower
  contribution was expected.

  Dates. The project was approved on January 26, 2018 and became effective four months later on May 16,
  2018. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on October 19, 2020 which was about two years and
  five months after effectiveness. While the PAD did not specify a date for the MTR, this Review finds that it
  was timely conducted relative to the original closing date. The project closed on May 31, 2023 which was
  the project's original closing date specified in the PAD.

  The project was restructured three times all Level 2 restructuring as follows:

  1. On February 22, 2021, when the amount disbursed was US$6.27 million, in order to revise the Results
  Framework, change components and cost, and
  change disbursements arrangements.


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI - FIP (P162789)



   2. On July 22, 2022, when the amount disbursed was US$9.98 million, in order to change in components
   and cost, and reallocate funds between disbursement categories.

   3. On January 9, 2023, when the amount disbursed was US$12.37 million, in order to revise the Results
   Framework, reallocate funds between disbursement categories, and adjust the reimbursement rate.

   While the two PDO outcome targets were revised, a split rating will not be applied to assess the overall
   outcome of the project. The revision for the GHG reduction related to PDO outcome indicator #1 were
   relevant and more specific, since the original targets covered the whole FIP areas, while the revised targets
   reflected only the areas covered by the World Bank-supported activities. The second revision of the targets
   was based on improvements on the underlying data of the REDD+ Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification
   tool, which according to the ICR (paragraph 17) became more precise overtime. Further, while the targeted
   reduction of GHG in metric tons/year decreased from an original 2,609,774 to 817,140, the proportional
   reduction against the baseline increased from 12% to 34%. As for the PDO outcome indicator #2, the
   measuring unit was changed from “Volume per ha of forest stock in target GF (metric tons)” to “Number of
   hectares of plantations established by the project (Ha)” given the young age of the plantations and the lack
   of certainty regarding survival rates. The new target instead tracked the number of hectares reforested in
   targeted project areas from agroforestry and restoration of forest plantations. These changes were relevant
   and improved the assessment of outcomes and did not substantially impact the original theory of change.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. Côte d'Ivoire is home to the last primary rain forest left in West Africa and to several
endangered species. However, the forests in Côte d’Ivoire were suffering from the highest average
deforestation rate in the world at 4.3% per year between 1990 and 2015 (National Bureau for Technical and
Development Studies-BNETD) and were at risk of disappearing within decades. The main causes of
deforestation and forest degradation were: (i) the massive expansion of extensive slash-and-burn
agriculture mainly for cash crops mainly coco; (ii) the uncontrolled harvesting of forests for firewood
(estimated at 20 million cubic meter per year); (iii) bushfires (accidental or intentional, often for agriculture
or hunting); and (iv) mining, notably illegal small-scale gold mining. To reverse the trend of deforestation
and forest degradation, Côte d'Ivoire committed in 2011 to the international mechanism of Reducing
Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) process. In parallel, Côte d'Ivoire
successfully applied for the Forest Investment Program (FIP) developed to address key drivers of
deforestation and forest degradation through agriculture intensification, agroforestry, restoration of
degraded forests, afforestation, and promotion of sustainable fuel wood production.

Previous Bank Experience. The World Bank has rich global technical expertise on climate, landscape and
forestry issues, and is home to a large pool of technical staff and sector experts. The Bank also continues
to support a range of carbon and climate finance mechanisms to achieve transformational changes in land
use and forestry. In addition, the World Bank had deep experience working with the Government of Côte
d'Ivoire on REDD+ through the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) REDD+ readiness grant, and the
Emissions Reduction Program, which was under preparation. The FIP also complemented the existing

                                                                                                       Page 5 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI - FIP (P162789)



World Bank project portfolio, such as the Sustainable and Inclusive Growth Development Policy Financing
Project (P169828), which sought to reduce the deforestation rate between 2018 and 2021. Also, several
key studies at the national level, including the history of land use, wood use for energy, reforestation
potential, as well as the national REDD+ strategy financed by the FCFP, served as the basis for
investments to be supported by the project. Overall, the World Bank was well positioned to assist the Côte
d'Ivoire in forest and land management to reduce greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) from land use change
and deforestation.

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At project appraisal, the PDO was in line with the goals of the World
Bank Group’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF, FY2016–FY2019) for Côte d'Ivoire. The CPF focused
on two cross-cutting areas, governance and spatial inequalities, with three major focus areas: (i) sustaining
strong private sector-led growth; (ii) building human capital for inclusive growth, social cohesion and youth
employment; and (iii) strengthening public financial management and accountability. The FIP had direct and
indirect contributions to the following objectives of the CPF’s first two focus areas: (i) Objective 1: Improve
productivity in agriculture/agribusiness value chains through support to agriculture intensification and
enhanced collaboration with the cocoa industry to implement their engagement in the Government zero-
deforestation agriculture objective by 2020; and (ii) Objective 4: Formalize and enhance access to land for
business and agriculture, through land tenure security and public-private partnership for sustainable
management of Gazetted Forests.

At project completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the World Bank Group’s Côte d'Ivoire CPF for
the period (FY2023-FY2027). Specifically, the project directly supported Objective 5: Improve sustainable
management of natural capital of the CPF and will contribute to the assessment of key results indicators,
including: (i) number of farmers with Climate-Smart Agriculture skills and/or assets, (ii) targeted forest-
dependent community members with increased access to income sources derived from sustainable forest
management, and (iii) carbon emission reduction. It also supported Objective 8: Support development of
sustainable and competitive agricultural and manufacturing value chains. The PDO was also in line with the
Bank's Country Climate Development Report (CCDR, 2023). The CCDR assessed climate change impacts
on Côte d’Ivoire’s economy and specifically recommended the promotion of policies to halt deforestation
and restore land through agroforestry practices for resilient cocoa production. The CCDR was endorsed by
Côte d’Ivoire in November 2023 at UNFCCC COP28. The project also supported the Forests for
Development, Climate, and Biodiversity program which was one out of eight programs under the Global
Challenge Programs (GCP) supported by the Bank. Further, the project supported the Bank's Green
Resilient and Inclusive Development agenda and was in line with the WBG's Climate Change Action Plan
2021–2025. Also, the project contributed to supporting the World Bank Gender Strategy 2024–2030 as it
promoted expanding economic opportunities for women. Finally, the PDO was in line with the World Bank
Group Strategy for Fragility, Conflict and Violence (2020-2025).

Consistency with Government Strategies/Priorities. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with Côte d'Ivoire
Forest Investment Plan (IP, 2016). The IP was designed to combine different interventions in short and
medium terms. It was based on two key areas: (i) a medium and long-term national vision aimed to balance
the economic interests of a range of stakeholders with the goal of emissions reduction and sustainable
conservation and management of the country’s forests; and (ii) a focus on the sectors which have become
the main drivers of deforestation in the country.

At project completion, the PDO continued to be in line with Côte d’Ivoire’s 2030 Vision which aimed for an
economic transformation that would sustain a 7% real GDP growth rate per year on average, while halving
poverty and attaining upper middle-income status. One of the key objectives of the 2023 Vision was to

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 25
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CI - FIP (P162789)



               develop Sustainable Economic Capital by protecting the green infrastructure of forests and coastal areas.
               The PDO was also in line with the new Abidjan Legacy Program presented (2022), which aimed to create a
               model for sustainable land management through better agricultural practices, reforestation and
               agroforestry, and sustainable water management. The Program was supported by the World Bank through
               several complementary projects, including the next-phase Forest Investment Project 2 (FIP-2).

               Summary of the Relevance of Objectives Assessment. The PDO statement was clear and pitched at an
               adequate level of ambition. At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with Côte d’Ivoire’s strategic
               development priorities and was also in line with the most recent Bank CPF (FY2023-FY2027) as well as
               with the Country Climate Development Report (CCDR, 2023). Therefore, the Relevance of Objectives is
               rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To conserve and increase the forest stock for selected communities in target zones.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported the following activities:

                             1. Support establishing a forest management framework. This would create an enabling environment for
                             sustainable management of selected GFs. The project would establish five local Committees for GFs co-
                             management. The project would work with these existing partners, local communities and SODEFOR to
                             formally establish CLCG around these selected GFs and monitor their involvement in GFs. The project would
                             also support the establishment of an agreement between the CLCG and SODEFOR for the benefit sharing of
                             incomes generated from GFs management with the CLCG. The project would also support the the formation
                             of four Participatory Forest Management Plan (PFMPs) and the support forest surveillance and operation.

                             2. Support the implementation of the GF governance frameworks with aim of restoring 20,000 hectares of
                             degraded GFs through reforestation and agroforestry. The project would support reforesting 5000 ha
                             (planting) thereby restoring more than 60% of their lost forest cover. Also, 15,000 ha would be reforested
                             through agroforestry results-based payments. The reforestation activities would be undertaken by women and
                             youth associations from adjacent communities under technical guidance and supervision of SODEFOR. The
                             project would also support zero-deforestation agriculture through agro-forestry contracts with existing cocoa
                             farmers in GFs. The establishment of fuelwood trees for sustainable charcoal production to provide for the
                             local market would reduce pressure on forests and ensure full restoration of the GFs with forest tree cover
                             over ten years. The project would also support conservation and ecotourism development through
                             partnerships with third parties. Specifically, the project would reinforce these partnerships by clarifying their

                                                                                                                                Page 7 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI - FIP (P162789)



roles and responsibilities in the implementation of the management plans of these GFs through
a memorandum of understanding between SODEFOR and these partners for conservation actions in the
GFs, including operating costs of enhanced surveillance of Cavally which is a buffer zone to TNP.

3. Development and implementation of an incentive system to reduce pressure on forest resources. This
would be though piloting a performance-based payment system in villages adjacent to selected GFs (Goin-
Debe, Haute-Dodo, Rapides Grah) to provide alternative revenues to local communities to reduce human
pressure on natural resources. The project would also support voluntary return from the southwest to the
center. Due to lower agricultural pressure, the Center has major potential for regenerating its forest cover and
is attracting its natives back. The aim would be to accompany this natural trend, organize it as it could be
scaled up in the long run and achieve a transformational change for the country’s land use balance, and
reduce pressure on the South West GFs, thereby indirectly impacting project results.

4. Enhance OIPR surveillance capacity of TNP. The project would provide vehicles and surveillance
equipment to OIPR and support its surveillance operations. Also, the project would support the banning of
establishing new gold panning sites since gold panning activities continue to degrade significantly the park
northern and eastern buffer zones.

The expected outputs of the above-mentioned activities included: the establishment of five local participatory
management bodies (CLCGs); establishment of a benefit sharing agreement between CLCG and SODEFOR;
the development of four PFMPs and surveillance operations implemented; 5,000 ha reforested by women and
youth associations; 15,000 ha reforested through results-based payment contracts; forest
concessions promoting agroforestry timber and fuel wood plantations signed with private sector'; partnerships
with third parties promoted for GF conservation and ecotourism development; performance-based
agroforestry and afforestation sub-projects piloted in adjacent villages; voluntary return initiative from the
south west to the center regions supported; OIPR surveillance operations supported; and the establishment
of new gold panning sites prevented.

The expected intermediate outcomes of the afore-mentioned activities and outputs included: the creation of
an enabling environment for sustainable participatory management of GFs; 20,000 ha of degraded GFs
restored; and human pressure on forest resources in TNP reduced.

All of this combined would contribute to achieving the stated PDO of conserving and increasing the forest
stock for selected communities in target zones. The anticipated long-term impacts included realizing the
Government of Côte d’Ivoire's (GoCI's) zero deforestation agriculture, improving productivity in agriculture-
agribusiness value chains, increasing opportunities in benefit-sharing and employment in the forest sector,
and achieving long-term sustainable development of natural resources.

The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following assumptions: 1. Performance-base
agroforestry will incentivize zero forestation cocoa growing and raise income levels; 2. CLCGs set up during
first year of project implementation to take active part in the development of PFMPs; and 3. Political stability
and continued political commitment to the project's PDO.

Overall, the ToC reflected relevant activities that were connected to the stated outputs, intermediate
outcomes and the PDO in a plausible causal chain. The stated assumptions were logical and realistic.

Outputs/Intermediate Results


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI - FIP (P162789)



1. Building an enabling environment for sustainable participatory forest management (GFs).

     7 Gazetted Forest (GFs) with participatory management plans (PFMPs) were under implementation,
      exceeding both the original target of 4 and the revised target of 5; there was none prior to the
      project. Key activities of these PFMPs are currently being implemented, notably monitoring,
      development of forest and agroforestry plantations as well as ecotourism.
     22 community forest co-management committees were created and trained in participatory forest
      management approaches, exceeding the original target of 15. Also, capacity-building support was
      provided to 345 CLCG committee members to report on the progress of project activities and to
      monitor and evaluate the implementation of the PAPFs (no target provided).
     6 Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) contracts were signed to comanage gazette forests exceeding
      the original target of 5, baseline was 1.

2. Restoring degraded forest land.

     1.3 million seedlings were produced with a survival rate of 80% and used for agroforestry reforestation
       and re-densification activities to increase forest stock (no target provided).
     2,000 ha area of new or restored plantations in GF were established through concessions with women
      and youth associations fully achieving the target of revised target of 2,000, but below the original
      target of 5,000 ha, baseline was 100 ha.
     557 ha areas were brought under enhanced biodiversity conservation exceeding the original target of
      300 ha. This was a WBG core indicator. At completion, 557 ha of surface area were covered by
      increased conservation measures since the start of the project. The areas covered relate to vulnerable
      areas, in particular those prone to illegal gold panning. This result comes from the effort of
      management activities including monitoring, awareness raising and education on the environment and
      sustainable development for local communities.

3. Reducing human pressure on forest resources

     100% of selected sampled surface areas were visited per year fully achieving the target, baseline was
      90%. This indicator measured the surveillance efforts by TNP park rangers. The Tai National Park
      was divided into 263 quadrats of 5km x 5km. In 2022, the 263 quadrats or 100% of the quadrats were
      visited by, at least, one surveillance patrol. In 2023, 181 quadrats were covered during the patrols
      carried out in the first quarter of 2023. SODEFOR carried out 2,000 man-days (100% of the expected
      target) in the Cavally gazetted forest over 10 missions. This effort was complemented by an additional
      surveillance of 4,220 man-days carried out by agents from the Cavally Forest Management Unit
      (UGF) based in the locality of Zagné and 10 eco-guards from neighboring villages. This resulted in 80
      arrests for category 1 GF clearing presented to the court, of which 52 resulted in firm sentences and
      28 in suspended sentences.
     The number of gold panning sites decreased to 16 compared to 85 at baseline and exceeding the
      original target of 30. This indicator measured the success of awareness raising campaigns and
      surveillance patrols organized by OIPR against the number of gold panning sites in TNP.
     10 fire prevention and control committees were established made up of young local residents living
      near reforested plots in the center GFs: during project implementation a total of 14 fires were brought
      under control. The committees had limited success due to the scale of the fires and the inadequacy of
      the communities' equipment. SODEFOR plans to update its fire-fighting strategy.


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 25
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  CI - FIP (P162789)




    A GF monitoring strategy was developed and the technical skills of 40 agents was strengthened in
       the use of the SMART tool for monitoring and protecting reforestation. OIPR trained 21 SODEFOR
       technical agents in the use of SMART for monitoring and carrying out reforestation missions in
       January 2023.
       3,400 ha were planted in center GFs, subject to three plot maintenance campaigns between 2020
       and 2021, and more than 20,000 nursery plants (Teak and Cassia) were produced.
      Over 1.5 billion francs were injected into the local economy through 241 performance-based contracts
       for nursery construction, seedling transport and planting.
      An annual annual monitoring plan was implemented to support: (i) financing of surveillance operations
       enabling surveillance patrols and ecological monitoring, enabling regular monitoring of areas prone to
       gold washing, (ii) training of 9 agents since 2022, (iii) 218 regular patrols (an average of 54
       patrols/quarter) and 13 large-scale patrols (patrols covering the entire fleet) were carried out for
       11,850 man-days from 2020 to 2023. As a result: (i) Apprehended 47 poachers, 38 gold panners and
       6 operators of non-timber forest products (2023), and (ii) Monitored 98% to 100% of the 263 5km x
       5km quadrats in the TNP from 2018 to 2022).
      A disaster risk prevention and management plan was developed in line with the best protected World
       Heritage sites. Validated with stakeholders in the TNP management in Soubré in 2022.
       A total of 15 patrols from 2019 to 2023 with a combined level of effort of 17,190 man-days, resulting
       in the apprehension of 100 offenders engaging in illegal mining and poaching activities, 85 of whom
       received firm sentences and 15 of whom received suspended sentences.
      An agroforestry buffer zone was created at the southern boundary of Taï National Park. Agroforestry
       redensification program for cocoa plots in the riparian zones of the TNP through production and
       distribution of food and medicinal forest plants such as Ricinodendron eudelotii, Irvinga gabonensis,
       Xylopia aethiopica, Garcinia kola, Tieghemella heckelii and Beilschmiedia mannii on the outskirts of
       the TNP.
      1,172,000 seedlings were produced to reforest cocoa plots along the southern boundary of Taï
       National Park.
      5,000 ha of cocoa plots bordering the TNP were enriched to a density of 18 stems/ha.

Outcomes

    By project completion, the project conserved and increased forest stock in the targeted GFs as
     evident in an 82% reduction of GHG emissions from gazetted forests and protected areas targeted by
     the project between 2018 and 2023. Against a reference net emission of 2,369,162 metric tons/year in
     2018, the project successfully reduced emissions from 1,925,561.0 T eCO2eq in 2018 to 345,164.4 T
     CO2eq in 2022 (PDO Outcome indicator 1), a reduction of over 82%, based on the assessment of the
     Monitoring Reporting and Verification team at the Office of the Permanent Executive Secretary of
     REDD+ (SEP REDD+) according to Forest Carbon Partnership Facility methodology (ICR, paragraph
     28).
    The project restored 22,719 ha of degraded forest land through reforestation and agroforestry
     activities in targeted GFs exceeding the target of 20,400 ha (PDO Outcome Indicator 2). This was
     facilitated by the production of 1.3 million seedlings and with a survival rate of 80%, agroforestry
     reforestation and re-densification activities have increased forest stock (ICR, paragraph 35).




                                                                                               Page 10 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI - FIP (P162789)




      However, the project did not achieve the planned framework agreement between SODEFOR and
       communities for co-managing natural resources in gazetted forest, which according to the ICR would
       be addressed under the project's next phase (FIP-2).

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project contributed to decreasing the rate of deforestation and
increasing CO2 sequestration through reforestation and agroforestry activities. Specifically this was achieved
through: (i) building an enabling environment for sustainable participatory forest management through
supporting developing a participatory forest management framework for gazetted forests in the center and
southwest regions and modelling the first management plans for category 3 GFs (ICR, paragraph 28); (ii)
restoring degraded forest land where the project restored nearly 23,000 ha of degraded forest land through
reforestation and agroforestry activities in targeted GFs (ICR, paragraph 35), and (iii) reducing human
pressure on forest resources most notable was reducing the unsustainable exploitation of forest resources by
lowering the number of illegal gold panning sites along the northern rim of TNP by 80% (ICR, paragraph 37).
As noted above, the project exceeded its outcome targets for carbon dioxide sequestration and for the
restoration of degraded forests (PDO outcome indicators 1 and 2). The project also met or exceeded all of its
intermediate results indicators pertaining to the three main activities supported by the project. However, the
planned framework agreement between SODEFOR and communities for co-managing natural resources in
gazetted forest was not achieved. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated
Substantial with minor shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve access to sources of income from sustainable forest management for selected communities in
target zones.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported enhancing local livelihoods
near TNP through awareness raising campaigns, capacity building of local communities to engage in
alternative activities such as vegetable gardening, agroforestry, reforestation with fruits trees. Seedlings
would be provided for free to interested farmers including technical assistance to manage and maintain their
farms for better harvests. The project would also finance rehabilitation of abandoned gold panning sites in the
TNP buffer zones and restore them for the development of income generating activities (agroforestry,
vegetable gardening, lowlands rice culture) targeted to women for food security and providing them with
incomes given that they have limited access to cash crops revenues. The project would also support
performance-based agroforestry and afforstation sub-projects on pilot basis in TNP adjacent villages.

The expected outputs for the afore-mentioned activities included: scaling up of alternative livelihood activities;
and rehabilitation of abandoned gold panning sites. As a result of those outputs the expected intermediate
outcome was the provision of an alternative revenue stream for local communities, which in turn would reduce
human pressure on forest resources in TNP. All this would contribute to improving access to sources of
income from sustainable forest management for selected communities in target zones.


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI - FIP (P162789)



The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following two assumptions: 1. Performance-base
agroforestry will incentivize zero forestation cocoa growing and raise income levels; and 2. Political stability
and continued political commitment to the project's PDO.

Overall, the ToC reflected relevant activities that were connected to the stated outputs, intermediate outcome
and the PDO in a plausible causal chain. The stated assumptions were logical and realistic.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      7 gazetted forests (GF) with participatory management plans were under implementation exceeding
         the original target of 4 and the revised target of 5.
        22 community forest co-management committees were created and trained in participatory forest
         management approaches exceeding the original target of 15.
        6 PPPs contract were signed to comanage gazetted forests exceeding the original target of 5,
         baseline was 1.
        Access of women to agroforestry sites was enhanced through the provision of vehicles (two 4x4 and
         four three wheeled bikes) to the Malebi women association.
        20 water catchments were made available to women associations exceeding the original target of 5,
         baseline was none.
        The project supported strengthening the livelihoods of peripheral communities by scaling OIPRs pilot
         IGA program in forest edge communities near TNP. This included funding 38 micro projects that
         moved on to implementation. At the end, nearly 1,000 people benefited from the program, of which
         more than half are women (ICR, paragraph 40).

Outcomes

      By project completion, 1217 farmers adjacent to targeted GF had increased access to income sources
       exceeding the target of 500 (PDO Outcome indicator 3). Results-based payments were delivered via
       mobile platforms primarily and amounted to approximately US$2,760 per beneficiary over the life of
       the project (ICR, paragraph 38). Potential productivity gains from converting 15,000 ha of cocoa
       plantations to agroforestry amount to US$54 million over 20 years (before discounting). For each of
       the 1,217 beneficiaries, this will mean an additional average annual income of US$300 in 2025
       growing to US$ 2,230 in year 2035 (ICR, paragraph 38).
      A project beneficiary survey showed that beneficiaries of remunerated reforestation and agroforestry
       activities were generally satisfied with the project and note an increase in income. For example, 74%
       of beneficiaries reported a high level of satisfaction with the project exceeding the target of 70% (PDO
       Outcome indicator #4); and with 80% of beneficiaries reported satisfaction with both the technical
       support delivered and with the frequency of visits made on a weekly basis. However, more than half
       the beneficiaries of agroforestry activities were either “not satisfied” or “not at all satisfied” with the
       remuneration received for the various activities (ICR, paragraph 39). Also, 53% of
       beneficiaries reported that their living conditions did not improve due to project support. The ICR
       (paragraph 39) attributed this negative sentiment among beneficiaries to two main reasons: first, the
       delayed onset of long-term productivity gains, and second, the lengthy process involved in realizing
       potential emission reduction benefits.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project contributed to improving access to sources of income from
sustainable forest management for selected communities in target zones mainly through

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 25
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                CI - FIP (P162789)



                            supporting performance-based payments for reforestation and agroforestry activities, and
                            through strengthening the livelihoods of peripheral communities by scaling OIPRs pilot IGA program in forest
                            edge communities near TNP. The project exceeded its end-line targets for both PDO outcome indicators as
                            noted above. Also, the project exceeded its targets on two intermediate results indicators and fully achieved
                            the third. Therefore the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. The project exceeded its targets of all four PDO indicators. It
                            successfully developed a participatory forest management framework. The project also strengthened local
                            communities’ access to alternative sources of income, but at the same time helped to maintain the integrity of
                            Taï National Park (TNP). The project also contributed to the objectives of the Emissions Reduction Program
                            around TNP, which was expected to enable the first related carbon credits to be sold (ICR, paragraph 41).
                            However, the project did not achieve the planned framework agreement between SODEFOR and
                            communities for co-managing natural resources in gazetted forest, which instead was expected to be
                            addressed under FIP 2 (ICR, paragraph 41).



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

   ex-ante

                               The economic analysis at appraisal did not provide an overall economic rate of return for the project
                                investments. Given time and data constraints, the consideration of benefits for the quantitative simulation
                                was limited to a few aspects and complemented by a qualitative discussion of other benefits (PAD,
                                Annex 4).
                               Direct economic benefits included reduction in GHG emissions and increase income of beneficiaries.
                                Indirect benefits included reduced pressure on protected areas; increased resilience to external shocks;
                                reduced malnutrition; better access to credit; and reduction in inundations. A Cost-Benefit-Analysis was
                                applied to conduct the economic efficiency assessment for this project. This quantitative analysis only



                                                                                                                             Page 13 of 25
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        CI - FIP (P162789)



      included the direct improvements of forest area affected. A “With” and “Without” project situation was
      used for estimating incremental benefits generated by the project.
     Net Present Value (NPV) and Benefit-Cost Ratio (B/C-Ratio) were used as criteria to assess the
      economic feasibility of the project. The results showed a net present value of US$3,334.7 million in the
      baseline scenario and a B/C-Ratio of 257.79.
     Valuation of carbon benefits. Using the official guidance for the social value of carbon as provided by the
      World Bank (2015) a baseline shadow value of Carbon starting at US$30 in 2015 and increasing to
      US$80 (US$33 in 2018 to US$38 in 2022) in real terms by 2050 was applied. For carbon sequestration
      and storage values of forest ecosystems a rather conservative value of US$ 50/ha/annum was assumed.
     A sensitivity analysis was applied considering discount rates of 5%, 10%, and 20%. the economic
      robustness was tested for a low carbon price and a low carbon price combined with a reduction of all
      benefits by 50 percent. Even with a low carbon price and a reduction of all benefits by 50% , the project
      yielded positive results at all discount rates (PAD, Annex 4, table 4.3).

ex-post

     At completion, a cost-benefit analysis (CBA) was carried out using the same scenarios and sensitivity
        tests applied at appraisal. The CBA yielded positive results across different scenarios and discount rates
        (ICR, Table 9) and compared favorably to estimates at appraisal.
       The following benefits were estimated in monetary terms: (i) productivity gains in resilient cocoa
        agroforestry, (ii) revenue from timber (teak) plantations, (iii) watershed benefits, (iv) climate regulating
        ecosystem services, and (v) global benefits in terms of the verified reduction of greenhouse gas
        emissions.
       Benefits were estimated under two scenarios, with Carbon benefits and without. In the scenario with
        carbon, the NPV of project benefits was valued between US$327 million to US$889 million (using a
        discount rate of 20% and 5%, respectively). The economic robustness of project investments was also
        tested in a scenario without carbon benefits. The results confirm that even in the scenario in which
        carbon benefits were excluded, the analysis yields positive results for all discount rates. The NPV ranges
        from US$12 million to US$80 million when using a discount rate of 20% and 5%, respectively, with an
        IRR of 39.6%.
       The project results also compare favorably to other FIP projects in the region. For example, in Burkina
        Faso, the economic analysis of the
        Forest Investment Project at completion in 2021 indicated an NPV of US$2.3 million and an IRR of 9% at
        a 6% discount rate in a scenario without carbon benefits. When considering the carbon impact, a global
        CBA generated an NPV ranging from US$87 million (low) to US$174 million (high), also using a 6%
        discount rate.
       Another aspect of efficiency considered in the ex-post analysis was a cost-effectiveness analysis of the
        unit cost per hectare of land reforestation. The entire cost of the project was US$15 million, and the
        result of reforestation through agroforestry and forest re-densification on 22,719 hectares, the unit cost
        per hectare reforested was US$660. According to the ICR (paragraph 44) "this compares favorably with
        the latest figure from a new World Bank Country Climate and Development Report on Côte d’Ivoire,
        which states that large-scale reforestation efforts cost about US$1,500/ha."
       Implementation efficiency. The project closed on its expected closing date set at appraisal. The
        integrated PMU (IPMU) for managing operating costs among various projects faced some challenges.
        Those related to financial transfer arrangements from the IPMU to the implementing agencies (IAs),
        which at times forced the IAs to have to prioritize payments at the expense of some activities (ICR,
        paragraph 46). While the actual costs of components 1 and 2 were reasonable compared to appraisal

                                                                                                      Page 14 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CI - FIP (P162789)



       estimates, the cost of component 3 was nearly double the appraisal estimate. This was attributed to
       several factors as noted by the ICR (paragraph 47): "there was a significant level of inefficiency at the
       level of coordination between the PMU and the integrated PMU; it may reflect that the Borrower
       mobilized 80% of counterpart funding committed at appraisal; and finally, it may relate to a delay in
       payment of allowances to the project focal points designated by SODEFOR and OIPR, which is likely to
       have lowered motivation for timely and dedicated implementation."

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. The ex-post IRR was estimated at 39.6% which was significantly above
the discount rates used for the sensitivity analysis. The CBA results at completion were all positive with the
benefits outweighing the costs in all tested scenarios including with carbon benefits and without. The project
faced some implementation inefficiencies as noted above, but those did not negatively affect overall project
outcomes. Finally, the project was expected to generate a wide range of benefits beyond what was included in
the ex-post economic analysis. Therefore, efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                             39.60
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial. The project exceeded its
targets of all four PDO indicators. It successfully developed a participatory forest management framework. The
project also strengthened local communities’ access to alternative sources of income, but at the same
time helped to maintain the integrity of Taï National Park (TNP). However, the planned framework agreement
between SODEFOR and communities for co-managing natural resources in gazetted forest was not achieved.
Efficiency was rated Substantial. The ex-post IRR was estimated at 39.6% which was significantly above the
discount rates used for the sensitivity analysis. Also, the CBA results at completion were all positive with the
benefits outweighing the costs in all tested scenarios including with carbon benefits and without.

Based on the assigned ratings for the three outcome criteria, the overall Outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CI - FIP (P162789)



   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following Risks could potentially impact the Development Outcome:

1. Government ownership/commitment risk. The GoCI remains highly committed to advancing the
agenda based on project outcomes and encouraged by the new international regulation to guide value chain
actors in the cocoa sector towards sustainable, deforestation-free cocoa production. The GoCI’s also
showed strong commitment to zero-deforestation agriculture and its current engagement with reforming the
cocoa industry to align with two new regulatory frameworks: the European Union’s Deforestation Regulation
(EUDR-effective in 2023) and the African Organisation for Standardization’s Sustainable Cocoa Certification
(ARS-1000). The EUDR ensures that seven commodity products, including cocoa, will no longer be sold in
the EU if sourced from areas affected by deforestation or forest degradation practices. As the EU constitutes
the principal market for Ivorian cocoa, purchasing approximately 60% of cocoa produced in Côte d’Ivoire, the
country’s economy faces a risk of collapse if this supply chain falters. The GoCI is also currently
implementing key national support frameworks towards ARS-1000 certification to ensure economic, social
and environmental sustainability and traceability of cocoa. At the same time, without intervention over the
next two decades, the country’s forests may vanish entirely. Therefore, the GoCI aims to reforest 20% of the
country by 2030 and the FIP project has catalyzed change to this end.

2. Political risk. The biggest risk to the sustainability of project outcomes relates to continued political
stability and commitment. Political instability has deeply affected neighboring countries in West Africa as
Guinea, Mali, and Burkina Faso, with which Côte d’Ivoire shares its northern and eastern borders. Those
countries have fallen subject to coup d’etats in 2021/2022.

3. Financial risk. Insufficient budget allocation for SODEFOR and OIPR for monitoring of illegal activities in
GF and TNP risks reversing the positive outcomes from project-supported surveillance missions. While the
project outcomes are positive, they require sustained financing for maintenance and operation. Additional
funding is secured in the next phase FIP 2 project, but the cost should be absorbed by the GoCI going
forward.

4. Institutional risk. At the institutional level, the lack of capacity and sustainable funding of operations is a
risk. At SODEFOR, the lack of institutional capacity presents a challenge for broadening the business model.
SODEFOR previously financed its operations by selling concessions to timber and fuel wood growers. There
is now a demand for SODEFOR to engage institutionally with the Coffee and Cocoa Board in selling
concessions for commodities in GF as well as with the Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable
Development (MINEDD) on addressing carbon issues through forest management. However, SODEFOR
lacks a sustainable business model as a state-owned company, which must generate profits with gazetted
forest with a drastic change in the management objectives of GFs objective endorsed by the REDD+ strategy
and the Strategy for the Preservation, Rehabilitation and Extension of Forests (SPREF). At OIPR,
institutional capacity is higher as they already have a sustainable funding mechanism in terms of the
Foundation for Parks and Reserves for Côte d'Ivoire, a conservation trust fund. However, lack of sustainable
funding is inhibiting the scale-up of activities from within OIPR. Restriction on IDA funds to capitalize this type
of funding mechanism means that other avenues must be explored to fund OIPR. Discussions are underway



                                                                                                       Page 16 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CI - FIP (P162789)



to explore how to capitalize the fund with part of the ERP benefits from the benefit-sharing plan targeting
OIPR.

5. Other stakeholder ownership risk. The lack of a benefit-sharing agreement between CLCGs and
SODEFOR for co-management of GFs and substantial levels of dissatisfaction among farmers with the
financial incentive structure to meet community needs puts zero-deforestation agriculture at risk. At the
community level, sustaining the engagement of farmers and cooperatives in co-managing forest resources
and participating in the performance-based remuneration mechanism (both are preconditions for advancing
the REDD+ agenda) remains a challenge to development outcomes. All of SODEFOR's forest management
agreements with third parties, such as cooperatives, women's associations and private sector actors were
meant to ensure that a percentage of the revenue generated from forest management activities would return
to communities through a mutually agreed upon benefit sharing mechanism. However, the definition of a
single percentage was not possible due to the multitude of forest products and the diversity of value chains.
The project's beneficiary Survey revealed a significant level of dissatisfaction with the level and timeliness of
payments for reforestation and agroforestry activities. The survey also revealed that payments to
farmers were sometimes delayed by up to twelve months from signing of the agreement, and the payment
sometimes was insufficient. To mitigate the risks going forward, lessons from FIP 1 are helping to inform the
design FIP 2.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic relevance and approach. The project was the first phase of the Forest Investment
          Program (FIP) under the Strategic Climate Fund (SCF). The FIP aimed to catalyze policies and
          measures and mobilize significantly increased funds to facilitate the reduction of deforestation and
          forest degradation. The program also aimed to promote sustainable management of forests,
          leading to emissions reduction and the protection of carbon stocks. The project was strategically
          relevant and in line with the Government priorities. The PDO was also in line with the Bank
          strategies (see Section 3 for details). Reversing the trend of deforestation and forest degradation
          continues to be a top priority for the Government of Côte d'Ivoire.
         Technical, financial and economic aspects. The project design reflected international best
          practices and incorporated lessons learned from previous and similar projects on forest
          management and reforestation. For example, activities related to co-management, community
          and stakeholder participation and independent oversight by NGOs were based on lessons learned
          from Benin’s experience through direct cooperation between the two countries’ forestry
          departments. While activities that aimed to support enhanced surveillance and management of
          TNP stemmed directly from the World Bank’s extensive experience in projects focused on
          protected area management, biodiversity conservation and the use of conservation trusts
          throughout Sub-Saharan Africa. Also, past WB and IFC projects experiences in the region and
          beyond provided lessons on the key role of domestic and regional markets for forest products that
          contributed to a better understanding of the potential for revitalizing old lumber and fuelwood
          plantations (ICR, paragraph 55). Design also promoted a community-approach to participatory
          forest management based on a shared vision for the management of forest resources and
          financial rewards linked to results. However, arrangements for repayment for communities were

                                                                                                      Page 17 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI - FIP (P162789)



         problematic and resulted in delayed payments and dissatisfaction among beneficiaries. Finally,
         the PAD reflected an adequate EFA that justified the project investment. Overall, the project
         design was relevant and adopting a pilot approach to some activities allowed the achievement of
         targets, despite being slightly ambitious.
        Poverty, gender, and social development aspects. The project was designed to directly
         counter the poverty of rural households that contributed to the overexploitation of natural
         resources, which constituted one of the main direct causes of deforestation and forest
         degradation in the country and contributed to rising carbon emissions. Project activities were
         expected to enhance livelihoods, improve agricultural practices, and clarify land tenure. Also,
         the implementation of a performance-based payment system was expected to directly impact
         income levels and potentially poverty rates at the local level. The project was gender-tagged and
         design reflected careful consideration was given to address gender inclusion in the project
         design. The project design sought to address gender gaps, including collecting gender
         disintegrated data and facilitating female participation. At least 50 of incentive-based sub-project
         funds were directed to women targeted activities.
        Environmental and Fiduciary aspects. While the project design reflected adequate
         environmental aspects, financial management faced some challenges. The project experienced
         fiduciary inefficiencies at the level of the integrated PMU in the early phase of implementation
         affected coordination. According to the ICR (paragraph 60), three main factors contributed the
         inefficiencies: first, a lack clarity of governance procedures, second, different texts regulating
         project coordination (between the PADs and the internal regulations of the IPMU), and third,
         unclear reporting lines.
        Implementation arrangements. An Integrated Project Management Unit (IPMU) was
         responsible for the implementation of the FIP, under the responsibility of the Ministry of Sanitation,
         Environment and Sustainable Development. The IPMU had experience in the implementation of
         Wb projects as it was managing two World Bank-financed projects: (i) the FCPF-Readiness grant
         managed by a REDD+ focal point who is also the Permanent Secretary of the REDD+ (SEP-
         REDD+); and (ii) the Obsolete Pesticides Management Project (P131778) under a dedicated
         project manager.
        Risk assessment. The overall risk of the project was rated Substantial at the appraisal stage.
         Four main risk areas were relating to: the technical design of project; institutional capacity for
         implementation and sustainability; fiduciary; and stakeholders. While the project design made
         appropriate accommodations to mitigate the likelihood and impact of identified risks, fiduciary risk
         proved more challenging and contributed to delays.
        M&E arrangements. Overall monitoring and evaluation was to be ensured by the Strategy for the
         Preservation, Rehabilitation and Extension of Forests (SEP-REDD), SODEFOR and OIPR. The
         FIP focal point under the SEDP-REDD within the Integrated Project Management Unit was
         responsible for data collection and upstream reporting and monitoring information and overall
         progress toward achieving results. M&E design reflected an adequate Results Framework.
         However, there were weaknesses related mainly to poor design of PDO indicator 1 (see Section
         9a for details).

Summary of QAE Assessment. The project was strategically relevant. Design reflected international
best practices and incorporated lessons learned from previous and similar projects on forest
management and reforestation. While environmental aspects were adequate, fiduciary aspects faced
serious challenges. Implementation arrangements faced challenges due to inefficiencies at the level of
the IPMU. The risk assessment was realistic and identified most risks, however, fiduciary risk was


                                                                                                    Page 18 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI - FIP (P162789)



  underestimated. M&E arrangements were complex with multiple agencies involved. Also, the RF had
  some shortcomings pertaining to the design of PDO indicator one. Overall, Quality at Entry is
  rated Moderately Satisfactory due to moderate shortcomings pertaining to risk mitigation measures, M&E
  arrangements and implementation arrangements.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The World Bank conducted nine implementation support missions with a frequency of two missions
        per year over the project implementation duration. According to the ICR (paragraph 80) "the Bank
        team provided adequate supervision guidance to the project." The Bank's financial management
        and procurement departments also provided several support missions.
       The World Bank team provided timely supervision and provided solutions to over implementation
        challenges. The Bank team proactively advanced the MTR by five months to address poor
        performance, restructured the project to align the project with SPREF and deleted the sub-
        component relating to voluntary return to the center, revised the results framework, and reallocated
        of funds between components to enable certain activities to be carried out more effectively. The
        Bank team was also proactive in facilitating full disbursement of project funds prior to closing.
       However, the ICR (paragraph 80) highlighted that the "lack of consistency in properly archiving
        Implementation Supervision Reports and Aide Memoires in the Bank’s internal designated
        repository for project documentation. This omission likely affected general supervision and may
        partly explain a lack of compliance with World Bank safeguards policies regarding some activities."

 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. The Bank team guided the project towards a
 successful outcome and was proactive in restructuring the project to enable certain activities to be
 implemented more effectively. However, a notable shortcoming was the lack of proper filing of project
 documentation and lack of compliance with safeguards policies. Therefore, the Quality of Supervision is
 rated Moderately Satisfactory.

 Based on the assigned rating to QAE and Bank Supervision, the Overall Bank Performance is rated
 Moderately Satisfactory due to moderate shortcomings pertaining to both QAE and Quality of Supervision.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization


                                                                                                 Page 19 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI - FIP (P162789)



a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) since it was not yet required by the Bank at the
          time of appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR included a ToC that reflected the relationship between the
          project activities, outputs, intermediate outcomes and PDO outcomes in plausible causal chains.
          This Review reconstructed a ToC narrative for each objective based on the detailed project
          description in the PAD (Annex 2) in combination with the ToC reported in the ICR.
         The PDO was composed of two objectives (see Section 2), which were assessed based on the
          following four PDO outcome indicators: 1. Net greenhouse gas emissions (in metric tons/year of
          CO2 eq); 2. Volume per ha of forest stock in target GF (by metric/ton); 3. Communities adjacent to
          targeted GFs with increased access to income sources (number); and 4. Satisfaction of
          beneficiaries (level of engagement, by gender and age). While the stated indicators were relevant
          and connected to the stated objectives, the target for outcome indicator #1 was based on an
          expected contribution from the overall Forest Investment Program. This assumption was flawed
          because FIP 1 was intended as a pilot to the larger FIP 2 project. Also, the measuring unit for
          outcome indicator 2 (Volume per ha of forest stock in target GF (metric tons)) was not the best
          choice because most areas were composed of young age forest plantations with uncertain survival
          rates.
         The Results Framework included fifteen intermediate results indicators (IRIs) to track the progress
          of the different project activities. The IRIs were measurable, reflected reasonable targets, and were
          connected to the project activities. However, the RF lacked a dedicated indicator to track progress
          on implementation of microproject IGAs (ICR, paragraph 66).
         M&E arrangements were integrated into the existing REDD+ M&E system, and data collection was
          designed to contribute to Côte d'Ivoire's overall FIP program. M&E design featured a dedicated sub-
          component to independent monitoring and verification of project activities and outputs by a third-
          party civil society team.
         The original M&E design was complex with 15 IRIs. There were also shortcomings pertaining to the
          mistaken assumption for PDO Outcome indicator #1, difficulty in measuring outcome indicator
          #2, and the lack of any IRI to track progress on implementation of microproject IGAs.



b. M&E Implementation
       The responsibility for M&E collection, analysis and reporting was shared between the IPMU,
         SODEFOR and OIPR. The FIP focal point under SEP-REDD+ within the IPMU had the overall
         responsibility for data collection and upstream progress reporting to the FIP Steering Committee
         and the World Bank on an annual basis. SODEFOR and OIPR were each in charge of collecting
         regular M&E data on their respective activities to allow for regular assessment of project
         implementation progress.
        Two outcome indicators were revised, while six intermediate indicators were dropped as activities
         were adjusted in accordance with new strategic priorities set out by the GoCI. These
         changes helped to align the RF with the activities on the ground and clarified attribution to enable
         a better assessment of outcomes.
        According to the ICR (paragraph 69) "baseline data for key indicators was established at appraisal
         and all indicators were measured and reported." The project relied on existing data sources at
         SODEFOR and OIPR, and on the tools developed by the SEP-REDD to monitor forest cover in
         Côte d’Ivoire. These tools included the SMART tool used in TNP by OIPR staff, the gendarmerie


                                                                                                   Page 20 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI - FIP (P162789)



         and mobilized community members to record all data collected in the field and facilitate reporting
         of realized security operations.
        A monitoring and evaluation manual was developed, with attention to gender gaps identified
         during project preparation and the risks of violence against women (GBV) associated with project
         implementation. End-of-project surveys and evaluations were timely completed to inform the
         assessment of project outcomes (ICR, paragraph 70).
        Monitoring activities benefited from partnerships with local and international NGOs. This facilitated
         regular monitoring and enabled independent
         verification of implementation progress and project outcomes. A methodological guide to
         independent monitoring was produced and validated by the IPMU and other implementing
         structures. The project also project partnered with an international NGO to monitor the
         implementation of microprojects (ICR, paragraph 71).
        M&E implementation successfully generated enough information on the progress towards the
         achievement of the PDO. According to the ICR (paragraph 74), the project data was "robust and
         reliable." Also, the restructured RF addressed a number of design weaknesses and was sufficient
         to assess the achievement of the objectives and track the results chain linkages.



c. M&E Utilization
       According to the ICR (paragraph 72) "M&E data and information was actively used for project
         management and accountability purposes." The FIP Technical Committee and Steering
         Committee used M&E information to take course corrective action, including through three
         restructurings and revisions of the RF.
        Further, the project data informed the preparation of the FIP Phase 2 follow-on operation. The
         collected data would also support the objectives of the Emissions Reduction Program and enable
         the first related sale of carbon credits. Finally, the entire database of the results-based payment
         mechanism was shared with the ERP to support continuity of activities around Tai National Park
         (ICR, paragraph 73).

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. M&E design had some shortcomings related to the RF. Those
  were mostly rectified during implementation. M&E implementation successfully generated enough
  information to assess the achievement of the objectives and track the results chain linkages. Finally,
  M&E utilization was evident in informing management decisions and guiding the project. Also, M&E data
  was used beyond the project to inform the preparation of FIP-2, support the objectives of the Emissions
  Reduction Program, and support continuity of activities around Tai National Park.

  Therefore, the Quality of M&E is rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

                                                                                                   Page 21 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI - FIP (P162789)



         Environmental Category and Safeguards. The project was rated Category B (partial assessment)
          with expected significant positive environmental and social impacts. The project triggered five
          environmental and one social safeguards policies: Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Natural
          Habitats (OP 4.04), Pest Management (OP 4.09), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP
          4.11), Forests (OP 4.36), and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).
         Compliance with Environmental and Social Safeguards. While the impacts of project activities
          were minor, the ICR (paragraph 76) reported that "instances of incompliance with World Bank
          safeguards policies prompted the project team to recommend an audit of safeguards activities." The
          audit found that some activities and sub-projects were not carried out according to the environmental
          and social safeguards mechanisms recommended in the ESMF of the PIF. Also, the audit found that
          activities related to reforestation, agroforestry, fencing and water retention did not submit an
          environmental compliance certificate prior to implementation to the Ministry of the Environment and
          Sustainable Development in accordance with Decree No. 96-894 of 8 November 1996. The project's
          GRM received a total of 16 complaints and according to the ICR (paragraph 77) "all of which were
          resolved by project closing."




b. Fiduciary Compliance
        Financial Management (FM). Regular financial monitoring reports and annual audits were timely
          transmitted in compliance with World Bank procedures. There were no overdue audit reports for
          FIP-1 or at the integrated PMU at the time of project closing. FM benefited from closer FM
          supervision by in-country World Bank FM staff. At completion FM compliance was rated
          Satisfactory.
         Procurement. The project experienced difficulties with proper archiving in the STEP software due
          to a failure to archive before 2021. Procurement activities benefited from closer FM supervision by
          in-country World Bank FM staff and a requirement of prior-review of all procurement documents.
          According to the ICR (paragraph 78) "there were no instances of mis-procurement." At completion
          Procurement compliance was rated Moderately Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings



                                                                                                 Page 22 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI - FIP (P162789)



                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    High


12. Lessons

The ICR included three lessons which are emphasized below with some adaptation of language:

1. Projects supporting results-based agroforestry require better coordination of the payment
and transfer mechanism to sustain the engagement of farmers. The project's experience
showed that mobile transfer payments have had a positive social effect on local forest communities.
However, payments faced several challenges including the lack of identity cards among forest
populations, which are required to receive mobile transfers. Therefore, the next-phase project will
contribute to the process of facilitating access to ID cards to members of local communities engaged
in project activities. Also, legal identity papers will have additional ripple effects for those
beneficiaries, including legal status to engage in agroforestry and access to health care. This
requires harmonization of identification, beneficiary monitoring and activity verification procedures,
harmonized database management, and clarification of procedures for switching from results-based
remuneration agreements to concession agreements.

2. To achieve long-term sustainability and emissions reduction goals, it is important to take
a deliberate and phased approach to forest management, informed by evidence-based
learning and stakeholder collaboration. Forest ecosystems and socioeconomic conditions vary
across regions, making it essential to tailor co-management approaches to local contexts. The
project experience demonstrated that piloting initiatives at the local level facilitates engagement with
local communities and stakeholders, enabling the development of customized strategies to align
government priorities with local needs, and provides opportunities for inclusive decision-making,
capacity building, and empowerment. This participatory approach builds trust consensus, and
commitment among stakeholders, laying the groundwork for successful scaling up. Piloting different
approaches to co-management of forest resources is critical before scaling up project activities and
as a prerequisite for developing a national Emission Reduction Program.

3. To effectively address deforestation and promote sustainable forest management, it is
critical to follow a holistic approach to conservation, addressing multifaceted challenges
such as deforestation, habitat degradation, biodiversity loss, and livelihoods. The project
experience demonstrated that cross-sector collaboration, particularly between environmental,
forestry, and agricultural sectors, is instrumental in addressing deforestation and promoting
sustainable forest management. Cross-sectoral cooperation has also encouraged institutional
knowledge sharing and synergy in resource management and strengthened policy alignment and
coordination. By recognizing and fostering partnerships that transcend traditional sector boundaries,
projects can leverage diverse expertise, resources, and perspectives to effectively address

                                                                                                     Page 23 of 25
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CI - FIP (P162789)



deforestation and promote the sustainable management of forest resources, ultimately contributing
to both environmental conservation and socio-economic development goals.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

      Quality of Evidence. The ICR provided an adequate evidence base to support the achievements
         reported.
        Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear links between evidence and findings to the extent possible
         and used the evidence base to serve the arguments under the different sections.
        Results Orientation. The ICR included a well structured discussion on the two objectives. It provided a
         well balanced discussion between reporting on the achievement of outcomes in relation to the indicators
         and what the project actually achieved on the ground.
        Internal Consistency. Various parts of the ICR were internally consistent and logically linked and
         integrated.
        Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.
        Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the standard structure defined in the Guidelines and used
         available evidence to justify the assigned ratings.
        Conciseness. Overall, the ICR was well written, provided a clear and concise coverage of project
         activities, and candidly reported on most shortcomings.

Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. The ICR included an adequate assessment of outcomes. The
lessons drawn by the ICR were relevant. Most sections were concise and reflected relevant evidence. Overall,
the Quality of the ICR is rated High.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
         High




                                                                                                  Page 24 of 25
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
CI - FIP (P162789)




                                                                  Page 25 of 25
