     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gambia Education Sector Support Program (P162890)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023921

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P162890                                   Gambia Education Sector Support Program

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Gambia, The                               Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D2800,TF-A7053,TF-B5583               31-Dec-2022                                         40,488,106.49

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Mar-2018                               30-Jun-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           35,000,000.00                                   12,160,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            42,160,000.00                                   12,158,989.83

 Actual                                        40,488,108.97                                   12,158,989.83




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Rosen Asenov               Denise A. Vaillancourt       Susan Ann Caceres              IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As stated in the April 20, 2018 Financing Agreement (p. 4), the project’s development objective (PDO) was "to
   increase access to Early Childhood Development (ECD) and basic education and improve the quality of
   teaching and learning.” This statement is consistent with the one provided in the Project Appraisal Document
   (PAD, p. 16).

   Although the PDO indicators were not changed, there were amendments to PDO targets. During
   implementation, the targets measuring access to basic education and ECD (gross enrollment rates in lower

                                                                                                 Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gambia Education Sector Support Program (P162890)



   basic schools and in ECD, with sub-indicators tracking access of males) were changed, in light of updated
   2022 and 2023 EMIS data based on the 2013 census data which replaced the 2003 census data that was
   used to inform the above indicators’ baselines and targets at the time of appraisal. Nevertheless, the project’s
   ambition did not change: the updated baselines and targets (all lower than the originals) reflected the same
   percentage point increases as the original sets of baselines and targets. In addition, the target for one PDO
   indicator measuring quality (average score of the Reading Comprehension Section of Early Grade Reading
   Assessment (EGRA), Grade 3 in Public Schools) was reduced under the June 2021 restructuring and
   Additional Financing (AF) from 2.0 to 1.6, mainly in response to expected learning losses from the COVID-19-
   related school closures. Because the efficacy in achieving this outcome target earned the same rating against
   both the original and the revised targets, a split-evaluation of the project is not warranted.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  10-Jun-2021

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1. Enhancing access to ECD and basic education (Original cost: US$9.70 million +
   US$0.98 million in AF, amounting to a revised estimate of US$10.68 million; actual cost at closing:
   US$10.29 million). The Component aimed to expand inclusive education for all, focusing on geographic and
   economic disparities, gender, students with disabilities, and other vulnerable groups. The component had
   two subcomponents:

         Subcomponent 1.1: Expanding the network of basic and ECD classrooms through: (a)
          construction of ECD classrooms, including construction of toilets and provision of classroom
          furniture; (b) construction of classrooms in Lower Basic Schools (LBS) and Upper Basic Schools
          (UBS) in rural areas, including construction of toilets, provision of classroom furniture, and water-
          points; (c) a fund for special needs modifications; and (d) provision of donkey carts to transport
          students to schools in targeted communities. The main focus was on rural areas with the lowest
          enrollment rates.
         Subcomponent 1.2: Expanding opportunities and access for out-of-school children through:
          (a) a Targeted Conditional Cash Transfer program in select districts for children in vulnerable
          households from ages 7 through 12 in exchange for school attendance; (b) provision of Conditional
          Cash Transfers (CCT) to Koranic centers on the condition that basic literacy and numeracy are
          delivered; (c) a feasibility study of options for provision of Second Chance Education in targeted
          communities, possible models for a pilot, implementation of a pilot program based on the findings
          from the feasibility study; and (d) support for sensitization campaigns and consultations to convey



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Gambia Education Sector Support Program (P162890)



       the benefits of education to village and religious leaders, villagers, and parents in targeted
       communities, and to better understand community needs through citizen engagement.

Component 2. Improving the quality of teaching and learning (Original cost: US$18 million + US$4.41
million in AF, amounting to a revised estimate of US$22.41 million; actual cost at closing: US$22.59 million).
This component aimed to strengthen the curriculum with a focus on core subjects, and develop a strategic
teacher training and management policy to improve classroom practices and ultimately learning outcomes.
The component had three subcomponents:

      Subcomponent 2.1: Curriculum revision and implementation. This included the implementation
       of a revised curriculum for ECD, Lower Basic Schools and Upper Basic Schools, with a focus on
       English, science, and mathematics, including: (a) development of key competencies, learning goals
       and minimum standards (for ECD only); (b) provision of accompanying instructional and learning
       materials; (c) sensitization and training of teachers, principals, and cluster monitors responsible for
       curriculum delivery; and (d) M&E to ensure systematic introduction and evaluation of the revised
       curriculum.
      Subcomponent 2.2: Improved teacher training and professional development through the
       development of a strategic framework and coherent policy for pre-service and in-service teacher
       training which views teacher education along a continuum of improved teacher preparation and
       professional development training, including: (a) Pre-Service Training: (i) introduction of an
       externally reviewed and overseen teacher competency test to evaluate graduating teachers which
       maps onto the teacher training standards in the revised curriculum; (ii) an external review of the
       revised curriculum and delivery model; (iii) improvements to the curriculum based upon the findings
       of the evaluation; and (iv) linkages to the in-service teacher training; and (b) In-Service Training: (i)
       analysis of the current in-service teacher training on offer; (ii) development of a structured framework
       for Continuous Professional Development (CPD) curriculum; (iii) development of standards and a
       strategic five-year plan for their operationalization; (iv) development of compulsory and optional
       training modules; and (v) internal and external quality assurance.
      Subcomponent 2.3: Teacher recruitment and deployment, including: (a) strategic planning for
       matching supply and demand of teachers in the education sector; (b) payment of Student Teacher
       Stipends for non-salaried Diploma in Education and Advanced Diploma in Education trainees at The
       Gambia College; (c) Tuition Scholarships for University of the Gambia students with strong
       mathematics and science skills who agree to become teachers at the senior secondary level; and (d)
       Hardship Allowances for teachers in schools located more than 3 kilometers from the main road in
       Regions 3-6, with additional top-up pay for females.

Component 3. Technical and institutional support (Original cost: US$7.30 million + US$1.77 million in
AF, amounting to a revised estimate of US$9.07 million; actual cost: US$7.61 million). The component
focused on assessment of learning outcomes, improving data collection and management, and
communications. It had three subcomponents:

      Subcomponent 3.1: Strengthening capacity for data driven decision making for the staff of the
       Ministry of Basic and Secondary Education (MoBSE) and the Ministry of Higher Education,
       Research, Science and Technology (MoHERST), including: (a) enhancing the system for monitoring
       of student outcomes and distribution of the results; (b) developing a unified Education Management
       Information System (EMIS) between the MOBSE and MoHERST and providing support for an
       annual exercise to collect and analyze education statistics; (c) funding of a service delivery
       indicators (SDI) exercise to provide a regional benchmark of service delivery performance in the

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Gambia Education Sector Support Program (P162890)



       education sector; and (d) enhancing the capacity of MOBSE and MoHERST staff to support data
       driven national policies.
      Subcomponent 3.2: Implementation of communication strategy: support for the implementation
       of the MOBSE’s Communication Strategy for the education sector’s strategic initiatives, including
       procurement of equipment, materials, publishing, dissemination, logistics and administrative costs.
      Subcomponent 3.3: Project management and institutional support: financing the salaries of
       consultants at the Project Coordination Unit (PCU); operating costs to coordinate the project; and
       capacity development for MOBSE and MoHERST staff.

Revisions to components

At the time of the March 2019 restructuring and the June 2021 AF, modifications were made to the project
components to accommodate new circumstances and increased funding. Changes under each component
are summarized here.

Component 1. Enhancing access to ECD and basic education. During the March 2019 restructuring: (i)
under Subcomponent 1.1, the number of ECD classrooms to be constructed remained the same (61) but
instead of 20 using a community-based approach and 41 using the annexed approach, the numbers were
modified to 10 community-based ECD classrooms and 51 annexed ECD classrooms. This modification was
in line with an impact evaluation that showed that annexed ECD classrooms produce better education
outcomes; (ii) under Subcomponent 1.2, to accommodate the government’s request (received after the
project’s approval) to avoid direct cash transfers due to concerns over sustainability, the enrolment incentive
program for the out-of-school children was modified from CCT to in-kind support provided through Mothers’
Clubs. At the time of the 2021 AF, additional funding was provided to Subcomponent 1.2 to continue the
support to out-of-school children. In addition, a small amount of funding was allocated to disability inclusion
efforts well underway, including accessibility adaptations, training for newly recruited itinerant teachers, and
a small number of learning aids not previously budgeted.

Component 2. Improving quality of teaching and learning. The June 2021 AF was used to: (i) support
Subcomponent 2.1’s revision of the curriculum and an immediate reprint of current textbooks to ensure
they were distributed to schools during the life of the project since delays caused by the COVID-19
pandemic did not allow for timely printing of textbooks in line with the revised curriculum; (ii) support
Subcomponent 2.2’s activities to further enhance teacher quality by scaling up the support for teacher
training; (iii) provide AF to Subcomponent 2.3, including for continued teacher attendance monitoring and
classroom observation efforts, as well as some new activities - piloting the newly updated classroom
observation tool and continued regional monitoring efforts conducted by regional education personnel; and
(iv) cover costs of additional monitoring expenses related to the expanded teacher initiatives under
Subcomponent 2.2 and the need to more frequently monitor the school-based remedial initiatives which
were launched following the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak.

Component 3. Technical and institutional Support. The June 2021 AF was used to support: (i) Sub-
Component 3.1’s performance management of teachers by strengthening the system to improve data
capture and analysis and linkage with the Human Resource and promotion systems, and funding for
continued capacity data management and assessment; (ii) Subcomponent 3.2’s communication for the
pre-service and in-service training reforms, and school enrolment communication during the post-COVID-19
period; and (iii) Subcomponent 3.3’s operations costs, capacity building activities, and enhanced
technology within MoBSE, the regional directorates, and The Gambia College to improve their ability to


                                                                                                  Page 4 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Gambia Education Sector Support Program (P162890)



  conduct and participate in technology enabled trainings, virtual planning sessions, and promote enhanced
  sector-wide communication, especially given the challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost. The total project cost was originally estimated at US$35.00 million. The estimate was revised upward
  to US$42.16 million, reflecting the AF of US$7.16 million provided by the Global Partnership for Education
  (GPE) in June 2021. The actual project cost was US$40.49 million, reflecting: (i) the cancellation of a
  textbook contract of US$450.000, which was reimbursed in full to the Bank, (ii) exchange rate losses in the
  amount of US$0.78 million; and (iii) US$0.44 million in undisbursed IDA funds, returned to the Bank.

  Financing and Borrower Contribution. The project was financed by an IDA grant in the amount of SDR
  20.6 million (US$30 million equivalent), a GPE grant in the amount of US$5.0 million, and AF in the amount
  of US$7.16 million, financed by a GPE multiplier grant. The GPE Multiplier is a financing instrument
  accessible to eligible countries, which mobilize at least US$3.0 million in new and additional external
  financing for every US$1 from the Multiplier. The Gambia mobilized external financing through a
  philanthropic organization, mainly focused on school construction. The AF was complementary to these
  investments. No government contribution was planned or provided.

  Key Dates. The project was approved on March 28, 2018 and became effective on August 31, 2018. Its
  mid-term review was undertaken on July 14, 2020, and it closed on June 30, 2023, six months after the
  original closing date of December 31, 2022.

  Restructuring and AF. The project underwent four restructurings, one of which also included an AF. The
  first restructuring, approved on March 28, 2019: (i) changed the proportion of community-based ECD
  and annexed ECD classroom construction; (ii) based on the government’s request, modified the incentive
  program for the out-of-school children from conditional -cash -transfer to in-kind support; (iii) paid an
  outstanding balance of US$128,000 for the digital content of English Language Art (ELA), which was
  developed under the previous READ Project; and (iv) adjusted the amount in the disbursement categories
  to reflect the modified arrangement for construction of the ECD classrooms and the amount disbursed
  under the Project Preparation Advance. The June 10, 2021 Additional Financing and restructuring
  significantly expanded the project scope and: (i) made changes to the project components which allowed for
  scaling up and optimizing teacher training reforms; (ii) revised downward the target of one PDO indicator in
  anticipation of learning losses due to the school closures during the COVID-19 pandemic; (iii) introduced
  adjustments to the IRIs; (iv) revised the project costs by component; and (iv) made some adjustments to the
  RF to account for the additional funds made available and the negative effects stemming from the COVID-
  19 pandemic. The third restructuring dated December 16, 2022: (i) extended the project’s closing date
  by six months from December 31, 2022, to June 30, 2023, to allow for completion of pending activities;
  reallocated US$740,000 from Category 1 to Category 2 to reflect the accurate costing of the benefits
  program under Category 2; reworded the one IRI to more accurately capture the full set of beneficiary
  teachers who were to be assigned to mentors; and modified all the indicator end-target achievement dates
  to reflect the project’s new closing date. The fourth restructuring, approved in June 2023, cancelled
  US$450,000 (equivalent) under the project and reprogrammed it for the Results, Inclusion, Skills, and
  Equity (RISE, P179233) Project, which at the time was under preparation. The cancellation was associated
  with the textbook procurement which was not possible given an internal dispute between the government
  and the recruited textbook firm.


                                                                                                 Page 5 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gambia Education Sector Support Program (P162890)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The PDO is highly relevant to current country conditions. As noted in the Bank’s Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) for FY2022-FY2026, The Gambia continues to face challenges in its efforts to improve
equity of access to education and education quality. Despite increased enrolment in recent years and
achieved full gender parity in enrollment in basic and secondary education, overall education access
remains lower than the Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) average across all education levels. Enrollment and
completion rates across education levels are lower in rural areas, especially for girls and learners with
disabilities. Key barriers include social norms and lack of safe or available transportation, roads, and
schools that address the needs of learners with disabilities and girls. According to the 2020 Human Capital
Index, a child in The Gambia who starts school at age four can be expected to complete 9.5 years of school
before turning 18, but only 5.4 learning adjusted years of schooling. Despite gains in teacher recruitment
and training, The Gambia still faces a lack of qualified teachers in some areas, particularly in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics, and challenges in education quality. Total spending on
education at 3.2 percent of GDP is lower than the SSA average of 4.5 percent; and while the government
had implemented a number of interventions to mitigate financial and socio-cultural barriers to accessing and
completing ECD and basic education, additional resources are needed for addressing remaining challenges
in the education system. The project responded to this need by providing support for increasing access to
education and improving the quality of teaching and learning. Moreover, the project’s relevance to current
country conditions is further strengthened by the support it provided for reducing the negative effects of the
COVID-19 pandemic, including the project’s support for the country’s remediation program targeted at
children ‘at risk’.

The PDO is highly relevant to the current development priorities of the country. Through its focus on
increasing access, improving relevance, and supporting cross-cutting system improvements in curriculum
and teacher management / training, the project is well aligned with the government’s 2016-2030 Education
Sector Strategic Plan (ESSP), and specifically ESSP 2016-2030’s program areas focused on access and
equity; quality and relevance; and sector management. Furthermore, the PDO is aligned with The Gambia’s
National Social Protection Policy 2015-2025, as well as The Gambia’s National Development Plan 2023-
27’s priorities on human capital development and social inclusion.

The PDO was highly relevant to the Bank’s 2018-2021 Country Engagement Note (CEN) for The
Gambia and remains relevant to the Country’s CPF for FY2022-FY2026. The project was in line with the
2018-2021 CEN, which covered the period until the CPF for FY22-FY26 was developed. Specifically, the
project was aligned to the CEN objective 2: ‘’Invest in human capital and build assets and resilience for the
poor.’’ The AF was aligned with the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) 2020, which informed the CPF
for FY22-26, and particularly, SCD’s priority to enhance primary and secondary education as part of the
main objective to build human capital. The project was also in line with the CPF for FY22-26, especially
CPF’s Focus Area 3, under which the Bank supports and strengthens programs providing quality education
to enhance human capital. More specifically, under the current CPF’s Objective 3.3., the Bank supports the
upgrading of the quality of education and technical and vocational skills and articulates the specific result of
increasing the average score of the Reading Comprehension section of Early Grade Reading Assessment
(EGRA). Additionally, the project was aligned with the GPE’s 2016-2020 Strategy Plan, which focused on:
(i) improved and more equitable learning outcomes; (ii) increased equity, gender equality and inclusion; and

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 24
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Gambia Education Sector Support Program (P162890)



               (iii) effective and efficient educational system. Finally, the project was in line with the Bank’s twin goals of
               ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity by contributing to the education of children, which is
               a key driver of development and a tool for reducing poverty.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase access to ECD in The Gambia.

                             Rationale
                             To achieve the objective of increased access to ECD in The Gambia, the project supported outputs aimed at
                             lifting key constraints to access. Specific outputs included: (i) newly constructed and equipped ECD
                             classrooms, including toilets and water and sanitation facilities and accommodations for special needs
                             students, and newly constructed donkey carts for transporting children, together supporting the intermediate
                             outcome of easier physical access to ECD in rural areas with the lowest enrollment rates; and (ii) completion
                             of sensitization campaigns and consultations directed at leaders, residents, and parents of targeted
                             communities supporting the intermediate outcome of enhanced appreciation at the village level of the benefits
                             of education. Together these supply- and demand-side interventions and anticipated intermediate outcomes
                             were expected to boost enrollments in ECD.

                             Outputs and intermediate outcomes:

                                        A total of 61 ECD classrooms (annexed and community-based) were built by the project’s end,
                                         achieving the original unchanged target (61). The breakdown for the newly built ECD classrooms is
                                         as follows: (i) 20 ECD classrooms annexed to existing Lower Basic Schools, (ii) 21 ECD classrooms
                                         annexed to multi-grade schools, and (iii) 20 community based ECD classrooms, achieving the
                                         original target of 41 annexed ECD classrooms and 20 community-based ECD classrooms, and not
                                         achieving the revised target at the 2019 restructuring of 51 annexed ECD classrooms and 10
                                         community-based ECD classrooms.
                                        100 donkey carts were constructed to provide pre-primary students with transportation.
                                        Under Component 3, communities were involved in planning and implementing targeted enrollment
                                         interventions in Region 5, as envisaged. As a result of the piloted activities, MoBSE data showed that
                                         there was increased enrollment of 44,426 ECD and Lower Basic School students in the targeted
                                         districts in Region 5. (Note: the ICR does not break down this aggregate enrollment result by ECD and
                                         Lower Basic Schools).




                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Gambia Education Sector Support Program (P162890)



Outcomes

As noted in Section 2a, original baselines and targets for GER indicators were based on 2003 population
data. During implementation, the baselines and end targets were recalculated based on the 2013 population
data. Nevertheless, the project’s ambition did not change: the updated baselines and targets (all lower than
the originals) reflected the same percentage point increases as the original sets of baselines and targets. For
this reason, only the updated baselines and targets will be reported here and under Objective 2.

      Gross enrollment rates for ECD increased from a baseline of 38.9 percent to 43.7 percent by the
       project’s end, not reaching the target of 47.4 percent. This translates into an increase of 4.8
       percentage points against a targeted increase of 8.5 percentage points (56 percent achieved).
            o The male ECD GER increased from a baseline of 37.5 percent to 41.5 percent, not achieving
               the target of 47.3 percent. This translates into an increase of 4.0 percentage points against a
               targeted increase of 9.8 percentage points (41 percent achieved).

As noted in the ICR (para 38), the drop in ECD GER between 2020 and 2021 is largely due to the drop in
enrollments for all ECD centers at the time of the COVID-19 pandemic. Before that, in 2020, the actual ECD
GER had reached 44.7 percent (43.2 percent for males) and expected to meet the set target by the project’s
end. As the negative effects of the COVID-19 pandemic subsided, the ECD GER in 2022 and 2023 began to
increase, and by project closing, the rates were very close to the pre-pandemic rates. This suggests that the
project’s ECD GER targets are likely to be achieved in the near future, with sustained efforts.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase access to basic education in The Gambia.



Rationale
To achieve the objective of increased access to basic education in The Gambia, the project supported
outputs aimed at lifting key constraints to access. Specific outputs included: (i) newly constructed and
equipped Lower Basic School classrooms, including toilets and water and sanitation facilities and
accommodations for special needs students, and newly constructed donkey carts for transporting children,
supporting the intermediate outcome of easier physical access to Lower Basic Schools in rural areas with the
lowest enrollment rates for all students; (ii) one-off payments to 17 Majalis (traditional religious schools) to
incite and support the inclusion of mathematics and English classes, alongside the religious curriculum
expanding exposure of Majali students to a basic education curriculum; and (iii) targeted in-kind enrollment
incentives, second chance education for out-of-school children, and completion of a sensitization campaign
and consultations directed at leaders, residents, and parents of targeted communities, all supporting the
intermediate outcome of lifting demand-side constraints to Lower Basic School enrollment. Together these



                                                                                                   Page 8 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Gambia Education Sector Support Program (P162890)



supply- and demand-side interventions and anticipated intermediate outcomes were expected to boost
enrollments in Lower Basic Schools.

Outputs and intermediate outcomes:

      A total of 60 Lower Basic Schools/Upper Basic Schools classrooms were built by the project’s end,
       achieving the original unchanged target (60).
      100 donkey carts were constructed to provide basic school students with transportation to school.
      17 Majalis received support to offer mathematics and English classes alongside the religious
       curriculum.
      Second chance, part-time education was provided for two cohorts of learners through The Gambia
       School of Opening Learning program which targets students who did not perform well and/or needed
       to sit for final examination in the 9th and 12th grades.
             o In the first cohort, 590 learners in six regions were supported to study for the 9th grade final
                exam. Following a mock examination, 98 were supported to take the 9th grade final exam.
             o Under the second cohort, 1,841 learners (1,166 female) across 30 centers prepared for the
                12th grade final exam. As reported by the TTL in an interview dated February 29, 2024, the
                purpose of studying for and passing at least one subject in a private 12th grade final exam is to
                secure one more credit because that increases 12 graders’ chances to be admitted at a
                college or university, while giving them an opportunity to deepen their knowledge in a chosen
                subject. A mock examination led to 935 participants to sit for at least one subject in a private
                12th grade final exam in 2022 and 1,646 in 2023. In addition to the provision of lessons, the
                program continues to provide wrap-around self-study materials and textbooks for the grade 12
                end exam curriculum.

      Communities were involved in planning and implementing targeted enrollment interventions in Region
       5, as envisaged. This initiative proved to be highly successful. The MoBSE conducted sensitization
       workshops for communities, provided 123 Mothers’ Clubs with training on the program, and signed
       memoranda of understanding with them. As a result of the project activities, there was increased
       enrollment of 44,426 ECD and LBS students in the targeted districts in Region 5. (Note: The ICR does
       not disaggregate total enrollment data by level, i.e., ECD and Lower Basic Schools). Moreover,
       communities and schools reported that there had been an increase in attendance— due in part—to
       the provision of the school feeding programs supported through this pilot in some of the districts.
      100 percent of Public Lower Basic schools completed a special needs assessment by the project’s
       end, exceeding the original unchanged target (75 percent). The project supported the development of
       a screening tool for better identification of children with special needs that was piloted and finalized
       prior to roll out of the special needs assessment. The collected disabilities data is now used to inform
       budgeting and planning for assistive technologies, which was highlighted as a best practice on
       disability inclusion.
      The regular interval evaluation of the pilot Second Chance Program found that the program was
       successful in improving participants’ skills. The 98 second chance learners, who took the 9th grade
       final exam, earned high pass rates in English (90 percent passed) and social and environmental
       sciences (96 percent passed), and lower pass rates in science (76 percent passed) and mathematics
       (57 percent passed). The program demand exceeded the available spaces, which showed its high
       relevance. There were participants who had dropped out of school long time ago.



                                                                                                   Page 9 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Gambia Education Sector Support Program (P162890)




        A mock examination led to 935 students sitting for at least one subject in a private 12th grade final
         exam in 2022 and 1,646 in 2023.

Outcomes

        Gross enrollment rate in Lower Basic Schools in targeted districts in Region 5 increased from a
         baseline of 61.2 percent to 75.6 percent by the project’s end, exceeding the revised target of 70.8
         percent. This was an increase of 14.4 percentage points, exceeding the target increase of 9.6
         percentage points (or 150 percent achieved).
               o The GER among males in Lower Basic Schools in targeted districts in Region 5 increased from
                 a baseline of 53.9 percent to 63.9 percent, fully achieving the revised target (63.9
                 percent). This was an increase of 10 percentage points over the baseline (100 percent
                 achievement).
        The regular interval evaluation of the pilot Second Chance Program found that the program was
         successful in improving participants’ skills. The 98 second chance learners, who took the 9th grade
         final exam, earned high pass rates in English (90 percent passed) and social and environmental
         sciences (96 percent passed), and lower pass rates in science (76 percent passed) and mathematics
         (57 percent passed). The program demand exceeded the available spaces, which showed its high
         relevance. There were participants who had dropped out of school long time ago.
        A mock examination led to 935 students to sit for at least one subject in a private 12th grade final
         exam in 2022 and 1,646 in 2023.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve the quality of teaching and learning in The Gambia.

Rationale
To achieve the objective of improved quality of teaching and learning in The Gambia, including improved
average score of the Reading Comprehension section of EGRA in grade 3 in public schools, the project
supported the following outputs: (i) increased percentage of public LBS completing special needs
assessment; (ii) revised core subjects curriculum of grades 1-6; (iii) increased number of teachers trained on
the integrated language and literacy curriculum for grades 1-3; (iv) a revised community-based ECD model;
(v) improved pupil/textbook (core subjects) ratio at public Lower Basic Schools; (vi) increased share of
schools using revised Classroom Observation Tool (COT); (vii) increased number of teachers receiving tuition
scholarships in UTG mathematics and science bachelor’s program; (viii) externally reviewed and overseen
end-of-year examination for students completing the revised Gambia College programs; (ix) increased
number of diploma students who complete the Lower Basic Schools English and mathematics initiative; (x)
increased number of newly qualified Lower Basic School teachers and teacher trainees assigned to a trained
induction mentor; (xi) a populated central database of in-service teacher training. Together these outputs
were expected to enhance the quality of teaching and learning. Neither the Theory of Change (ICR p. 5) nor
the project’s results framework provided any articulation (or measurement) of anticipated intermediate

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Gambia Education Sector Support Program (P162890)



outcome(s) or outcomes, supported by these outputs (e.g., mastery of revised curricula, improved in-service
teacher performance in terms of pedagogical and subject matter competency and practice, attendance,
among others) that would have documented improved teaching quality under Objective 3 (as measured by
improvements in Grade 3 EGRA results).

Outputs and intermediate outcomes:

      100 percent of PLB schools completed a special needs assessment, exceeding the original
         unchanged target (75 percent). Trainers were trained to use the project-supported special needs
         screening tool and they in turn trained over 1,640 teachers and principals on developing inclusive
         cultures, policies, and practice. There were also 16 additional itinerant teachers recruited and the
         entire itinerant teacher force totaling 64 was extensively trained under the project. These teachers
         subsequently supported children in Madrassas and the broader network of schools in The Gambia.
         Also, a module on special education was incorporated into the pre-service teacher training. The
         schools completed the screening and collected disability data that is now integrated into the annual
         EMIS data collection process.
        The core subjects' curriculum of grades 1-9 was revised and finalized, exceeding the target of
         revised curriculum from grades 1 to 6, and it is now a competency-based curriculum; 85.1 percent of
         teachers were trained on the integrated language and literacy curriculum for grades 1-3, not
         achieving the target (100 percent). The review of core textbooks for grades 1-9 was completed. The
         printing and distribution of the textbooks and teachers’ guides will be completed under the RISE
         project (P179233).
        13,583 teachers were trained, exceeding the end target of 10,000; among them, 5,442 teachers
         were trained on the synchronized EGRA (ECD, G1-3), 2,536 - for continuous professional
         development, and 268 - on Progressive Science Initiative and Progressive Math Initiative (PSI-PMI),
         and ELA.
        The community-based ECD model was reviewed and revised, as planned. In addition, the minimum
         standards for ECD were established and are being used.
        The pupil / textbook (core subjects) ratio at public Lower Basic Schools decreased from a baseline of
         4.10 to 2.75, not achieving the original unchanged target (1.10).
        1,000 diploma students completed LBS English and mathematics initiative, almost achieving the
         original unchanged target (1,200); among them 60 percent were females, exceeding the end
         target (40 percent).
        90 percent of schools used revised Classroom Observation Tool (COT), reaching the original
         unchanged target. A total of 733 head teachers and senior teachers, and 67 cluster monitors
         completed COT training. As reported by the task team in an interview dated February 29, 2024, the
         data received from the revised COT were: (i) used by the MoBSE to improve the curriculum and
         teacher training, (ii) shared with the teachers to improve classroom practices; and (iii) used by the
         Bank team in the development of the follow-on RISE project.
        A total of 124 teachers received tuition scholarships in UTG (The Gambia College) mathematics or
         science bachelor’s program, not achieving the original unchanged target (300); among them, 20
         percent were female teachers, not reaching the original unchanged target (30 percent).
        100 newly qualified Lower Basic School teachers and teacher trainees were assigned to a trained
         induction mentor, not achieving the original unchanged target (300). The mentorship program for
         student teachers and newly qualified teachers was developed along with handbooks and portfolios for
         mentor teachers and newly qualified teachers.


                                                                                                Page 11 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Gambia Education Sector Support Program (P162890)




      A central database of in-service teacher training was in place and populated by the project’s end, as
         planned. The database specifies the most current trainings teachers have successfully completed
         and will be used to tabulate and track actual training financed and completed training.
        A total of 9 large-scale primary/secondary learning assessments were completed, exceeding the
         original unchanged target (4).
        As planned, the EMIS was expanded to cover post-secondary level to improve the availability of data
         throughout the system.
        Externally reviewed and overseen end-of-year examination for students completing the revised The
         Gambia College programs was in place, as envisaged. The project supported the development of
         The Gambia College External Competency Exam (GCECE) which was piloted in 2020 and 2021 and
         revisions were made to the test design and means of reporting/benchmarking. The GCECE was used
         as a recruitment criterion in 2022 based on the modifications. In 2022, 42 percent of The Gambia
         College’s graduating students achieved the threshold for Lower Basic Schools recruitment, and in
         2023, their share increased to 50 percent. Those that did not were not appointed as teachers but were
         given a report card identifying areas of weakness and were promised an opportunity to retake the
         exam. The Bank-supported follow-on RISE project will continue to use the GCECE through a
         performance-based condition to incentivize an increase in the percentage of graduating primary
         school teachers who score at or above minimum proficiency on GCECE with the aim of fostering
         higher educational standards. This activity has been transformational within the teacher training
         college and system in The Gambia.
        The project contributed to the government’s decision to convert The Gambia College School of
         Education to a University of Education and to restructure pre-service teacher training, whereas three
         years of initial training for Lower Basic School teachers is now required to receive an advanced
         diploma; capacity was also built in the development of basic content courses in English and
         mathematics (see ICR, para 49).
        The project supported physical infrastructure improvements in The Gambia College and provided the
         latter and the regional In-Service Teacher Training coordinators with needed equipment and vehicles.
        A total of 473,673 students benefited from direct interventions to enhance learning, exceeding the
         original unchanged target (411,000); of which 50 percent were female, as originally planned. The ICR
         (p. 19) noted that the target was exceeded because of the project-supported activities aimed to
         increase enrollment and improve teaching and learning, which contributed to student retention.

Outcomes

The average score of the Reading Comprehension section of EGRA, Grade 3 in public schools decreased
from a baseline of 1.23 to 0.82, not achieving either the original target (2.00) or the revised target (1.60);
among female third graders, the average score decreased from a baseline of 1.20 to 0.94, not reaching
either the original target (2.00) or the revised target (1.60). As noted in the ICR (p. 19), the end target for
this indicator was revised downward at the time of the AF in anticipation of learning loss due to the school
closures during the COVID-19 pandemic, but the decline was greater than expected.

Although the average EGRA score for all public schools decreased, not reaching the reduced target for Grade
3 average EGRA score of 1.60 for reading comprehension, the EGRA sample included at-risk students
benefiting from the project-supported, after-school remediation program focused on Reading and Math (The
Effective Intervention Remediation Program), who outperformed their peers and actually met the 1.60 project
end target on the reading comprehension section of EGRA. The Task Team informed IEG (by email of April
30) that the Effective Intervention Remediation Program was initiated and assessed in The Gambia prior to

                                                                                                 Page 12 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Gambia Education Sector Support Program (P162890)



the project. Results revealed a 3.2 standard deviation improvement on the composite EGRA and EGMA
scores (children benefiting from the remediation program vs. control group, which did not benefit from the
remediation program). Based on this positive result, The Gambia sought support to continue the remediation
intervention, securing project support for its implementation in Region 5, and the support of its
partner, Effective Intervention, for its implementation in Regions 3 and 4. The MoBSE is in the process of
expanding the program to reach all early grade students to address the learning loss resulting from the
COVID-19 pandemic and to mainstream ‘lessons learned’ from this approach into the formal education
system. The follow-on RISE project supports the 'mainstreaming' of this intervention in a select number of
pilot schools.

The project strengthened institutional capacities for assessing and improving education quality. Under
Component 3, the capacity for data driven decision making in the education sector was increased through
MoBSE’s improved capacity for data collection, system management, and assessment of learning outcomes,
including (i) development and implementation of The Gambia College Eternal Competency Exam and the
Classroom Observation Tool; (ii) development of a screening tool for identification of children with special
needs and the annual integration of the screening data into the EMIS; (iii) implementing the Service Delivery
Indicator survey, which showed that in 2020, few teachers were proficient in the curriculum they taught,
specifically in English and mathematics, and in how they taught it; (iv) development and implementation of
individual student IDs; and (v) implementation of the NAT and EGRA assessments. The project also
supported MoBSE’s development of a new competency-based curriculum for G1-9 core subjects (i.e.,
curriculum framework, syllabi, pupil books, teacher guides, and implementation guides). While some of these
intermediate outcomes are reported to serve as tools for improving teaching quality, the ICR did not provide
data or other evidence showing that the quality of teaching in the classroom has indeed improved.

In short, the overall efficacy of Objective 3 achievement is rated as negligible because (i) overall Grade 3
EGRA scores were not achieved. They actually regressed from baseline levels, largely due to learning losses
attributable to COVID-19; (ii) at-risk beneficiaries of the project-supported remediation program in Region 5
achieved the reduced target for Grade 3 EGRA score of 1.60 for reading comprehension; and (iii) improved
institutional capacities for assessing and improving education quality hold promise for tracking and inciting
improved teacher performance and learning outcomes, but as of yet, have provided little measurement or
indication of improved teacher performance/improved quality of teaching in the classroom, or of improved
teacher attendance (among others), as a result of project interventions and outputs.

While the ICR reports on the “number of students who benefited from direct interventions to enhance
learning,” as an outcome indicator, whose target was exceeded, IEG does not consider this to be an
adequate measure of improved quality of teaching and learning. Neither do the RF and Theory of Change
include other relevant PDO indicators (or intermediate outcome indicators) that might have enabled the
assessment of teaching and learning quality improvements under the third project objective (e.g. measures of
improved teacher quality/classroom practices as a result of project outputs achieved, including improved
teacher training and management, or results of the revised Teacher Observation Tool, which was applied by
90 percent of the schools).




Rating


                                                                                               Page 13 of 24
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Gambia Education Sector Support Program (P162890)



                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy under the PDOs was Substantial, based on substantial achievement of the first objective
                            (increased access to ECD), high achievement of the second objective (increased access to basic education),
                            and negligible achievement, overall, of the third objective (improved quality of teaching and learning). Under
                            Objective 3, increases in Grade 3 EGRA were negligibly achieved, largely because of learning losses due to
                            COVID-related school closures. Nevertheless, project-supported remediation interventions for students at risk
                            in Region 5 resulted in these beneficiaries' achievement of the reduced Grade ERGA target of 1.60 for
                            reading comprehension. The ICR reported on the development and use of tools and other outputs for
                            improving the quality of teaching, but provided no data or evidence to show whether or to what extent
                            teaching quality improved.

                            During the February 29, 2024 meeting between the task team and IEG, the task team shared their views of
                            the project's attribution/contribution and counterfactual as follows.

                            Attribution/Contribution. During and around the time of project implementation, there were very few donors
                            engaged in The Gambia’s education sector, the largest being the Bank, followed by MRC Holland
                            Foundation. The Bank and GPE provided the bulk of the project funding, while the MRC Holland Foundation,
                            UNICEF and WFP provided much smaller funding and played a complementary role. The project’s
                            achievements can be largely attributed to the Bank and GPE, on the one hand, as they provided most of the
                            project funding and technical assistance, and The Gambia Government, on the other hand, whose
                            commitment, active participation and expertise, were pivotal in achieving the project’s results.

                            Counterfactual. Given the government’s financial and capacity constraints, further reduced by the COVID-19
                            pandemic, and the international partners’ limited engagement in The Gambia’s education sector, it is unlikely
                            that the outputs and intermediate outcomes contributing to increased access to ECD and basic education and
                            improved quality of teaching and learning would have been achieved without this project. This includes,
                            among others, the building of 121 classrooms, provision of transportation for ECD and basic school students,
                            in-kind support and enrolment campaigns for out-of-school children, technical support to The Gambia
                            College, revision of curricula, improved teacher training and competencies, as well as improved teacher
                            recruitment and deployment, reducing learning losses associated with the COVID-19 pandemic through
                            support for remedial initiatives, and improved availability of critical data for evidence-based decision making
                            at the sector level, including data on students with special needs, and data on students’ performance.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency

                                                                                                                             Page 14 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Gambia Education Sector Support Program (P162890)



Economic efficiency. The PAD’s cost-benefit analysis was limited to quantifiable benefits of the project. Based
on 2015 data and strict conservative assumptions on the project’s benefits, the present value of the overall
project benefits was estimated to be US$40.23 million while the present value of costs was estimated to be
US$25.08 million. The corresponding net present value (NPV) of the project benefits was US$11.00 million. The
internal rate of return (IRR) associated with this NPV was estimated to be 17.5 percent, demonstrating the
rationale for investing in education in The Gambia. Moreover, the results of the PAD’s sensitivity analysis
showed that the project could achieve more if successfully implemented and well managed. The updated cost-
benefit analysis presented in the ICR showed that the IRR at closing was 17.8 percent - similar to the estimated
IRR at appraisal, confirming the project’s economic viability. Despite an additional financing of about US$1
million, the results of the disaggregated cost-benefit analysis related to enhancing access to ECD and basic
education (Component 1) were lower than those estimated at appraisal, while the additional financing of over
US$6 million on quality interventions (Components 2 and 3) produced cost-benefit results at closure that were
not significantly higher than those calculated at appraisal. This, however, does not suggest inefficiency given the
challenging context in which the project was implemented, including the COVID-19 pandemic’s negative effects,
increased project costs, especially Component 1’s construction costs, as well as foreign exchange rate losses
and limited institutional capacities, as reported by the task team in an interview dated February 29, 2024.

Implementation efficiency. It took less than six months after project approval to reach effectiveness. The
project was extended by six months to enable implementation of pending activities. By the extended project end,
most of the envisaged outputs were successfully delivered and overall efficacy in achieving objectives is
assessed as substantial. By project closing, almost 100 percent of the project’s net financial resources (i.e., net
of the US$450,000 cancelled funds for textbooks) had successfully been disbursed. The US$450,000 linked to
the cancelled textbook contract was reimbursed in full to the Bank and reprogrammed for the follow-on RISE
project. As reported by the task team in an interview dated February 29, 2024: (i) despite the foreign exchange
loss in the project funding, the government was able to implement the project with the allocated budget and
achieve or exceed the majority of project targets; and (ii) around 16 percent of the allocated funding to
Component 3 was saved and reallocated to other project components to cover increased costs resulting from
supply issues and increased prices due to the COVID-19 pandemic, including increased classrooms’
construction costs under Component 1, enabling the project to build the planned 121 classrooms with the
available project funding.

Some shortcomings affected implementation efficiency, although these were largely caused by factors outside
the project’s control and some of them were overcome. For instance, the NAT and EGRA were delayed due to
the COVID-19-related school closures. The pandemic also likely led to the temporary decreases in ECD
enrollment rates and learning losses that resulted in lower-than-expected achievement of the EGRA reading
comprehension PDO indictor. There were initial delays in the Majali interventions, as some of the originally
targeted Majalis could not provide proof of land ownership and were consequently replaced by Majalis that met
this condition. Also, there were issues with the project’s financial management, as some of the financial
transactions had not been adequately documented by the government, which resulted in “qualified opinion” of
the project’s first external audit. These initial issues were, however, overcome and the remaining four external
audits were all of “unqualified opinion” (i.e., clean). There were challenges with the timely printing and delivery of
textbooks to LBS due to an unexpected price increase from the firm that had been hired for this purpose,
although the firm indicated that the higher price was due to price increases caused by the COVID-19 pandemic
and the conflict in Ukraine. There were also challenges within the MoBSE procurement team related to the time
required to complete the international competitive bidding process for the textbooks. Despite MoBSE’s and the
Bank’s efforts, the price increases and the reduction in printing time led to the termination of the textbook
contract. Before the project ended, the task team proactively cancelled the funds (US$450,000) that had
remained for reprinting out-of-date textbooks and strategically reprogrammed them to the follow-on RISE

                                                                                                       Page 15 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Gambia Education Sector Support Program (P162890)



project. As reported by the task team in an interview dated February 29, 2024, since by the project end,
textbooks could not be revised in line with the new curriculum and existing textbooks had to be reprinted,
reprogramming the unused US$450,000 for textbooks to the follow-on RISE project can be seen as an efficiency
gain since these funds will be used for provision of textbooks that are revised, which will also save some costs
to the government for replacing out-of-date textbooks with revised textbooks.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO is rated high, as the objectives were highly responsive to: (i) current country
conditions; (ii) current development priorities of the country; (iii) and the Bank’s most recent CPF (FY2022-
2026). Efficacy is rated substantial, based on substantial achievement of the first objective (increased access
to ECD), high achievement of the second objective (increased access to basic education), and
negligible achievement of the third objective (improved quality of teaching and learning). Efficiency is rated
substantial due to favorable internal rate of return and implementation efficiency gains despite the challenging
implementation environment. While Relevance is rated High and Efficacy and Efficiency are rated Substantial,
the shortcomings in achieving the important third objective constitute “moderate” shortcomings in the project's
overall outcome and result in a Moderately Satisfactory Outcome rating.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk that the development outcome will not be sustained is modest, as project activities have been
institutionalized throughout the education system and further support for their maintaining, improving and/or
scaling up is to be provided under the follow-on Bank-supported RISE project. First, the new competency-
based curriculum will be used as the anchor to a structured pedagogy package in the follow-on RISE project.

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Gambia Education Sector Support Program (P162890)



Second, the Mothers’ Clubs will continue to function and provide in-kind support for at-risk children. Third,
the piloted Second Chance Program will continue to offer out-of-school over-aged children with an
opportunity to return to school. Fourth, the Teacher Competency Exam was fully institutionalized and
capacity within The Gambia College was increased. Fifth, ECD minimum standards were established and
the newly built classrooms under the project increased the access to ECD. Sixth, the tool for identification of
children with disabilities was fully institutionalized with data entered into the EMIS and used for making policy
decisions. Seventh, hardship allowances to teachers were fully integrated into the national budget as a
standalone budget line item. Eighth, the EMIS was improved, and data are used to inform policy decisions.
Finally, the follow-on RISE project will provide support to the following: (i) Mothers’ Clubs to continue raising
enrollment rates in Region 5; (ii) the Second Chance Program; (iii) The Gambia College and improved pass
rates on The Gambia College Teacher Competency Exam; and (iv) further improvements to the EMIS to
support data driven decision-making. In addition, the planned structured pedagogy package to be financed
under the RISE project will seek to bring together many elements that were supported under this project,
including teacher training, assessment, and inclusive education.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Project design was based on lessons learned from the successful implementation of the READ
  project (P133079) as well as international and in country evidence from successful education projects,
  including the successful PSI-PMI initiative, as well as the 2013 Scoping Survey Report on Majalis and
  Quranic Memorization Centers in The Gambia, and the 2014 Evaluation Report on the CCT to 12 Majalis
  across the country. The design and its underlying theory of change was straightforward and focused. The
  project objectives were clear, outcome-oriented, highly relevant, and appropriately pitched for the
  government’s capacity and development status of ECD and basic education in The Gambia. The project
  components were clearly structured, and the activities were comprehensive, complementary to each
  other, and selected in close collaboration with the government. The RF contained baselines and
  indicators that enabled tracking progress towards achieving intermediate and final outcomes. The IPF
  financing instrument and traditional indicators were appropriate, given the constrained macroeconomic
  environment that had created problems for the implementation of the DLIs in the previous READ project.
  The project risk was adequately assessed as substantial, with appropriate mitigation measures centered
  on recruitment of a well-qualified and experienced PCU, timely guidance, and capacity building.

  Project implementation was mainstreamed into the government’s education management system. An
  inter-ministerial senior management team (SMT) – comprised of MoBSE, MoHERST, permanent and
  deputy permanent secretaries, directors, and the PCU manager - was responsible for oversight of the
  sector and the project activities. The members in SMT and PCU had implemented previous Bank-
  financed projects and their staff remained largely unchanged since 2006, which further strengthened the
  project implementation readiness. The MoBSE was the key implementation agency, and the MoHERST
  was to be consulted for all pre-service teacher training activities. The Regional Education Directorates
  were given responsibility to supervise all school-related interventions via the head teachers and cluster
  monitors within their respective regions. The West African Exams Council in partnership with the
  Standards and Quality Assurance Directorate and the Planning Directorate in the MoBSE were given
  responsibility for assessment-related activities.


                                                                                                     Page 17 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gambia Education Sector Support Program (P162890)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Semi-annual supervision missions - staffed with education specialists, fiduciary and safeguards staff, and
 consultants - provided the needed technical expertise to support project implementation. In total, 10 Bank
 review and implementation support missions, including a mid-term review, were undertaken, averaging
 over two ISRs per year. The Bank team was actively engaged in supporting the government’s efforts to
 implement the project. The Bank’s team worked with the government to find appropriate solutions to
 implementation challenges, including the provision of help with the project’s 2019 restructuring and the
 preparation of the AF. The supervision teams consistently reported on financial management (FM),
 procurement, and safeguards progress during supervision missions and worked with the MoBSE, PCU and
 other implementation agencies, to build their capacity in these areas. The Bank team also provided remote
 implementation support during the COVID-19 pandemic through weekly virtual monitoring missions.
 Safeguards compliance was monitored regularly. The missions also systematically documented project
 progress in aide memoires, back-to-office reports, and ISRs, keeping Bank management informed on
 progress and providing the foundation for the ICR's analysis.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The theory of change, as presented in Figure 1 (ICR, p. 5) was logically sound for the most part, with clear
 links between inputs, outputs, outcomes, and the PDO. However, its articulation of intermediate outcomes
 was not consistently complete (e.g., the lifting of supply- and demand-side constraints to access; and,
 especially improved teacher competencies and performance, and the uptake and effective application of
 outputs, as contributions to improved quality of teaching and learning). The PDO was clearly articulated at
 the outset and did not change. The PDO-level indicators and the intermediate results indicators that were
 chosen were clearly defined and provided good measures of progress and outcomes, albeit with above-
 noted gaps in the articulation and measurement of the results chain leading to the quality outcome
 indicator of improved learning outcomes. The project's M&E arrangements were closely aligned with sector
 priorities. MoBSE had the critical M&E function of coordination and implementation supported by the EMIS
 team of the Directorate of Planning. The M&E arrangements were generally adequate, although there were
 some inconsistencies across data sets (IHS, EMIS, etc.). M&E within the sector was to benefit from
 additional capacity building under Component 3 as well as strengthened data at the post-secondary level
 and included data collection at The Gambia College and the University of the Gambia. In addition to regular

                                                                                                 Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gambia Education Sector Support Program (P162890)



 tracking of the PDO and intermediate results indicators, the sector was to benefit from a rigorous impact
 evaluation on the CCT that supported Koranic centers in Region 5, an evaluation of the pilot Second
 Chance Program, as well as SDI survey, EGRA and NAT assessments.



b. M&E Implementation
  Reporting of M&E data was carried out during the entire life of the project. The M&E data were collected
  and analyzed in a methodologically sound manner. The RF was revised to refine indicators, both targets
  and definitions. During project implementation, original baselines and targets related to objectives 1 and 2
  were appropriately updated to reflect more accurately the updated EMIS data, based on 2013 census
  data that replaced the 2003 census data used to inform baselines and targets at appraisal. The education
  sector benefited from strengthened M&E capacity and improved availability of M&E data: (i) the MoBSE
  developed the unique student IDs and included them in the EMIS; (ii) the EGRA and NAT assessments
  were completed; (iii) the SDI was completed with results made available within the education system and
  donor community; (iv) the teacher observation tool was developed and regional administrators and
  teachers were trained on its use; (v) the disability screening tool was developed and training was
  conducted on its use; (vi) The Gambia College Eternal Competency Exam was developed; and (vii) the
  post-secondary school database was developed, as well. The evaluation of the pilot Second Chance
  Program was successfully done and it found that the program was successful in improving participants’
  skills, especially in English (90 percent pass rate) and social and environmental sciences (96 percent
  pass rate), and to a lower extent in science (76 percent passed) and in mathematics (57 percent passed).
  The planned evaluation on the CCT that supported Koranic centers in Region 5 was not carried out since
  the CCT was replaced with in-kind support.



c. M&E Utilization
  Project M&E data were used to track project implementation progress, identify implementation issues,
  measure progress towards achieving outcomes, inform the scaling up of activities within the AF and the
  analysis of the ICR. The unique student IDs are used for identification of all students in the education
  system and monitoring individual student progress within the system. The EGRA and NAT results are
  used by the MoBSE to make policy decisions for remedial activities and improve teacher training
  programs to address student needs. The SDI and the COT are used to improve training, and were also
  used in the development of the follow-on RISE project. Also, the disability screening tool was used to
  identify children with disabilities, and it is considered best practice, while the GCECE is being used by
  The Gambia College to determine the level of achievement of students and by the MoBSE as a
  recruitment tool - a considerable achievement of the project.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

                                                                                                   Page 19 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Gambia Education Sector Support Program (P162890)



  The parent project and the AF were rated as Category ‘B’ partial assessment. OP/BP 4.01 “Environment
  Assessment” was triggered due to project activities that included construction, which could result in small to
  moderate site-specific negative impacts on the biophysical environment and the recipient communities. An
  Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a simplified Environmental and Social
  Impact assessment/Environmental Management Plans (ESIA/EMP) were prepared to provide guidelines for
  screening, preparation, implementation, and monitoring of the site-specific environment work. The Project
  also triggered OP/BP 4.12 “Involuntary Resettlement”, and a Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared
  outlining the policies and procedures to be applied in the event of relocation. All the parent project
  documents were publicly disclosed. At the time of the AF, all the safeguards’ policies remained unchanged,
  and the documents were updated and publicly disclosed.

  Overall, safeguards activities included: (i) hiring an ES specialist; (ii) training of PCU staff on social
  assessments, ES risk management, grievance management, monitoring and reporting, and monitoring and
  managing contractors and subcontractors; and (iii) discussions on the ESMF and sexual exploitation and
  abuse/sexual harassment (SEA/SH), SEA/SH grievance management, and Codes of Conduct for project
  workers and related training. Additionally, the voluntary donation of land by communities for schools was
  systematically verified through the Bank’s supervision missions and appropriate documentation was
  provided, and it was discussed in training sessions. During implementation, the Bank added a corporate
  requirement for inclusion of Occupational Health and Safety to reflect the training of contractors hired under
  the project. The COVID-19 protocols were monitored, and teams were in compliance. An action plan was
  developed to ensure that all ES requirements and risks mitigation measures were followed. The Bank’s ES
  team followed this closely to ensure identified issues were adequately addressed. The project’s main GRM
  became effective in 2021. Once the GRM was established, complaints were recorded consistently and
  monitored for completion, although the PIU did not always escalate or flag grievances of concern to the
  Bank in a timely manner. The Bank discussed this frequently with the PIU and significant improvements
  were observed during the project period. Following discussions with the affected individuals, matters were
  resolved in a way that was sensitive and agreeable to the complainants. While the ICR did not make an
  explicit statement about the Borrower's compliance with environmental and social safeguards, IEG notes
  that safeguards were consistently monitored during project implementation and that Implementation Status
  Reports (ISRs) consistently rated safeguards compliance as Moderately Satisfactory (ICR, para. 73, p. 32).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). According to the ICR (para 74, p. 32), the project’s overall FM performance
  was rated Moderately Satisfactory, while overall FM residual risk rating remained Moderate. IEG also notes
  that ISRs consistently rated FM as Moderately Satisfactory throughout the project life. Systematic periodic
  reviews were undertaken to ensure adequacy and soundness of the project’s FM arrangements.
  Transaction reviews were periodically carried out to ascertain whether funds had been used in accordance
  with the conditions and standards set forth in the project’s Financing and Grant Agreements and to
  determine if funds had been used as planned. While the project’s overall FM performance was generally
  strong throughout implementation, there were some challenges, including: (i) incomplete monitoring and
  late retirement of advances/imprest given to project officers; (ii) recovery of ineligible transport refund rates
  paid to the project; and (iii) weak controls over imprest approval and subsequent review of retirements by
  project and finance officers. The project’s first external audit was of “qualified opinion”, revealing that some
  of the financial transactions had not been adequately documented by the government. Notwithstanding
  these initial challenges, the project’s remaining four external audits were all of “unqualified opinion” (i.e.,

                                                                                                     Page 20 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Gambia Education Sector Support Program (P162890)



  clean). The manual of procedures was effectively updated during project implementation. The Internal
  Audit Directorate provided strong fiduciary oversight of the project and periodic reports were shared with
  the Bank. The accounting software for the project remained functional and up-to-date, FM staffing was
  sound, and the unaudited interim financial reports were of adequate quality and generally submitted on
  time. Though four out of the 5 external project audits were of unqualified opinion, these audits pointed to
  the need to further strengthen the government’s internal control mechanisms to ensure that project funds
  continued to be used effectively and efficiently. By project closing, 100 percent of the project’s net financial
  resources (i.e., net of the US$450,000 cancelled funds) had successfully been disbursed. The US$450,000
  linked to the cancelled textbook contract was reimbursed in full to the Bank and reprogrammed for the
  follow-on RISE project.

  Procurement. At closing, the project’s overall procurement performance was rated Satisfactory, indicating
  an improvement over the initial ratings of Moderately Satisfactory during the project's early years, while the
  associated residual risk rating remained Substantial. The project’s Procurement Plan was regularly
  updated during the project’s life and included the main interventions and deliverables procured under the
  project. The accuracy, completeness, and timeliness of the information in the Systematic Tracking of
  Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) system improved significantly during project implementation,
  particularly the information related to contract administration, including payment, delivery, and completion
  of all procurable activities. The Bank’s task team worked closely with the government throughout
  implementation to ensure that procurement activities were carried out in accordance with the agreed
  procedures and guidance. As a result of a concerted effort of the Bank’s task team and the government, all
  the approved contracts - except for the printing and distribution of textbooks contracts - were reflected in
  the STEP tool and successfully completed prior to the project’s closing. As previously mentioned, the
  textbook contract was terminated given the inability of the supplier to print and deliver the textbooks on
  time. The final comprehensive Procurement Risk Assessment and Management System (PRAMS)
  Assessment was carried out on April 30, 2023, and showed that the project’s overall procurement
  performance remained Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  N/A



d. Other
  Gender. Despite the project’s measures to address the gender imbalance in education, such as provision of
  in-kind support, second chance education, support for Majalis, and having gender-disaggregated indicators
  with a special focus on boys, boys in The Gambia continue to have lower GER in ECD and basic education,
  while enrolment rates over the project period show a consistent and increasing representation of girls in
  education, with the share of girls in Lower Basic Education going from 52 percent to around 53 percent, and
  in Upper Basic Education at 55.7 percent (2.6 percent increase). In 2021, 8.1 percent of females in primary-
  school age were out-of-school, compared to 19.1 percent of their male counterparts. Related to that, the
  follow-on RISE Project (P179233) has included activities to further address gender-based differences and
  barriers, including gender issues affecting the Lower Basic Schools teacher workforce, access and quality




                                                                                                    Page 21 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gambia Education Sector Support Program (P162890)



   issues for boys, and to apply a gender lens to the development or review of new textbooks, structured
   teacher guides, teacher professional development and support activities.

   Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity. While poverty reduction and shared prosperity were not part
   of the PDO statement, the project contributed indirectly to poverty reduction and shared prosperity by
   contributing to beneficiary children’s human capital formation and future earning potential through
   supporting the pre-primary, primary and lower secondary sub-sectors, including through in-kind donations,
   which were a direct response to the household survey’s findings that the cost of school was prohibitive,
   even though it was fee free (ICR, pp. 26-27).



11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                             Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Bank Performance               Satisfactory         Satisfactory
                                                                              While the project reported on
                                                                              outputs that were poised to
                                                                              contribute to improvements in
                                                                              the quality of teaching, no
Quality of M&E                 High                 Substantial
                                                                              evidence was provided on
                                                                              whether intended improvements
                                                                              in teaching quality were actually
                                                                              achieved.
Quality of ICR                 ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 35-36) presents a number of lessons generated through this project:

Education enrollment rates can be improved through targeted interventions to eliminate
barriers to equal access, especially when they are well documented and tailored to a
particular country context, and discussed and supported at the community level. As the
experience of this project showed, enrolment can be increased through interventions that address
actual needs, such as (i) providing in-kind support through community-based Mother’s Clubs, which
provided more transparency at the community level and community knowledge of what the actual
local needs for food, school uniforms, supplies, etc. were; (ii) provision of an innovative Second
Chance Education Program; and (iii) development of tools to identify children with disabilities and
use the data to inform inclusive education planning - all of which, as demonstrated by MoBSE data,
helped increase enrolment rates in Region 5.

Ensuring pre-service and in-service teachers’ pedagogical competence and the measurement
of teachers’ performance against quality standards are both essential for enhancing


                                                                                                Page 22 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Gambia Education Sector Support Program (P162890)



children’s learning outcomes. The project invested in activities aimed at improving teacher
competency both through pre-service and in-service teacher training, focusing on a continuum of
improved teacher preparation and professional development training, and it provided technical
assistance to The Gambia College School of Education to support the staff and build management
capacity. At the pre-service stage, the share of aspiring teachers completing the revised The
Gambia College programs who pass the externally reviewed and overseen end-of-year examination
(i.e., pre-service teachers who meet the 50 percent benchmark in teaching literacy and numeracy)
increased from 42 percent in 2022 to 50 percent in 2023; and the passing of the GCECE was used
as a recruitment criterion in 2022. Additionally, the development of a college-based practicum model
for student teachers and a school-based mentorship program were important investments in
improvements in teacher competency, which is a pre-requisite for improved classroom practices and
better learning outcomes.

Hardship allowances can have a transformative effect on the equitable distribution of
teachers. The project provided hardship allowances for lower and upper basic education teachers in
remote areas with additional incentives for female teachers, which had a strong, positive impact on
the proportion of qualified teachers in hardship schools. This major achievement resulted in the
government’s decision in 2023 to add a line item in the budget for the hardship allowance.

Non-formal pathways to education are difficult to sustain without greater efforts to
institutionalize the approach and to clarify and strengthen accountability for results. Although
the effort to offer reading and mathematics sessions at Majalis was important given the lack of state
curriculum in these institutions, the intervention did not move beyond the initial pilot stage. However,
in neighboring Senegal which has a similar intervention initially based on The Gambia intervention,
and supported by the Bank, the government has managed to greatly scale the intervention over
time. This difference might be partly explained by the approach in Senegal which utilizes
performance-based contracts between the state and the Koranic schools, which in turn allows for
results agreements and better monitoring and accountability.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well written and candid. It provided a detailed overview of the project. The evidence was of
adequate quality and sufficient to reach conclusions in assessing the achievement of the PDO. The ICR
contained a well-articulated theory of change that helps the reader understand how the ratings were reached.
The report sought to triangulate data to reach conclusions and was focused on results. The lessons presented
in the report were clear, evidence-based, and useful for difficult contexts. The ICR adhered to the guidelines
overall, with some minor shortcomings, such as (i) the ICR’s discussion of efficacy lacked an assessment of
attribution/contribution and the counterfactual, and (ii) an inconsistency in the reported pupil-textbook (core
subjects) ratio at public LBS – in the RF, the achieved ratio was reported to be 1.27, whereas the ICR Efficacy
section (para 47) reported that it was 2.75. These, however, were promptly addressed by the task team on 02-
29-24. The ICR’s Efficacy section, in para 36, based the assessment of the achievement of the first objective

                                                                                                    Page 23 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gambia Education Sector Support Program (P162890)



‘’Increase access to ECD’’ on indicators that relate to the second objective ‘’Increase access to basic
education’’ (e.g., ‘number of Lower Basic Schools and Upper Basic Schools classrooms built’ or ‘increase in
GER at Lower Basic Schools in select districts’), and vice versa (para 39). The ICR did not include an explicit
statement confirming the Borrower's compliance with environmental and social safeguards.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 24 of 24
