     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GA- Skills Development and Employability (P146152)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023875

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P146152                                    GA- Skills Development and Employability

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Gabon                                      Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-85820                                 31-Dec-2021                                         65,981,161.90

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 10-Feb-2016                                30-Apr-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             63,123,725.16                                              0.00

 Actual                                         65,981,161.90                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Shahrzad Mobasher           Denise A. Vaillancourt       Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
 Fard                                                     Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was to: "improve the effectiveness of vocational training, short-
   term skills development, and entrepreneurship programs in key growth sectors in the Gabonese Republic"
   (Financing Agreement, p. 5). This is consistent with the PDO statement in the design document (PAD, para.
   23 and footnotes 11, 12 and 13), which provides additional information on the PDO intent and measurement:
   (i) effectiveness was to be measured by graduation or employment (including self-employment); (ii) short-term
   skills development was defined as “less formal, generally short-term training programs for graduates of higher
   education and technical programs, as well as school-leavers, who are unemployed; and (iii) targeted key

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GA- Skills Development and Employability (P146152)



   growth sectors included: “green” growth, wood processing, food processing agriculture, information,
   communication and technology (ICT), and construction. For the purposes of this ICR Review (ICRR), the PDO
   is decomposed into three objectives: (i) improve the effectiveness of vocational training in key growth sectors;
   (ii) improve the effectiveness of short-term skills development in key growth sectors; and (iii) improve the
   effectiveness of entrepreneurship programs in key growth sectors.

   A split rating is undertaken given changes in the project’s ambition introduced at the April 2019 restructuring
   in response to delayed implementation. While the PDO statement did not change, of the six original outcome
   indicators, the targets of two were reduced and one of these outcome indicators was dropped. At the
   approval of the 2019 restructuring, the project had disbursed 21.9 percent of the total amount disbursed by
   the project closing date ($14.46 million disbursed out of a total of $66.0 million).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Original Components

   Component 1: Extension of Training Supply and Quality Improvement in TVET in key growth sectors
   (estimated cost at appraisal: US$65 million; estimated cost at 2019 restructuring: US$34.65 million;
   estimated cost at 2021 restructuring: US$40.09 million; actual cost: US$39.51 million)

          Supporting skills development and availability of training in key growth sectors through: (a) the
           construction of two technical and vocational education and training (TVET) centers for the
           construction and public works, and ICT sectors; (b) carrying out of dimensioning, feasibility and
           architectural studies for the establishment and management of the TVET centers; (c) carrying out of
           dual preparatory training for youth aspiring to work in the two sectors and on-the-job/continuing
           training to employees in said sectors; and (d) supporting the establishment of an independent
           management body for the TVET centers in partnership with the private sector.
          Improving the quality of existing TVET centers, through: (a) preparation of related procedures
           manuals, guidelines for preparation of proposals and the provision of training; and (b) provision of
           performance-based payments pursuant to performance-based contracts to selected TVET centers
           aimed at improving the quality of training and upgrading their facilities.

   Component 2: Employability Development, Youth Integration and Entrepreneurship Promotion
   (estimated cost at appraisal: US$20 million; estimated cost at 2019 restructuring: US$17.93 million;
   estimated cost at 2021 restructuring: US$15.16 million; actual cost: US$15.49 million)

          Carrying out an apprenticeship program aimed at increasing professional opportunities for youth with
           limited education, through apprenticeship and short-term training and insertion programs, including

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  GA- Skills Development and Employability (P146152)



       provision of: (a) apprenticeship payments to apprenticeship beneficiaries to cover basic fees; (b)
       mentoring and coaching training; and (c) toolkits and equipment necessary for apprenticeship.
      Carrying out an internship program aimed at increasing job opportunities for young graduates,
       including: (a) the provision of internship payments for internship beneficiaries/graduates to improve
       the transition from higher education and TVET to the labor market; and (b) monitoring and
       evaluation of the internship program.
      Promoting youth employment through the development and implementation of entrepreneurial
       initiatives, including: (a) preparation of entrepreneurship-training modules; (b) organizing an
       information campaign to raise awareness and invite proposals for new business ideas; (c) selection
       of most promising business concepts; (d) support in the drafting of business plans and provision of
       required training in the areas of business planning and entrepreneurship; (e) provision of sub-grants
       to selected sub-grant beneficiaries as seed capital for specific development projects; and (f)
       technical assistance and mentoring for the carrying out of sub-projects.

Component 3: Institutional Capacity Support and Project Implementation (estimated cost at
appraisal: US$10 million*; estimated cost at 2019 restructuring: US$7 million; estimated cost at 2021
restructuring: US$11.02 million; actual cost: US$10.98 million)

      Support to the Borrower in the areas of project coordination, supervision, financial management,
       communication and outreach, impact evaluation and assessment, procurement, supervision of
       implementation of the safeguards instruments, including through the provision of training, operating
       costs, goods and services for the required purpose.
      Carrying out external evaluation of performance-based contracts.
      Carrying out a program of activities aimed at enhancing institutional capacity, including: (a)
       strengthening the institutional and operational capacity of the Ministry of Vocational Training and
       Youth Integration, ministry in charge of professional education, General Direction of Human
       Resources, and National Observatory on Employment and Training; (b) supporting the
       implementation of a new format of the Insertion and Reinsertion Fund (Fonds d’Aide à l’Insertion et à
       la Réinsertion Professionnelle, FIR) mechanism in the National Office for Employment; and (c)
       supporting the design and implementation of the regulatory and operational framework of an
       apprenticeship scheme.

* While the cost of Component 3 is presented as US$15 million in the PAD, the 2019 restructuring paper
explains that US$5 million of this amount was viewed as “unallocated” and that the new proposed amount
for “unallocated” under the restructuring was US$1 million. The 2019 restructuring paper explains that the
unallocated amount was intended to be used to address any unforeseen situations and shortfalls due to
currency fluctuations.

Revised Components

Component 1: Extension of Training Supply and Quality Improvement in TVET in key growth sectors
(estimated cost at appraisal: US$65 million; estimated cost at 2019 restructuring: US$34.65 million;
estimated cost at 2021 restructuring: US$40.09 million; actual cost: US$39.51 million)

      Sub-component 1.1: The allocation to this sub-component was reduced from US$30 million to
       US$27.35 million at the 2019 restructuring, with the scope of work related to sporting and boarding
       facilities reduced due to high costs. The allocation to this sub-component was increased from


                                                                                                Page 3 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GA- Skills Development and Employability (P146152)



         US$27.35 million to US$32.79 million at the 2021 restructuring to include the addition of a kitchen,
         restaurant for students and trainers, and infirmary.
        Sub-component 1.2: The allocation to this sub-component was reduced from US$35 million to
         US$7.3 million at the 2019 restructuring, with the number of TVET institutions being upgraded
         reduced from 14 to four. This was explained by significant delays in the development of strategic
         business plans for the institutions, as well as the involvement of other development partners working
         in this area. Some changes were introduced at the 2021 restructuring which, however, did not affect
         the amount allocated to this sub-component.

  Component 2: Employability Development, Youth Integration and Entrepreneurship Promotion
  (estimated cost at appraisal: US$20 million; estimated cost at 2019 restructuring: US$17.93 million;
  estimated cost at 2021 restructuring: US$15.16 million; actual cost: US$15.49 million)

        Sub-component 2.1: The allocation to this sub-component was reduced from US$11 million to
         US$8.59 million at the 2019 restructuring, with the apprenticeship program for rural and agricultural
         jobs moved to the internship program and the target for the number of youth in urban
         apprenticeships increased to 2,400. The allocation to this sub-component was further reduced from
         US$8.59 million to US$8.09 million at the 2021 restructuring with project activities concluding earlier
         than anticipated so that government could focus on other project activities given the limited time
         remaining.
        Sub-component 2.2: The allocation to this sub-component increased from US$4 million to US$7.3
         million at the 2019 restructuring. The target for youth participation increased from 3,500 to 3,800, but
         the target for the training-adaptation program for rural and agricultural jobs was reduced from 1,000
         to 500. The allocation to this sub-component was reduced from US$7.03 million to US$5.13 million
         at the 2021 restructuring due to a decrease in the target for internships, with cost-savings being
         reallocated to Component 1 activities.
        Sub-component 2.3: The allocation to this sub-component was reduced from US$5 million to
         US$2.04 million in line with the reduction in the number of youth beneficiaries from 2,000 to 873.
         The allocation to this sub-component was reduced from US$2.04 million to US$1.94 million at the
         2021 restructuring, with the number of youth beneficiaries reduced from 300 to 200. Cost-savings of
         US$0.1 million were reallocated to Component 1 activities.

  Component 3: Institutional Capacity Support and Project Implementation (estimated cost at
  appraisal: US$10 million*; estimated cost at 2019 restructuring: US$7 million; estimated cost at 2021
  restructuring: US$11.02 million; actual cost: US$10.98 million)

  The allocation to this component was reduced from US$10 million to US$7 million at the 2019 restructuring
  in line with the reduction in the scope of the project activities and associated capacity support and
  implementation oversight needs. The allocation to this component was increased from US$7 million to
  US$11.02 million at the 2021 restructuring to cope with the repercussions of the COVID-19 pandemic,
  which necessitated the introduction of a mobile tool to monitor the internship program, the establishment of
  a digital platform for National Office for Employment (Office National de l'Emploi, ONE), and a study on the
  impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on employment.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GA- Skills Development and Employability (P146152)



   Project Cost. The total project cost estimated at appraisal was $100 million (PAD, Table 1, p. 15). This
   included $65 million for Component 1, $20 million for Component 2, and $15 million for Component 3, and
   $0.25 million in Front-End Fees. The actual total cost at closing was $65.98 million, or 66 percent of the
   original estimate due to the change in scope of project activities under Components 1 and 2. Actual
   Component costs, provided in Section 2d (above), were, respectively: 62 percent of the original estimate for
   Component 1, 75 percent of the original estimate for Component 2, and 73 percent of the original estimate
   for Component 3.

   Financing. The project was 100 percent financed through an International Bank for Reconstruction
   Development (IBRD) loan. The original loan amount approved by the Board was 94.6 million Euros ($100
   million equivalent). As part of the April 19, 2019, restructuring, which reduced the project’s scope, an
   amount of 34.88 million Euros ($39.42 million) was cancelled, leaving an adjusted amount of 59.72 million
   Euros ($60.58 million) in IBRD financing (Project Paper, April 19, 2019, Table 9). Total actual
   disbursements amounted to 59.71 million Euros ($65.98 million equivalent) – 63 percent of the original loan
   amount, and 100 percent of the amended loan amount. Large fluctuations in the US dollar over the
   implementation period explain the difference between the revised and actual disbursement amounts
   expressed in US dollar equivalents.

   Dates. The project was approved on February 10, 2016, and became effective on December 13, 2016. A
   mid-term review was held on November 8, 2018. The original closing date of the project was December 31,
   2021, and the actual closing date of the project was April 30, 2023. The project underwent three
   restructurings on April 19, 2019, October 13, 2021, and December 20, 2022. The first restructuring resulted
   in changes to the results framework, change in components and cost, the cancellation of financing, the
   reallocation of funds between disbursement categories, the change in institutional arrangements and the
   change in the implementation schedule. The second restructuring resulted in changes in the results
   framework, changes in components and cost, changes in the loan closing date, the reallocation between
   disbursement categories, and changes in the implementation schedule. The third restructuring resulted in
   changes in the loan closing date and the reallocation between disbursement categories. From its original
   closing date of December 31, 2021, the project was extended twice to allow time for completion of planned
   activities: initially by one year (to December 31, 2022) under the October 13, 2021, restructuring; and
   subsequently by an additional four months (to April 30, 2023) under the December 20, 2022, restructuring.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At the time of appraisal, Gabon was confronted with a significant skills mismatch between those
seeking jobs and the needs and demands of the labor market, resulting in the substitution of foreign
workers for domestic workers, leading to a high unemployment rate. According to the ONE, while the
majority of job offers sought applicants with technical skills, 64 percent of applicants surveyed lacked any
relevant type of vocational training. This resulted in Gabon substituting foreign workers for domestic
workers, notably, in the skills-intensive growth sectors, such as mining, oil, and information and
communications technology. This contributed to the rise in the unemployment rate from 16.3 percent in
2005 to 20.4 percent in 2010, with the unemployment rate among the youth population between the ages of



                                                                                                  Page 5 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GA- Skills Development and Employability (P146152)



15 and 24 years of age estimated at 35.5 percent, compared to 25 percent for the 25-34 age cohort and 17
percent for the 34-44 age cohort.

The significant skills mismatch in the labor market was explained at appraisal by the lack of quality
basic education and problems with the TVET system. While there has been some modest progress
on some of the issues identified at appraisal (and listed in this paragraph), most continue to
undermine a better match between the supply of skills in Gabon and the needs and demands of the
labor market. Notwithstanding Gabon's high enrollment rate for basic education and high literacy rate, the
low quality of basic education—attributed to the continued overcrowding of primary schools and the poor
working conditions of teachers— and the high secondary school dropout rate has undermined skills
development. Meanwhile, numerous problems with the TVET system have also exacerbated the
situation. First, there has been a lack of access to vocational institutions given that these were concentrated
in urban areas and regional administrative centers, and that only 1,700 students out of 5,000 applicants
were admitted into the program each year due to capacity constraints. Second, the quality of TVET
programs has been low, resulting in an estimated 80 percent of graduates from these institutions failing to
be hired in the sectors in which they were trained for. Third, private sector involvement in the development
of TVET training programs and linkages to the industry has been weak, undermining the relevance of the
programs. Fourth, TVET institutions lacked autonomy as they did not operate as distinct legal entities and
did not have a board of directors (or similar entity) to facilitate private sector participation, and the Ministry
of Vocational Training and Youth Integration (Ministère chargé de la Formation Professionnelle et de le
l’Insertion des Jeunes, MFPIJ) retained the power to, for example, recruit and post staff in training
institutions. Fifth, only 8 percent of total youth in post-primary education are enrolled in TVET institutions
compared to 30-40 percent in other developing countries.

The PDO was aligned with the government’s strategy at appraisal, which remained in effect
beyond project closing. The PDO was aligned with all three pillars of the Government of Gabon’s
Strategic Plan for an Emerging Gabon (Plan Stratégique Gabon Émergent, PSGE) adopted in 2009
covering the 2012-2025 period, consisting of (i) Gabon Industrial (Gabon Industriel), which aims to position
Gabon as an industrial center that uses clean energy and is driven by strategic raw materials including, but
not limited to, manganese, iron, gas, and a regional wood processing industry; (ii) Green Gabon (Gabon
Vert) which aims to position the country as a pioneer in the green economy through sustainable
management of the country’s rich biodiversity and the development of ecotourism; and (iii) Service-oriented
Gabon (Gabon des Services) which aims to develop Gabon as a center of excellence in higher education
and to develop the country’s capacity in the research, business, tourism, health, media, and ICT sectors.
The PSGE identified priority sectors holding the greatest potential for economic growth and job creation,
which included construction, wood processing, mining, tourism, the green economy and ICT.

The PDO was aligned with the Bank’s strategies for Gabon, both the one in effect at the time of
appraisal and the subsequent one currently in effect. The PDO was aligned with one of the two
strategic themes of the Country Partnership Strategy FY2012-FY2016 focused on increasing Gabon’s
competitiveness and employment, which included an outcome of enhanced vocational skills and capacity to
support economic diversification and private sector development. The PDO is also aligned with the currently
Country Partnership Framework FY2023-2027, specifically as it relates to the High Level Outcome of
increasing employment in the non-oil private sector, which included an objective on improved environment
for private investment in the non-oil sector.

Interventions under this project were complemented by existing and planned interventions by the
Bank and other development partners. The upgrading of skills and enhanced employability were

                                                                                                       Page 6 of 24
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      GA- Skills Development and Employability (P146152)



               complementary to Gabon Investment Promotion and Competitiveness Project (P129267) which supported
               an improvement in the investment climate and fostered enterprise development, and the eGabon Project
               (P132824) intended to contribute to the development of a local ICT industry encompassing the creation of
               digital content, applications, and services. Other partners' support included the United Nations Development
               Program’s National Project for Youth Employment supporting skills development and access to decent jobs
               for the youth population between the ages of 16 and 35 and an African Development Project supporting the
               training of teachers in higher education and vocational training.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve the effectiveness of vocational training in key growth sectors (original indicators and targets)

                             Rationale
                             As derived from the design document, and the M&E framework, this ICRR summarizes the following project
                             logic. Through investments in civil works and equipment, activities to improve the quality and relevance of
                             technical training in priority sectors, and formal partnerships between technical training institutions and the
                             private sector, the project sought to boost enrollment of youth in high quality technical training programs in
                             priority sectors, with the expected outcome that they would graduate from these programs and find
                             employment soon thereafter.

                             However, the theory of change as presented in the ICR (Figure 1, p. 6), does not provide the full logic of the
                             project, laying out and linking key project activities, to expected outputs, outputs to expected intermediate
                             outcomes, and intermediate outcomes to expected outcomes. The PAD (p. 7) was clear in specifying that the
                             PDO – improved effectiveness of training in relevant sectors – would be assessed by students’ graduation
                             from training programs (number of graduates, rates of graduation), and rates of employment (including self-
                             employment) of graduates. The theory of change, as presented in the ICR (p. 6) does not capture these
                             outcomes, nor does it capture key intermediate outcomes of improved quality and relevance of training.

                             The activities/inputs column for Component 1 (Extension of Training Supply and Quality Improvement in
                             TVET in Key Growth Sectors) focuses mostly on civil works, with no mention of activities to improve training
                             quality. The outputs column includes a mix of output, intermediate outcome and even outcome indicators,
                             without showing their links and sequence. Among the outputs listed in the theory of change, there are some
                             indicators of quality improvement: school managers and teachers trained; revised and implemented curricula;
                             improved/expanded infrastructure. The outcomes column only provides the statements of the three PDO
                             (e.g., for Objective 1: improve the effectiveness of vocational training programs in key growth sectors). The
                             above-noted outcome measures of graduation and graduates’ employment rates are not reflected at all as
                             outcomes in the theory of change, even though they are captured (somewhat) among the indicators,

                                                                                                                                Page 7 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GA- Skills Development and Employability (P146152)



especially with indicators added in 2019 (See Section 9 on M&E). The theory of change does not capture
capacity building of TVET trainers and the ANFEP (National Agency for Training and Vocational Education),
or the strengthening of inspections in the areas of competency-based pedagogy and
management/governance, both of which are important elements of quality improvements.

Outputs and intermediate outcomes

Two new training centers specializing in two priority sectors (respectively, ICT and wood/construction/public
works), were constructed and equipped with project support, and were expected to become operational by
the end of 2023.

Four existing TVET institutions were upgraded under the project through rehabilitation works and the
provision of needed equipment, falling short of the original scope of 14 TVET institutions. The project
also supported improvements in the quality and efficiency of training through the implementation of new
pedagogical and management models, including greater involvement of the private sector, and the upgrading
of trainers’ skills and knowledge as detailed below.

The number of programs, which have revised and implemented the new curricula, rose from a baseline of
zero, to 26 by the project’s closing, surpassing the target of 25, and six months later (at the time of ICR
preparation) rose to a total of 49, almost double the target of 25. In an email to IEG dated January 9, 2024,
the Bank clarified that the revised curricula were developed by mobilizing international and national TVET
experts, representatives of local companies, the board of directors of the National Agency for Training and
Vocational Education, and inspectors from the National Pedagogical Institute to formulate and implement a
survey on sectors with high potential for economic growth in Gabon. Survey results were reviewed by sectoral
representatives and TVET institutions to identify the key skills needed by youth to meet the job requirements
in these high-growth sectors. The design of the curricula and training programs focused on a practical, skills-
based training approach and was informed by these results and consultative process. The task team later
clarified in an email to IEG on January 9, 2024, that the revised and implemented curricula included the
following:

      20 curricula for training programs in the ICT and wood/construction/public works sectors (specifically
       designed for use in the two new training centers built for these sectors), of which:
              o 12 for ICT: (i) Telecom networks, (ii) cyber security, (iii) Micro-informatics and networks, (iv)
                network and telecom cable installer, (v) information systems and databases, (vi) Web and
                mobile programming, (vii) digital systems, (viii) computer installer, (ix) web marketing, (x)
                cybersecurity, (xi) multimedia and Internet, and (xii) multimedia infographic, and
              o eight for wood/construction/public works: (i) carpentry-coffering, (ii) renewable energies, (iii)
                elevator mechanics, (iv) metallurgical milling, (v) plumbing, (vi) civil construction, (vii)
                entrepreneurship, and (viii) English for wood/construction/public works sectors.
      19 curricula for training programs in the four rehabilitated training institutes: (i) kitchen, (ii) restaurant,
       (iii) reception, (iv) bakery, (v) shaving, (vi) slaying-tracing hardware, (vii) industrial slicing, (viii)
       woodworking, (ix) plumbing installation, (x) building electricity, (xi) industrial electricity, (xii)
       maintenance of hospital equipment, (xiii) physical sciences and laboratory chemistry (3 versions), (xiv)
       quality control in agri-food; (xv) industrial sawing-peeling, (xvi) carpentry-cabinet making, and (xvii)
       carpentry-general carpentry.




                                                                                                       Page 8 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GA- Skills Development and Employability (P146152)




      10 curricula for general training programs in the following professions: (i) auto electricity, (ii) auto
       mechanics, (iii) boiler welding, (iv) ironing, (v) plumbing, (vi) electrical construction, (vii) hairdressing,
       (viii) cutting and sewing, (ix) kitchen, and (x) infographics.

A total of 594 youth were enrolled in the four existing TVET institutions that were supported under the project,
falling short of the original target of 4,800 (12 percent achievement), of which 29 percent were female,
substantially achieving the target of 30 percent. Total enrollments had increased to 1,203 (of which 34
percent female) by May 2023, falling short of the original target of 4,800, but exceeding the 30 percent
target share for females. In its email to IEG of May 28, 2024, the Bank indicated that total enrollments in
restructured vocational institutions further increased to 1,995 as of May 24, 2024 (42 percent achievement),
with the sub-indicator targeting female youth surpassing the target.

Against the original target of 4,500, there were no youth enrolled in the new TVET institutions supported by
the project in the two priority sectors—ICT and wood/construction/public works—by the project’s end, since
the two centers had still not opened. In its May 28, 2024 email to IEG, the Bank indicated that, as of May 24,
2024, 519 youth were enrolled in the new TVET institutions supported by the project in the two priority sectors
(12 percent achievement).

While the Bank indicated that the project supported improvements focused on strengthening the capacity of
TVET trainers and ANFEP, and inspections in the areas of competency-based pedagogy and
management/governance, evidence to this effect remains scant. The only evidence provided was the
participation of 46 TVET trainers in a seven-month training program in Morocco and the participation of the
two directors chosen to run the two new sectoral centers in a two-month training program in Morocco.

The number of direct project beneficiaries—defined as individuals or groups who directly derive benefits from
an intervention (in this case students enrolled in or having completed programs in targeted training
institutions, or in apprenticeship, internship, and entrepreneurship programs)—rose from a baseline of zero to
7,665 by the project’s closing, and continued to rise post-project to 8,462 by the time of ICR preparation
(October 2023) falling short of the original target of 18,100 beneficiaries (47 percent achievement). In its
May 28, 2024 email to IEG, the Bank reported that the number of direct project beneficiaries had further risen
to 10,976 by May 24, 2024 (87 percent achievement). The share of female beneficiaries as of October 2023
was 47 percent, surpassing the target of 30 percent. The ICR (p. 13 and p. 26) reports that the shortfall in
direct project beneficiaries is attributable to delays in the construction of the two new training centers. While
labeled as an outcome indicator in the design documents and in the ICR, IEG assesses this as an
intermediate outcome indicator because it is a measure of coverage/uptake of training, and not a measure of
training effectiveness.



Outcomes.

An original outcome indicator was the graduation rate of youth from TVET institutions supported by the
project (defined in the PAD, Annex 1, as the share of final year students, who actually graduate), with a set
target of 60 percent. This indicator was deleted during the April 2019 restructuring due to the project’s
delayed schedule for the construction and opening of the training centers (Project Paper, para. 12). This
original target was not achieved.



                                                                                                        Page 9 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GA- Skills Development and Employability (P146152)



From a baseline of zero, no TVET institutions receiving project support had functioning boards of directors
(defined as a board with 50 percent of representatives drawn from the private sector and which meets at least
twice a year), by the project’s end, not achieving the original target of eight TVET institutions. This
outcome indicator is a measure of improved governance and effectiveness of TVET institutions. In its May 28,
2024 email to IEG, the Bank reported that two TVET Institutions had functioning boards of directors as of May
24, 2024 (25 percent achievement).

The number of public-private joint management agreements signed between the private sector and the public
sector for the joint management of TVET institutions based on performance contracts rose from a baseline of
zero to three, falling short of the original target of 12 (25 percent achievement). The Bank also reported,
in its May 28 2024 email to IEG, that the number of public-private joint management agreements signed rose
to 26 as of May 24, 2024 (217 percent achievement). Signed in June 2020, these agreements focused on
improvements to the quality and relevance of TVET training to be achieved through joint work of training
institutions and the private sector, which was expected to culminate in improved effectiveness of training
programs. The three signed agreements included:

(1) a general agreement signed by the TVET Ministry with private companies to improve the overall
employability and insertion of young people trained in TVET institutions;

(2) a Wood/Construction/Public Works sectoral agreement, which aimed to (a) establish good governance of
these specific sectors in the TVET system; (b) ensure the active participation of sectoral professionals in all
stages of the training process; (c) ensure a quality and relevant training program; and (d) facilitate the
successful integration of trained young people into the workforce; and

(3) an ICT sectoral agreement, which aimed to: (a) establish sound governance of the ICT sector in the TVET
system; (b) ensure strong involvement of sectoral professionals at all stages of the training process; (c)
provide quality vocational training and learning; and (d) facilitate the insertion of trained young people into
employment.

In the absence of data on completion of TVET training and on the employment within one year of those
completing training programs, there is insufficient evidence to assess the achievement of Objective 1
(effectiveness of vocational training in key sectors).



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improve the effectiveness of vocational training in key growth sectors (revised indicators and targets)

Revised Rationale
The rationale remained identical to the original rationale as elaborated above.

Outputs and intermediate outcomes.


                                                                                                 Page 10 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GA- Skills Development and Employability (P146152)



The 8,462 direct project beneficiaries achieved at the time of the ICR preparation (October 2023) fell short of
the revised target of 12,573 beneficiaries (67 percent achieved). Female beneficiaries comprised 47
percent of total beneficiaries, surpassing the target of 30 percent. In its May 28, 2024 email to IEG, the Bank
reported that the number of direct project beneficiaries further rose to 10,976 (87 percent achievement), of
which, 5,203 female beneficiaries, still surpassing the target of 30 percent.

The government adopted a regulatory framework for the management of TVET institutions, as envisaged.
This comprised: (i) texts adopted in connection with the reform of Law No. 21/2011 (Law of General
Orientation for Education, Vocational Training, and Research) – i.e., overall Decree on the organization and
operation of TVET centers plus two specific Decrees establishing the new sectoral centers focused on
Wood/Construction/Public Works and ICT; (ii) decrees reforming the National Agency for Training and
Vocational Education and the National Pole for the Promotion of Employment; (iii) the three public-private
partnership agreements signed in June 2020 (one framework agreement and two sectoral agreements for
Wood/Construction/Public Works and ICT); and (iv) the decision of the TVET Minister to establish councils
with private sector representation in TVET centers. While this indicator was introduced during the 2019
restructuring, it was a good measure of the original intent of Objective 1 (quality, relevance and effectiveness
of TVET training) and therefore is appropriate to assess against the original objective. (Substantial
achievement)

The number of programs which now have revised and implemented curricula rose from a baseline of zero to
26 by the project’s closing, further increasing to 49 by the time of ICR preparation (October 2023),
surpassing the target of 25.

By the project’s closing, 594 youth had enrolled in restructured vocational institutions, of which 29 percent
were female. Total enrollments had increased to 1,203 (of which 34 percent were female) by October 2023,
falling short of the revised target of 2,800 enrollments (43 percent achieved), but surpassing the 30
percent target of females’ share of those enrollments. In its May 28, 2024 email to IEG, the Bank reported
that the number of youth enrolled in restructured vocational institutions increased to 1,995 as of May 2024 (71
percent achievement), with the sub-indicator targeting female youth surpassing the target of 30 percent.

No youth were enrolled in the two new TVET institutions supported by the project in the two priority sectors by
the project’s end, given that these institutions had not yet opened, not achieving the reduced target of
2,500. The Bank, in its May 28, 2024 email to IEG, reported that, as of May 24, 2024, 519 youth were
enrolled in the new TVET institutions supported by the project in the two priority sectors (24 percent
achievement), with the sub-indicator targeting female youth surpassing the target of 30 percent.

Outcomes.

Under the 2019 restructuring, the graduation rate of TVET students was dropped as an indicator, and the
targets of the remaining two indicators were reduced.

No TVET institutions receiving project support had functioning boards of directors by the project’s end, not
achieving the reduced target of six, established during the 2019 restructuring due to a decrease in the
number of targeted TVET centers under the project. The number of TVET institutions with functioning boards
of directors rose to two as of May 24, 2024 (33 percent achievement).

The number of public-private joint management agreements signed between the private sector and the public
sector for the joint management of TVET institutions based on performance contracts rose from a baseline of

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GA- Skills Development and Employability (P146152)



zero to three by the project’s closing, substantially achieving the revised target of four (75 percent
achieved). The Bank later indicated that the number of public-private joint management agreements signed
rose to 26 (650 percent achievement).

In the absence of data on completion of TVET training and on the employment within one year of those
completing training programs, there is insufficient evidence to assess the achievement of Objective 1
(effectiveness of vocational training in key sectors).



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the effectiveness of short-term skills development in key growth sectors (original indicators and
targets)

Rationale
Improved effectiveness of short-term skills development included two key outputs: the development of
apprenticeship programs to help rural and peri-urban workers develop professional skills; and the
development of internship programs targeted at youth to support graduates from higher education and TVET
institutions to address their practical skills deficit and find jobs. These outputs were expected to lead to
intermediate outcomes, including the enrollment of youth in these programs, and eventually to the outcomes
of successful completion of these programs and employment of graduates thereafter.

Outputs and intermediate outcomes.

The project supported the development of an alternate training for out-of-school youth in the form of a dual
apprenticeship program (comprised of coursework and apprenticeship, focused on priority sectors). The
dual program targeted unskilled youth who had completed primary and/or secondary education as well as
out-of-school youth and unemployed individuals between the ages of 16 and 24. The training combined
coursework in a training center and apprenticeship in a craft unit. The duration of the training ranged from 12
months (e.g., service and catering occupations) to 24 months (e.g., automotive and construction fields). The
time was divided between the training center (25%) and the craft units (75%). The project provided
employment payments to apprenticeship participants consisting of stipends, and accident and medical
insurance coverage.

By the end of the project a total of 2,218 youth had enrolled in a dual apprenticeship program in urban areas,
falling slightly short of the original target of 3,000 (74 percent achievement). The share of female
enrolment stood at 39.27 percent, surpassing the target of 35 percent.

The project also supported the introduction of the Internship and Youth Adaptation Training
Program. The internship program helped young individuals between the ages of 16 and 34 who had already
graduated from institutions of higher education or TVET schools by placing them in professional internships.
This enabled them to acquire initial work experience and further develop practical skills that would facilitate
their insertion into working life. The program lasted for six months and could be renewed once. The project

                                                                                                 Page 12 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GA- Skills Development and Employability (P146152)



financed: (i) employment payments to internship participants comprising stipends, accident, and medical
coverage; (ii) monitoring of youth during the internship period; and (iii) survey of youth following the
completion of their internships.

A total of 4,172 youth had enrolled in the internship program, surpassing the original target of 3,500. 2,373
female youth enrolled in the internship program, which surpasses the target (55 percent). According to
the results of a December 2021 tracer study carried out by a Canadian consulting firm (ICR, p. 14), 82
percent of these youth were unemployed prior to being admitted into the internship program.

By the project’s end, a total of 49,224 youth had registered in the job seekers database established by ONE,
surpassing the original target of 12,000 by a factor of four.

Outcomes.

Completion rates of the internship and apprenticeship programs were substantially achieved, with the share
of females surpassing targets. While there is no direct measure of the quality and relevance of these
trainings, these are likely to be substantial, since they were developed and implemented jointly with the
private sector in order to respond to their needs and demands for specific skills in specific sectors.

      84.6 percent of enrolled youth completed the internship program, substantially achieving the target
       of 90 percent. Of those who completed the internship program, 55.5 percent were female,
       surpassing the target of 30 percent.
      70.6 percent of enrolled youth completed the apprenticeship program, fully achieving the target of
       70 percent. Of those who completed the apprenticeship program, 46.1 percent were female,
       surpassing the target of 30 percent.

However, the employment rates of those completing these programs fell far short of targets. By project
closing, 26 percent of youth, who had completed apprenticeship or internship training supported by the
project, were employed or self-employed one year after the end of the program, rising slightly to 27 percent
by the time of ICR preparation, six months later, falling short of the target of 50 percent (54 percent
achievement). Of these employed/self-employed youth, 58 percent were female, surpassing the target of
30 percent. (Although introduced as part of the 2019 restructuring, this indicator presents a measure of the
original intended outcome of the project – the effectiveness of short-term skills development training
[apprenticeships and internships], particularly its use for securing employment, including self-employment).

Post-completion placements of young women were modestly achieved, overall.

      A total of 871 young women were trained under the dual apprenticeship program, of which only 57
       young women (or 6.5 percent) secured placements after completing their apprenticeships.
      Likewise, a total of 2,297 young women were trained under the internship program, of which only 578
       placements (or 25 percent) were achieved, including fixed-term and permanent contracts.
      On the other hand, the agripreneurs program trained 24 young women in agricultural skills and
       supported them in establishing cooperatives.

According to the results of a December 2021 tracer study carried out by a Canadian consulting firm (ICR, p.
14, as well as evidence presented by the Bank): (i) 93 percent of beneficiaries found the experience useful in
improving their professional skills; (ii) 73 percent ultimately pursued careers in the same branch of activity as


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GA- Skills Development and Employability (P146152)



their internship; (iii) 83.3 percent of youth enrolled who had been employed prior to being admitted in the
internship program benefitted from an increase in their income following the completion of the internship; and
(iv) 74 percent of beneficiaries who were employed at the time of the survey felt that their economic and
social situation had improved as a result of the project. (As noted above, youth enrolled in the program who
had been employed prior to being admitted to the internship program represent a small portion (18 percent) of
all youth enrolled in the internship program.)



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improve the effectiveness of short-term skills development in key growth sectors (revised indicators and
targets)

Revised Rationale
The rationale remained identical to the original rationale as elaborated above.

Outputs and intermediate outcomes

A total of 2,218 youth had enrolled in a dual apprenticeship program in urban areas, substantially achieving
the revised target of 2,400 (92 percent achievement). The share of female enrolment stood at 39.27
percent, surpassing the target of 35 percent.

A total of 4,172 youth had enrolled in the internship program, substantially achieving the revised target of
4,300 (97 percent achievement). 2,373 female youth enrolled in the internship program, which
surpasses the target (55 percent).

By the project’s end, a total of 49,224 youth had registered in the job seekers database established by ONE,
surpassing the revised target of 20,000 by a factor of 2.5.

Outcomes

The reported outcomes are identical to the ones reported under the original targets.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve the effectiveness of entrepreneurship programs in key growth sectors (original indicators and targets)


                                                                                                Page 14 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GA- Skills Development and Employability (P146152)




Rationale
Project activities supported a critical output: the development of a new training program in
entrepreneurship. Expected intermediate outcomes included: enhanced entrepreneurial skills of youth
completing the program, enhanced capacity to develop their own business plans, and, with program support,
the identification of necessary financing to start their own businesses. The expected outcome of the program
was self-employment of youth completing the program, achieved with program assistance and follow-up
during the start-up phase of their self-employment.

Outputs and intermediate outcomes

A total of 681 youth trained under the entrepreneurship program elaborated an income-generating project
falling short of the original target of 2,000 (34 percent achievement). Of these youth who elaborated an
income generating project, 46 percent (or 313) were female, surpassing the target of 35 percent.

Outcomes

According to p. 18 of the ICR and based on clarifications received by the Bank’s team in an email dated
March 3, 2024, of the 358 young women who received entrepreneurship training, 126 (or 35 percent)
succeeded in executing their projects, as of October 2023.

By the project’s closing 148 youth had started the implementation of income-generating activities, and this
rose to 260 by October 2023, substantially achieving the target of 300 (87 percent
achievement). (Although introduced as part of the 2019 restructuring, this indicator presents a measure of
the original intended outcome of the project – the effectiveness of entrepreneurship training – its use for
securing employment, including self-employment.)



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improve the effectiveness of entrepreneurship programs in key growth sectors (revised indicators and targets)

Revised Rationale
The rationale remained identical to the original rationale as elaborated above.

Outputs and intermediate outcomes

A total of 681 youth trained under the entrepreneurship program elaborated an income-generating project
substantially achieving the revised target of 873 (78 percent achievement). Of these, 46 percent were
female, surpassing the target of 35 percent.




                                                                                                Page 15 of 24
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                GA- Skills Development and Employability (P146152)



                            Outcomes

                            The reported outcomes are identical to the ones reported under the original targets.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy under the original indicators and targets is rated Modest, with efficacy under Objective 1
                            (Improve effectiveness of vocational training in key growth sectors) rated Modest. Objective 2 (Improve
                            effectiveness of short-term skills development in key growth sectors) and Objective 3 (Improve effectiveness
                            of entrepreneurship programs in key growth sectors) was rated Substantial.

                            Overall efficacy under the revised indicators and targets is rated Modest, with efficacy under Objective 1
                            (Improve effectiveness of vocational training in key growth sectors) rated Modest. Objective 2 (Improve
                            effectiveness of short-term skills development in key growth sectors) and Objective 3 (Improve effectiveness
                            of entrepreneurship programs in key growth sectors) were rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency. An economic analysis was carried out at appraisal and at project completion. The results
   of the economic analysis carried out on an ex-ante basis at project preparation point to a net present value
   (NPV) of US$21.54 million and an internal rate of return (IRR) of 16.7 percent. The results of the sensitivity
   analysis performed suggest that 95 cents would be reaped in benefits for every dollar invested in the project.
   The benefit-to-cost ratio was estimated at 1.12. The results of the economic analysis carried out on an ex-post
   basis at project completion point to a net present value of US$61.69 million and to an internal rate of return of
   21.4 percent. The benefit-to-cost ratio was estimated at 1.94. IEG requested clarifications from the Bank
   regarding the significant difference in the NPV of the economic analysis performed at the appraisal and ICR
   stages to which the Bank responded in an email dated January 28, 2024: “Reasons for this difference may
   include changes in economic conditions, project scope, unforeseen challenges, or deviations from initial
   assumptions. For example, in the ex-ante phase, the project preparation team used household survey data from
   2010; in the ex-post phase, we used household survey data from 2017, and a key element of the difference may
   be the change in the country's economic conditions and earnings by education level of beneficiaries between
   2010 and 2017. The team also used an average annual exchange rate of CFAF 490 per US dollar (based on
   2010 exchange rates) to convert local currency into US dollars at the preparation stage, and an average annual

                                                                                                                            Page 16 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GA- Skills Development and Employability (P146152)



exchange rate of CFAF 624 per US dollar at the ICR stage.” The Bank team reiterated that one key factor
contributing to the disparity in NPV between the ex-ante and ex-post analyses is the significant impact of
changes in economic conditions and data sources.

Implementation Efficiency. The ICR indicates that project achievements were undermined by unforeseen
challenges and delays, including a nine-month delay between the Board approval and project effectiveness, as
well as delays in establishing the project coordination unit (PCU), thereby limiting the amount of time available
for the implementation of project activities. This was partly explained by the lack of understanding of Bank
procedures as this constituted the first Bank-funded education and skills project in Gabon since 1974. Other
challenges leading to implementation delays included changes in implementing agency leadership, design
changes, high staff turnover, a reduction in financing amount and scale of project activities, and interruptions
due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Further, the construction of the two new training centers was behind schedule,
but these centers were ultimately completed and equipped by project closing.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       89.00
 Appraisal                                                  16.70
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       89.00
 ICR Estimate                                               21.40
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the objectives is rated High, given that the PDO is aligned with the government's and the
World Bank's current priorities for the country. Overall efficacy is rated Substantial against the original objectives
and targets and against the restructured objectives and targets. The efficiency of the project is rated Modest.
The project outcome is thus rated Moderately Satisfactory (Table 1).

Table 1: Overall Outcome Ratings Prior to and Following the 2019 Restructuring

                                              Revised Objectives
                        Original Objectives &
Rating Dimension                              and Targets as
                        Targets
                                              restructured in 2019
Relevance of objectives High
Efficacy                Substantial


                                                                                                       Page 17 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GA- Skills Development and Employability (P146152)



Objective 1: Improve
effectiveness of
                           Modest                  Modest
vocational training in key
growth sectors
Objective 2: Improve
effectiveness of short- Substantial                Substantial
term skills development
Objective 3: Improve
effectiveness of
                           Substantial             Substantial
entrepreneurship
programs
Efficiency                 Modest

Outcome ratings
                        Moderately Satisfactory
Final outcome rating Moderately Satisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (p. 23) states that a substantial portion of project activities have been successfully integrated into
the official mandate and service offerings of the TVET ministry, ensuring their sustainability. A risk
assessment was conducted at the project preparation stage to identify the key sources of risks to sustaining
development outcomes, including capacity risks. Further, it states that these risks were mostly mitigated
through institutional strengthening measures including, the establishment of vocational training institutions,
the enhancement of overall governance, and the increased use of private sector partnerships. The project
also supported the monitoring of labor market changes by facilitating the development of the PNPE’s (Pôle
national pour la promotion de l'emploi, National Pole for the Promotion of Employment) capacity to identify
and monitor employment market changes, benefiting job-seeking youth. The project also contributed to
improvements in data systems and the utilization of data for employment policy development. The ICR
further states that these achievements are likely to increase the chances of perpetuating and maintaining
project interventions moving forward.

The ICR Review identifies two factors, which could undermine the sustainability of development
outcomes. First, none of the TVET institutions had a functioning board of directors by the project's end, a
fact which risks undermining private sector participation in the design of curricula and training programs,
reducing their relevance to meeting the job requirements of the labor market. Second, TVET institutions
require steady and sufficient funding to delivery programs. The lack of fiscal space or changes in
government administration may lead to a change in priorities and reduce the funding allocated to TVET
institutions, undermining the quality of the programs and their ability to deliver training services.




                                                                                                    Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GA- Skills Development and Employability (P146152)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project activities were highly relevant to the country and sectoral context as detailed under Section 3 of
  the ICRR. The choice of financing instrument was adequate given the limited institutional capacity of the
  implementing agency and government more broadly, with the Investment Project Financing facilitating the
  provision of technical assistance in support of institutional strengthening. Project design relied on the
  roadmap for enhancing training programs, skills development activities, and youth employability in
  Gabon, as laid out in the PSGE 2012-2025. Assessed risks included: (i) poor institutional and managerial
  capacity; (ii) weak human resources and lack of familiarity with Bank projects; (iii) weak fiduciary
  accountability; (iv) insufficient capacity for monitoring and evaluation, project administration, sector
  coordination, and technical oversight; and (v) limited capacity of critical stakeholders. Risk mitigation
  included: (i) capacity building initiatives supported under Component 3; (ii) establishment of a
  comprehensive management information system for monitoring and evaluation purposes; (iii)
  strengthening the internal capacity of implementing agencies and establishment of appropriate protocols
  and controls to address fiduciary challenges; (iv) purchase and installation of a computerized accounting
  system for the implementing agency; (v) establishment of a procedures manual for effective
  implementation of administrative and fiduciary protocols; and (vi) establishment of a Stakeholder
  Committee to facilitate consultation with the private sector and address implementation challenges. The
  Project Implementation Manual provided guidelines on M&E methodology, including on the development
  of baseline data and indicator calculation to support consistent and accurate data collection.
  Environmental aspects were adequately prepared.

  The technical design incorporated recommendations from peer reviewers and recognized research for
  addressing the skills mismatch and lack of employability among Gabonese youth. Moreover, the
  preparation process involved a highly collaborative and consultative approach with the government of
  Gabon.

  There were, however, significant shortcomings in readiness for implementation. Gabon's experience and
  capacity for managing and implementing a project of this nature fell short of needs and the above-listed
  mitigation measures did not adequately address capacity gaps. Implementation arrangements for
  Component 2.3 activities were inadequate and ultimately led to changes at the first restructuring to
  include a combination of ONE tasked with the management of youth at the end of their apprenticeship,
  the National Agency for Professional Training and Development tasked with overseeing the integration of
  new modules into the training programs run by the training centers, and private structures being charged
  with execution. The Bank could have mitigated fiduciary risks by making adequate provisions for
  technical assistance and capacity building on the procurement of goods and services at the start of the
  project. P. 24 of the ICR also reports that the project did not have a dedicated communications specialist
  or a communications plan, leading to unnecessary confusion among stakeholders. Moreover, there was
  no education specialist based in the country to provide real-time advice and support.

  There were also shortcomings in the project’s theory of change and in its results framework. As detailed
  in Sections 9 (Monitoring and Evaluation), the theory of change (ICR, p. 6) did not provide sufficient
  articulation of the project’s intended outcomes, as specified in the PAD: graduation/completion of training
  programs and employment or self-employment of those completing these programs. While the original
  results framework included indicators to track graduation from TVET institutions and completion of



                                                                                                  Page 19 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GA- Skills Development and Employability (P146152)



  apprenticeship and internship training programs, it did not include any measure to track employment or
  self-employment of those graduating/completing training programs.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank conducted two supervision missions to Gabon per year to ensure effective management and
 oversight and recorded implementation progress through Implementation Status and Results Reports
 (ISRs). During the course of early implementation, the Bank encountered formidable challenges and
 delays, including a nine-month delay between the Board approval and project effectiveness and delays in
 establishing the PCU. These missions, and especially the 2018 MTR, addressed capacity constraints and
 culminated in the 2019 restructuring, which reduced the project scope and provided more support and
 technical assistance for implementation capacity building. Soon after the 2019 restructuring, the
 recruitment of a technical consultant, stationed in Libreville, helped support implementation, enhancing
 regular interaction with, and real-time support for, the different implementing agencies. The 2019
 restructuring also added indicators to measure outcomes specified in the PAD, but not included in the
 original results framework, specifically, share of youth having completed an apprenticeship or internship
 supported by the project, who were employed or self-employed one year after the program’s end.

 The Bank’s restructurings aimed to provide quick course corrections for emerging issues. Supervision
 missions provided regular reports on safeguards, procurement and FM performance, which were used to
 enhance the capacity of the PCU and other implementing entities. These were especially important for
 addressing procurement issues, which caused important delays in the construction and equipment of the
 two new TVET centers. While the ICR does not explicitly state whether or not the Borrower was fully
 compliant with safeguard and fiduciary policies, it does report the following: (1) Environmental and social
 safeguards were consistently monitored and rated as Moderately Satisfactory during most of the
 implementation period, with the Bank providing feedback and recommendations, which culminated in a
 Satisfactory E&S rating by the project’s end. (2) FM was rated Moderately Satisfactory early on in the
 project and Satisfactory during the last two years of implementation. (3) Procurement was rated
 Moderately Satisfactory for most of implementation and at Project closing. Notwithstanding significant
 delays, procurement management was effective, all planned activities were accomplished, all required
 payments to contractors were made, and all documents were uploaded into the procurement (STEP)
 system.

 Aide-memoires and ISRs were used to keep World Bank management well informed about the project's
 progress. Moreover, the Bank team's consistent documentation and sharing of supervision mission
 updates kept project stakeholders abreast of project progress and milestones achieved. The ICR (p. 23)
 reports that this comprehensive reporting played a vital role in facilitating the analysis and evaluation of the
 project's outcomes and impacts.



  Quality of Supervision Rating


                                                                                                      Page 20 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GA- Skills Development and Employability (P146152)



  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The theory of change, as presented in the ICR (Figure 1, p. 6) had some gaps in terms of the identification
 and sequencing of key outputs, intermediate outcomes and outcomes (see also ICRR Section 4). The
 results framework indicators filled some of these gaps, linking project activities and outputs to outcomes,
 with those chosen indicators, for the most part, sufficiently specific, measurable, achievable, relevant and
 time-bound. The ICR reports that the Project Implementation Manual provided detailed guidelines on the
 M&E methodology, including on the development of baseline figures and indicator calculation to support
 consistent and accurate data collection. Finally, the project financed tracer surveys and satisfaction surveys
 to gather feedback from the implementation of project activities from project beneficiaries.



b. M&E Implementation
  The PCU was charged with all M&E-related activities and there was a dedicated team member who was
  responsible for overseeing all aspects of project implementation. An international firm specializing in M&E
  was recruited to assist the PCU in designing the M&E system and conducting annual evaluations.
  A baseline data collection for indicators was conducted in collaboration with implementing agencies. The
  Bank provided technical assistance on M&E principles and practices to relevant stakeholders, including
  ministries and implementing agencies, with the latter being responsible for data collection and reporting
  on their activities. The PCU consolidated and reviewed data related to output indicators and the financial
  and physical progress of the project. In the end, the project generated enough data to track progress and
  allow the assessment of efficacy.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR notes that progress reports on the project implementation status were produced twice a year,
  along with data to assess performance indicators. Annual reviews were organized by the PCU to
  evaluate progress, assess lessons learned and incorporate adjustments to project activities.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


                                                                                                   Page 21 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GA- Skills Development and Employability (P146152)



  The project is classified as Category B on environmental safeguards. Three safeguard policies were
  triggered, namely, OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources),
  and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement), with the latter being triggered as a precautionary measure
  despite the fact that the project did not result in the resettlement of people. An Environmental and Social
  (E&S) Management Framework was prepared in 2015, approved and disclosed during project preparation
  and several specific safeguard tools and instruments were also prepared and utilized during project
  implementation. The E&S screening of activities was systematized, and E&S monitoring reports were
  regularly produced.

  E&S safeguards performance was consistently monitored during implementation and ISRs
  consistently rated this aspect “above the line,” with ratings of Moderately Satisfactory and
  Satisfactory. The ICR (para. 59) notes the end-of-project rating of Satisfactory. The number of
  operational health and safety specialists was increased for each contractor and supervising engineering
  firm. Funding was allocated at each of the project restructurings to address shortcomings in the design of
  the new training centers to achieve the recommended E&S standards related to emergency exits and
  security aspects and the improvement of dining rooms and study laboratories. The placement of geotextiles,
  remediation work, and revegetation of embankments at the new sites treated gullies thereby reducing the
  risk of landslides. The PCU implemented the management of the Environmental, Social, Health and Safety
  guarantees of performance. The ICR did not provide an explicit statement of satisfactory compliance.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management risks were considered to be high at appraisal. To mitigate the fiduciary risks, the
  Bank conducted supervision missions twice a year, developed a Procedures Manual and established an
  experienced financial management team comprised of a financial and administrative officer and an
  accountant. IFRs and audit reports were submitted on time and were considered of adequate quality during
  project implementation. The ICR does not provide an explicit statement of satisfactory compliance with the
  Bank’s FM policies, although it does state (para. 60) that Financial Management was rated Moderately
  Satisfactory during the early years of implementation and Satisfactory for the last two years (ICR,
  para. 60). IEG’s review of the 13 ISRs submitted for this project reveals that all FM ratings were “above the
  line” (either Satisfactory or Moderately Satisfactory), except for one Moderately Unsatisfactory rating
  issued in ISR #4, December 27, 2017. Because FM was upgraded to Satisfactory in ISR#5, and was rated
  Satisfactory in the final ISR#13 (with a mix of Moderately Satisfactory and Satisfactory ratings in between),
  it is reasonable to assume that the FM issues encountered in late 2017 were addressed and resolved
  expeditiously and that the project was compliant with FM policies. The ICR does not mention, or address
  the reason behind, the MU rating in late 2017 or provide adequate evidence of redress by the Bank to
  ensure compliance after that poor performance.

  Procurement was rated Moderately Satisfactory at project closing and for most of implementation,
  except for the first three ISRs, which gave fully Satisfactory ratings. There were significant challenges
  with the procurement of goods and services during project implementation, leading to substantial delays.
  The Bank provided support with procurement processes, resulting in all planned activities being
  accomplished without any mis-procurement issues, all contracts being fulfilled, and all required payments
  being made to contractors. All procurement documents were uploaded to the Systematic Tracking of

                                                                                                  Page 22 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GA- Skills Development and Employability (P146152)



   Exchanges in Procurement system. The ICR did not provide an explicit statement of satisfactory
   compliance.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None noted.



d. Other
   None noted.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                       IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG highlights the following key lessons identified in the ICR:

    1. Effective communications campaigns can keep stakeholders informed and engaged in
       project implementation. This was particularly important in this project given that it constituted
       the first Bank-financed education and skilling project in Gabon since 1974. Further, this was
       important given the numerous challenges with project implementation, which included,
       changes in implementing agency leadership, design changes, high staff turnover, a reduction
       in financing amount and scale of project activities, and interruptions due to the COVID-19
       pandemic. The ICR reports that the project did not have a dedicated communications
       specialist or a communications plan, leading to unnecessary confusion among stakeholders;
    2. A multi-phased programmatic approach rather than a single project might be appropriate in
       low-capacity country contexts where the Bank is engaging in a sector for the first time to
       allow time for policy dialogue and reforms. The ICR admits that much remains to be done in
       order to solidify the initial gains made in this project; and
    3. Dedicated World Bank staff on the ground are necessary in low-capacity country contexts
       where the Bank is engaging for the first time. This proximity allows for real-time
       communication, relationship building, and a better understanding of technical and operational


                                                                                                    Page 23 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GA- Skills Development and Employability (P146152)



         challenges to better address them. The ICR indicates that there was an observable
         improvement in communication once dedicated staff were placed full-time in the country.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The quality of the ICR is rated Substantial, but barely so. The ICR provided sufficient evidence of project
performance and achievement and was systematic in presenting and explaining end-of-project data, as well as
updates in this data at the time of ICR preparation. The quality of analysis was generally sound, presenting and
linking evidence to various segments of the results chain. The lessons identified through the project were based
on evidence and analysis generated in the ICR, and they were appropriately linked to the ICR's narrative.
Guidelines were followed in the ICR's overall presentation. However, the ICR's presentation of the theory of
change (Figure 1, p. 6) was not fully reflective of the project's logic, as laid out in the design document (as
explained in Section 4 of this ICRR). The ICR did not explicitly state whether the Borrower was fully compliant
with safeguards and fiduciary policies, though it did provide evidence to indicate compliance.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 24 of 24
