     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Energy for Rural Transform III (P133312)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0024016

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                     Project Name
 P133312                                        Energy for Rural Transform III

 Country                                        Practice Area(Lead)
 Uganda                                         Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                               Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-56530                                      31-Dec-2020                                        142,917,875.48

 Bank Approval Date                             Closing Date (Actual)
 05-Jun-2015                                    30-Jun-2023

                                                IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              135,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                               135,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                           133,751,595.13                                               0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                     ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan           Fernando Manibog                Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)




 P146876_TBL
 Project ID                                     Project Name
 P146876                                        UG-GEF Egy for Rural Transform III ( P146876 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                               Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                       8196004.04

 Bank Approval Date                             Closing Date (Actual)
 05-Jun-2015

                                                                                                      Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Energy for Rural Transform III (P133312)




                                                IBRD/IDA (USD)                                  Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                      0.00                                    8,200,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                       0.00                                    8,196,004.04

 Actual                                                   0.00                                    8,196,004.04




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to both the International Development Association (IDA) Financing Agreement (p.6) dated
   December 16, 2015, and the Project Appraisal Document (p.14), the project objective is “to increase access
   to electricity in rural areas of Uganda.”

   The formulation of the project objective in the Global Environment Facility (GEF) Grant Agreement (p.5) dated
   December 16, 2015 included the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions as an additional objective: “To
   increase access to electricity in rural areas of Uganda and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.”

   This review will assess the project’s performance based on the achievement of the project objective as
   defined in the IDA Financing Agreement.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The Energy for Rural Transformation Project III (ERT-3) was the third phase of a project series and
   consisted of three components:

   A. On-Grid Energy Access. (Appraisal cost: US$144.60 million; actual cost: US$131.48 million excluding
   the cost incurred by the Government of Uganda because data was not available)

   This component was to finance on-grid investments to be implemented by the Rural Electrification Agency
   (REA). These investments were to consist of grid expansion (construction of 21 priority distribution lines
   totaling 1,800 kilometers (km) in accordance with the Indicative Rural Electrification Master Plan), grid
   intensification (short grid extensions to medium and low voltage networks), and electricity connections (last
   mile or no pole household connections). This component was to also support REA in strengthening its rural
   electrification oversight capacity through the provision of technical advisory services, non-consulting
   services, training, and acquisition of goods and in implementing the on-grid investments through planning,

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Energy for Rural Transform III (P133312)



coordination, and implementation support, supervision of constructions, and independent verification of
connections.

B. Off-Grid Energy Access. (Appraisal cost: US$25.00 million; actual cost: US$22.08 million)

This component was to finance the following activities: (i) installation and maintenance of solar photo-voltaic
(PV) systems in health centers, post-primary schools, and water pumping schemes and technical advisory
services to the ministries responsible for these sectors; (ii) strengthening of business development services
through the provision of training to wiremen, technicians, and contractors, the construction of pico-hydro
and micro-hydropower generation facilities, and the organization and self-regulation of solar PV vendors;
(iii) scaling up of the Credit Support Facility through the Uganda Electricity Capitalization Company
(UECCC) to facilitate financing of solar sub-projects by financial intermediaries, and the strengthening of the
capacity of the UECCC in product enhancement and pricing, appraisal and risk assessment of solar
companies, risk management, process and procedures for its operations and information systems; and (iv)
the carrying out of awareness campaigns on quality and effectives solar lighting procedures and
strengthening of the capacity of the Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) in reviewing the national
solar quality assurance framework with the goal of obtaining international accreditation.

C. Institutional Strengthening and Impacts Monitoring. (Appraisal cost: US$5.60 million; actual cost:
US$4.73 million)

This component was to provide technical advisory services to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral
Development (MEMD) and the REA for institutional strengthening, regulatory enhancement, conducting
studies, and capacity development in rural electrification. These activities were to consist of undertaking a
cost of service study for the sector, carrying out of consumer affordability studies, preparation of national
guidelines for the design and construction of electricity distribution infrastructure, review of qualifications
and licensing requirements for electrical technicians, systematic review of the new electrification model,
carrying out of priority environmental and social impact assessment studies, and a comprehensive review of
technical information on potential geothermal sites and improvement of the related legal framework. The
component was also to support project implementation, coordination, and oversight by the MEMD, the REA,
and the project coordination unit including monitoring and evaluation.

Revised Components

At the second project restructuring, the development of six pico and micro-hydropower generation projects
by the Private Sector Foundation of Uganda was dropped because of significant delays in preparing the
feasibility studies, and a 307 km distribution line section was excluded from the project’s financing because
of the government’s request to prioritize funding for other activities.

Additionally, the financial intermediation activities under the second component were scaled down from
US$8.5 million to US$4.7 million because of slow progress in lending to solar energy companies. The
number of water pumps to be installed with solar PV systems was increased to use additional funds that
became available because of an amendment of the Value-Added Tax Law. Under the third component, the
geothermal development preparation, review of the electrification model, and the impact evaluation of
Energy for Rural Transformation Project II (ERT-2) were dropped. Instead, the scaling up of the certification
of wiremen and a baseline survey for ERT-3 were added to the project scope. The revisions to the project
components reported in this paragraph were included in the Aide Memoirs but not documented in the
project restructuring papers (ICR, footnote 6, p.14).


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Energy for Rural Transform III (P133312)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project cost was originally estimated at US$176.4 million including a price contingency of
  US$1.2 million. The project closed on June 30, 2023, with an actual cost of US$158.29 million. The actual
  cost was lower than the estimated cost because of lower financing requirement for the acquisition of the
  wayleaves for the installation of the installation of solar PV systems at schools, health centers, and water
  pumping stations.

  Financing: At appraisal, the IDA credit amount was estimated at US$135.0 million and the GEF grant
  amount at US$8.2 million. The project fully disbursed the GEF grant and US$133.8 million of the IDA credit
  by project closing.

  Borrower’s contribution: At appraisal, the borrower’s contribution was estimated at US$33.2 million to
  finance the acquisition of wayleaves. At project closing, the actual borrower’s contribution was estimated at
  US$18.0 million as confirmed by the World Bank project team.

  Project Restructurings: The project was restructured three times.

        First Project Restructuring (June 12, 2020 – Level 2): The project closing date was extended by
         12 months from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 to allow time for the completion of the
         grid extension and intensification works under the first component that were delayed because of
         inadequate project implementation arrangements and management capacity, insufficient staffing to
         implement the project, protracted procurement processes, and inefficient internal processes. The
         non-compliance to World Bank’s Involuntary Resettlement safeguard policy under the previous ERT-
         2 necessitated the preparation of a new framework under the ERT-3 to ensure compliance with the
         requirements of this safeguard policy. The time required to prepare the new framework delayed the
         implementation of the project activities. Lastly, the restrictions imposed by the onset of the COVID-
         19 pandemic in March 2020 delayed project implementation activities.
        Second Project Restructuring (October 14, 2021 – Level 2): The project closing date was
         extended by 11 months from December 31, 2021 to November 30, 2022 to allow time for the
         completion of the delayed project activities because of the continued adverse impact of COVID-19
         pandemic-related restrictions (on site mobilization, importation of major electrical equipment, and
         compensation of project-affected persons), the reorganization of the REA (the project implementing
         agency of the first component) as a new department under the MEMD, and the general elections
         held in January 2021. The financing agreement was revised to replace the REA by the Department
         of Energy Resources Development (DoERD) of the MEMD as the implementing agency of the rural
         electrification activities under the first component. Additionally, the development of pico and micro-
         hydropower generation projects were dropped from the project scope because of significant delays
         to conduct feasibility studies, and the target for the “total length distribution lines constructed under
         the project (kilometers)” was reduced because of the government’s decision to exclude 307
         kilometers of a line section from financing under the project (see Revised Components above).
        Third Project Restructuring (November 25, 2022 – Level 2): The project closing date was
         extended by seven months from November 30, 2022 to June 30, 2023 to allow time for the
         completion of the project activities that were delayed because of the continued impact of the
         institutional changes in the status of the REA and non-compliance with the implementation of the
         Involuntary Resettlement and Forests safeguards policies. There were about 16,000 unpaid project-

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Energy for Rural Transform III (P133312)



          affected persons at the time of the restructuring, and some project works were undertaken without
          mitigation measures to minimize the project’s impact on forests. An action plan was prepared and
          implemented to address these safeguards’ issues that continued beyond project closing.

   Dates: The project was approved on June 5, 2015 and became effective ten months later on March 31,
   2016 because of the delay in establishing a project implementing unit for the activities under the first
   component. The Mid-Term Review was conducted in February 2019. The original project closing date was
   December 31, 2020, but it was extended by 30 months (please see the project restructurings above for the
   reasons of project closing date extensions). The project closed on June 30, 2023.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objective was substantially aligned with the World Bank’s latest strategy as defined in the
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the Republic of Uganda, FY2017-2021 (At the time of this
review, there was no active country partnership framework for Uganda). The project sought to address the
development problem of lack of access to electricity in the rural areas of Uganda—one of the major barriers
to economic development and reduction of poverty. The project was to finance the expansion of the
distribution network and the installation of solar PV systems at households, schools, public agencies, and
water pumping stations to increase access to electricity that would have been expected to have a direct
positive impact on the socio-economic welfare of the rural population. The project was also to support the
development of private sector in solar PV systems and the development of pico and micro-hydropower
generation plants. The project objective corresponded to “Strategic Focus Area B: Raising Incomes in Rural
Areas” and the project supported the achievement of “Objective 4: Enhanced resilience of the poor and
vulnerable” through increased access to electricity among others (CPF, p.37). The project indirectly
supported the achievement of “Objective 2: Improved social service delivery” through improvements in
education and health services because of increased access to electricity under “Strategic Focus Area A:
Strengthening Governance, Accountability and Service Delivery” (CPF, 33). However, the focus of the latest
bank strategy on increasing access to electricity was weaker compared to the focus in the previous Country
Assistance Strategy (CAS), FY2011-2015. The CAS specifically included “increased access to electricity”
as an objective under the “Strategic Objective 2: Enhancing Public Infrastructure.” The achievement of this
CAS objective was rated unsatisfactory; the World Bank’s efforts to increase access to electricity during the
CAS period were adversely affected by “unclear roles and responsibilities of agencies involved in
expanding access to power” in Uganda (CPF, p49). Yet, the Strategic Country Diagnostic (SCD) Update of
2021 points out the importance of increased access to electricity for accelerating growth and identifies the
lack of access to electricity as one of the dimensions of poverty in Uganda. Similar to the recent CPF’s
focus, the SCD Update included improved access to electricity along with internet connectivity and digital
technology infrastructure and solutions under its priority area of “Governance and service delivery.”
Therefore, the project objective is aligned with the priorities and proposed key actions of the SCD Update.

The project objective was substantially relevant to the country context. The project directly supported the
government’s rural electrification efforts as defined under the Rural Electrification Strategy and Plan 2
(RESP-2) with the goal of increasing the electrification rate to 80 percent by 2040. Therefore, the project
objective was appropriately pitched for the development status in the country but as explained in the
previous paragraph, the unclear roles and responsibilities of agencies involved in expanding the electricity

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Energy for Rural Transform III (P133312)



               coverage in Uganda still continues to be a bottleneck for a successful implementation of national plans.
               This was evidenced during the implementation of ERT-2 when REA was reorganized as a department
               under the MEMD; this adversely affected the project implementation and the achievement of the project
               results.

               The World Bank has been a long-term development partner of Uganda in the electricity sector and rural
               electrification. The project constituted the third phase of a programmatic approach to rural electrification.
               While the project objective was clearly defined as to increase access to electricity in rural areas of Uganda,
               it was output-oriented, rather than outcome-oriented; a significant shortcoming of the project formulation of
               the third project in a programmatic approach is the lack of clarity around what outcomes would have been
               achieved as a result of increased access to electricity.

               Overall, while there were minor misalignments of the project objective with the World Bank strategy and the
               country context, and the objective was output-oriented rather than outcome-oriented, its relevance was,
               nevertheless, substantial taking the extremely low electrification rate in Uganda into consideration.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase access to electricity in rural areas of Uganda.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change of the Project

                             The project’s theory of change was typical for a rural electrification project with an objective formulated at the
                             output level as only increasing access to electricity. The project inputs (IDA credit, GEF grant, and technical
                             assistance) were to be used to finance the expansion of the distribution network to connect households to the
                             grid and the supply and installation of solar PV systems to households, schools, health centers, and water
                             pumping stations while developing pico and micro-hydropower generation projects to increase the supply of
                             electricity. The project was also to extend credit and guarantees to financial institutions and beneficiaries for
                             the financing of solar PV systems and develop standards for solar PV systems to be adopted in the country.
                             To support the electrification efforts in the medium term the project was to finance a review of electrification
                             model and prepare a study for geothermal development. The project’s outputs would have been distribution
                             lines expanded and 150,000 households connected to grid electricity, solar PV systems installed at 30,000
                             households, 100 schools, 276 health centers, and 15 water pumping stations, and six pico and micro-
                             hydropower generation facilities developed. Additionally, the project would have been expected to have
                             extended a total of US$17.0 million credit and guarantees for solar PV projects, developed national standards
                             for solar PV systems, completed a review of the electrification model, and prepared a study for geothermal

                                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Energy for Rural Transform III (P133312)



development. The intermediate outcomes of these activities would be a total of around 1.02 million people
gaining access to electricity, and capacity of the related entities strengthened in implementing electrification
activities. One critical aspect of the project was that the government was to pre-finance the cost of
households’ connection to the grid, which would have been repaid by the customers in 60 months without
interest (This did not include solar PV systems). It was also estimated that there would have been sufficient
demand from enterprises and individuals for credit and guarantees to install solar PV systems. The global
environment outcome of the project would have been an avoided emission of greenhouse gases because of
the installation of solar PV systems.

Overall, although the causal links from project inputs and outputs to the expected intermediate outcomes
were direct and valid, and the achievement of the increase in the number of people gaining access to
electricity and avoided greenhouse gas emissions could be attributed to the project’s intervention, the theory
of change had significant shortcomings regarding what outcomes that should have been expected from
households, schools, health centers, and pumping stations’ gaining access to electricity. Furthermore, the
theory of change did not address the availability, quality, reliability, and affordability aspects of electricity
supply service through grid, or the sustainability of the solar PV systems installed under the project.

Outputs

      Total length of distribution lines constructed under the project (Kilometers): Originally, the
         project was to finance the construction of 1,850 km of distribution lines consisting of 21 sections. The
         target was revised down to 1,543 km at the second restructuring because of the government’s
         decision to exclude a 307-km of distribution lines from the project’s financing. The achievement of 514
         km in four sections at project closing was significantly lower than the revised target. After closing, and
         thus outside the project’s financing and scope, 166 km of distribution lines were completed in
         December 2023 financed by government funds. The project team reported by email dated May 30,
         2024, that the total length of distribution lines constructed as of April 30, 2024 reached at 784 km.
        Number of on-grid household connections made under the project (number): The project
         financed the connection of 122,783 households to the grid against the target of 150,000. The
         achievement was lower than the target because of the shorter length of the distribution lines
         constructed under the project and the two-year delay of the adoption of the Electricity Connection
         policy. Furthermore, as the ICR (p.19) reports, because the project could only build 541 km of
         distribution lines (see the previous indicator), the project established household grid connections using
         the pre-existing distribution network. Therefore, the achievement of this output can partially be
         attributed to the project’s intervention according to the theory of change.
        Number of off-grid household solar system installations made under the project (number): The
         project financed the supply and installation of 4,072 off-grid household solar systems. The
         achievement was significantly lower than the target of 30,000 because of the demand for these
         systems did not materialize as estimated at appraisal. Affordability (i.e., high interest rates to finance
         the initial capital cost) and technical constraints regarding solar component standards in the local
         market also adversely affected the installation of solar PV systems. The project did not provide any
         subsidy for this activity.
        Number of rural schools with solar PV systems installed: The project financed the installation of
         solar PV systems at 89 schools against the target of 100.
        Total installed capacity of solar PV systems installed at rural schools: The achievement was 114
         kWp. The target was 169 kWp.


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Energy for Rural Transform III (P133312)




    Number of rural health centers with solar PV systems installed: The project financed the
       installation of solar PV systems at 329 health centers. The target was 276 health centers. The
       achievement was higher than the target.
      Total installed capacity of solar PV systems installed at rural health centers: Although the
       project installed higher number of solar PV systems at rural health centers than the target, the
       installed capacity of these solar PV systems was 250 kWp. The target was also 250 kWp.
      Number of rural water pumping stations with solar PV systems installed: The project financed
       the installation of solar PV systems at 27 water pumping stations. The original target was 15 pumping
       stations. The achievement was higher than the target because of the reallocation of funds from other
       components to the implementation of this activity and the cheaper price due to the VAT relief on
       equipment.
      Total installed capacity of solar PV systems installed at rural water pumping stations: The
       achievement was 458 kWp against the target of 200 kWp because of the installation of a higher
       number of solar PV systems than the target.
      Amount of credit and guarantee extended to Participating Financial Institutions (cumulative):
       The achievement at US$3.8 million was lower than the target of US$8.5 million because of insufficient
       demand.
      Amount of credit and guarantee extended to project beneficiaries by Participating Financial
       Institutions (cumulative US$ million equivalent): The achievement at US$0.8 million was
       significantly lower than the target of US$8.5 million because of lack of demand.
      National standards for Pico PV Systems adopted by UNBS: The project financed the preparation
       of these national standards as planned.
      National standards for Solar Home Systems adopted by UNBS (Yes/No): The project supported
       the preparation of the national standards for solar home systems. These standards are now
       implemented.
      Completion of the baseline survey report for ERT-3 (Yes/No): The project financed the
       implementation of a baseline survey report for ERT-3 as planned.
      Increase in certified wiremen for household connections: The project financed the training and
       certification of 1,850 wiremen against the target of 2,300 wiremen.
      The project did not develop any pico or micro-hydropower generation facility, because this activity was
       dropped at the second restructuring. The geothermal development preparation, review of the
       electrification model, and the impact evaluation of ERT-2 were also dropped (see Revised
       Components in section 2.d. Components above).
      Expansion of low voltage (LV) lines: 32 percent (941 kms out of 2,970 kms) of LV lines were
       completed at project closure. There was no indicator to measure the achievement of this output.

Outcomes

    People provided with access to electricity by household connections (Number): At project
       closing, 714,901 people gained access to electricity through on-grid and off-grid household
       connections. The achievement was substantially lower than the target of 1,021,000 people mostly
       because of the lower than expected demand for solar household systems as explained in the following
       two indicators below and lower grid connections. As explained in the Outputs section, this
       achievement can only be partially attributed to the project’s intervention because the project
       connected households to the grid using existing distribution network, not the distribution lines
       expanded under the project.

                                                                                                Page 8 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Energy for Rural Transform III (P133312)




                                   People provided with access to electricity by household connections –Grid (Number – Sub-
                                    Type: Breakdown): Through on-grid household connections, 695,770 people gained access to
                                    electricity against the target of 850,000 people (Please see the previous indicator above for a
                                    discussion of attribution).
                                   People provided with electricity by household connections – Off-grid/mini-grid – Only
                                    renewable sources (Number – Sub-Type: Breakdown): The project’s achievement in providing
                                    access to 19,131 people through off-grid solar home systems was significantly lower than the target of
                                    171,000 people. The main reason was insufficient demand because of higher costs including interest
                                    rates.
                                   Direct project beneficiaries: This indicator includes the number of people who gained access to
                                    electricity through grid and off-grid connections under the project and those who benefit from
                                    electricity at schools, health centers, and water pumping stations. The achievement is reported at
                                    8,595,298 people against the target of 7,600,000 people. Although the number of people who gained
                                    access to electricity through household connections was lower than the target (as given in the
                                    previous three indicators above), the number of project direct beneficiaries was higher than the target
                                    because more health centers and water pumping stations gained access to electricity from which
                                    higher numbers of people are estimated to benefit.
                                   Tons of CO2 emission reduced/avoided as a result of the project (tCO2): The avoided carbon
                                    dioxide emission amount because of project activities is estimated at 96,337 tons. This is lower than
                                    the target of 120,000 tons.

                            The project’s achievement in connecting households to electricity through grid and solar PV systems fell short
                            of the targets. The achievements of the on-grid connections can be partially attributed to the project’s
                            intervention because the households were connected to the existing distribution lines rather than the ones
                            constructed under the project. The ICR (p.21) reports some anecdotal information gathered from the
                            beneficiaries regarding the impact of access to electricity on social and economic activities, but these do not
                            constitute a robust evidence base to validate the achievement of the project outcomes. The evidence is
                            insufficient to assess the availability, reliability and affordability of the electricity supply service. There is a
                            high risk that the ongoing construction of the distribution lines could not be completed because of insufficient
                            government funds. Overall, the project, the third in a three-project series, fell significantly short of achieving
                            the project outputs and outcomes. Therefore, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective is rated
                            Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Although the project was partially successful in connecting households to the grid using the existing
                            distribution lines, it substantially fell short of achieving the project outputs of distribution lines constructed and



                                                                                                                                     Page 9 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Energy for Rural Transform III (P133312)



  solar home systems installed. This resulted in fewer households gaining access to electricity than targeted.
  The overall efficacy of the project in achieving the project objective is rated Modest.



  Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
  Modest                                                     Low achievement


5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis

At appraisal, a cost-benefit analysis was conducted for the on-grid infrastructure investments and the installation
of solar PV systems at households, schools, health centers, and water pumping stations. The benefit included in
the analysis was the consumer surplus derived from a comparison of average consumption basket before and
after grid connection and the installation of solar home systems—the difference between the cost of paraffin and
phone charging and the cost of using electricity from grid or solar home systems along with increased
consumption. The analysis included the environmental benefit from a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions
because of the use of solar PV systems. The costs associated with the extension of the distribution lines, grid
intensification (low voltage lines), solar system installations, operation and maintenance costs of the assets, and
the cost of additional power generation were included in the analysis as costs. The assumptions used in the
analysis were appropriate for a project with the objective to increase access to electricity. The calculations
resulted in an overall Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 38 percent and a Net Present Value (NPV) of
US$231 million at a discount rate of 10 percent. The EIRR and NPV estimated for on-grid connections were 39
percent and US$277 million, respectively, and those for the off-grid solar system installations were 20 percent
and US$3.3 million.

At project closing, the same methodology with actual project benefits and costs was used to conduct a post-
project economic analysis. The calculations resulted in an overall EIRR of 30.0 percent and an NPV of
US$123.1 million. The EIRR and NPV for on-grid connections estimated at project closing were 33 percent and
US$127 million, respectively. Although these calculations were lower than the those estimated at appraisal,
they, nevertheless, were sufficiently high to confirm the economic viability of the on-grid connections and overall
project. However, the EIRR and NPV for off-grid connections at 3 percent and negative US$3.2 million were
significantly lower than those estimated at appraisal failing to confirm the economic viability of the off-grid
connections. The main reason for a lower EIRR and an NPV for off-grid connections was the significantly fewer
solar PV systems installed at households.

Operational and Administrative Efficiency

Through to project closing, the project was faced with significant operational and administrative inefficiencies.
The project effectiveness was delayed by nine months because of lack of institutional capacity to establish the
project implementing unit (PIU), which was a condition for effectiveness. The PIU staff were not solely assigned
to the project but covered other activities. The PIU staff lacked capacity in procurement, safeguards
implementation, and financial management. The project activities were non-compliant with Involuntary
Resettlement and Forests safeguard policies. These significantly contributed to delays in project implementation
that resulted in a total of 30 months of project closing extension. Despite these project closing day extensions,
the extension of distribution lines could not be completed before project closing. Except two distribution line
segments, the remaining 19 line segments and the pico and micro-hydropower project were not ready for

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Energy for Rural Transform III (P133312)



implementation at project start. Additionally, the change in the project implementation unit for the on-grid
component because of the merging of the REA as a department under the MEMD resulted in a halt in project
implementation for about six months. The delay in the government’s issuance of the electricity connection policy
in January 2018 (which was expected in March 2016) adversely affected the number of household connections.
Poor documentation, insufficient capacity of the technical and procurement staff, and long-time required in
receiving approvals from the contracts committees resulted in lengthy and delayed procurement of MEMD sub-
projects. Weaknesses in contract management adversely affected project implementation such as withdrawal of
the main supervision consultant for distribution line expansion because of delays in amending their contract that
resulted in the implementation of some project works without supervision.

Overall, the project’s efficiency in achieving the project objective is rated Modest because of major shortcomings
in operational and administrative efficiency and low EIRR and negative NPV for the off-grid connections.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       100.00
 Appraisal                                                  38.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       100.00
 ICR Estimate                                               30.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

While the project objective was substantially aligned with the World Bank strategy and was output-oriented
rather than outcome-oriented (for a project that is third in a three-project series), it was nevertheless highly
relevant to the country context where the electrification rate is significantly low. Therefore, the relevance of the
project objective is rated Substantial. The efficacy of the project in achieving the project objective is rated
Modest because of the lower achievement of most targets. Similarly, the efficiency of the project is also rated
Modest because of significant shortcomings in the operational and administrative efficiency of the project and
low EIRR and negative NPV for the off-grid connections.

Although not directly a criterion for rating outcome, it is important, in terms of understanding project results
comprehensively, to take into account the unsatisfactory performance and non-compliance of the project with
Environmental Assessment, Involuntary Resettlement, and Forests safeguard policies, as well as health and
safety requirements (see Section 10 below on Safeguards). The project team monitors the progress in the
completion of the actions defined in the Post Closure Safeguards Corrective Action Plan the Government of
Uganda developed because of non-compliance determined during project implementation.


                                                                                                       Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Energy for Rural Transform III (P133312)



Overall, the project’s outcome is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial risk for Solar PV Systems: Inadequate funds pose a high risk to maintain the solar PV systems
installed at schools and health centers and protect them against vandalism. The maintenance of these
assets by service providers for five years following their installation were included in the contracts financed
by the project. These assets were also secured in lockable or welded cabinets. However, insufficient
government funds beyond the initial five-year maintenance contract could adversely affect the maintenance
and protection of these systems, and, hence, their operation. This is to be addressed by funds to be made
available for maintenance under the follow-on World Bank-financed Electricity Access Scale-up Project
(EASP – P166685) and by other donors (ICR, p.35).

Completion of the ongoing project activities: The government has been financing the ongoing
construction of the distribution lines that were to be built under the project. The completion of those
distribution line is delayed because of insufficient government funds. The government shares the
implementation status reports with the World Bank on a monthly basis. Once completed, the expanded
distribution network is expected to facilitate the connection of more households to the grid.

Financial Viability of the Service Providers: Service providers are faced with financial constraints.
Although the current pricing policy allows the service providers to charge the customers a fee for the
distribution service high enough to recover operating costs, if the collection rate dropped, the service
providers’ financial viability could worsen. This would have an adverse effect on the operation and
maintenance of the distribution grids.

Replacement of the Solar Home System Batteries: The project connected 4,000 households to electricity
through the installation of solar home systems. The households financed the installation of these solar home
systems through their own funds or borrowing from the project, because the project did not provide any
subsidy for their installation. Therefore, it should be expected that the households would have funds to
replace the batteries at the end of their service lifetime. However, if the replacement of the batteries
becomes unaffordable, the outcomes achieved from the installation of solar home systems could be lost as
has been the case in other countries at the similar income level with Uganda.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Increasing the electrification rate in the country has been of a high strategic importance for the
  Government of Uganda. The project design to increase access to electricity was straightforward
  consisting of infrastructure investments for on-grid connections and installation of solar home systems to

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Energy for Rural Transform III (P133312)



  provide off-grid electricity to households and public institutions. However, the overall design of the project
  was complex because each component consisted of numerous sub-components and various project
  activities ranging from development of geothermal power (preparation study) and pico and micro-
  hydropower projects to training of wiremen, technicians and contractors to be implemented by a total of
  eight implementing agencies. Economic analysis was adequately conducted showing the economic
  viability of the project’s intervention in increasing access to electricity, but the assumptions related to the
  demand for solar home systems were overly optimistic. Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) arrangements
  were adequate to capture the project outputs and the increase in access to electricity but had
  shortcomings in encompassing the project outcomes related to electricity supply service quality.

  Although similar issues were experienced during the implementation of the previous projects in this three-
  project series, the safeguards arrangements, both environmental and social, had shortcomings that led to
  project implementation delays. The insufficient institutional capacity of the REA, which was responsible
  for 85 percent of the project, was identified at appraisal, but the mitigation measures fell short of
  addressing this issue. The project was not ready for implementation except two distribution line segments
  out of 21. The demand for working capital and guarantee facilities, and the solar home systems was
  overestimated because of insufficient preparation at appraisal. The World Bank’s strategy to prepare and
  implement subprojects within the project’s implementation period was not realistic, which resulted in a
  significant downsizing of the working capital and guarantee facilities and deletion of the pico and micro-
  hydro power projects from the project scope along with some studies.

  Overall, given the experience gained during the implementation of ERT-1 and ERT-2, the project should
  have been expected to be at a higher readiness status for implementation. However, the project
  readiness was weak, and insufficient support to the implementation capacity during appraisal led to
  significant delays that resulted in uncompleted project activities. Because of significant shortcomings in
  identification, preparation and appraisal of the project, the quality at entry is rated Moderately
  Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 In-person supervision missions were held twice a year, except the COVID-19 period during which virtual
 missions were held. A brief review of the Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) and Aide
 Memoirs showed that the performance reporting was candid and detailed. The project team’s focus was
 more on addressing various project implementation issues, such as non-compliance with safeguards
 policies, delays in procurement, and strengthening REA’s capacity in project implementation, which took for
 about three years (ICR, p.34). Despite these efforts, the project closed with significant shortcomings in the
 implementation of the Involuntary Resettlement and Forests safeguard policies; a Post Closure Action Plan
 had to be prepared to ensure the project activities compliance with these safeguard policies after project
 closing.

 While there were moderate shortcomings in quality of supervision, the project team acted proactively to
 address the implementation issues most of which stemmed from insufficient preparation at appraisal. The
 onset of COVID-19 and the various other reasons beyond the control of the project team adversely affected

                                                                                                      Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Energy for Rural Transform III (P133312)



 project implementation such as the merging of REA as a department under the MEMD. Overall, the quality
 of supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project objective to increase access to electricity was output-oriented. The indicators in the results
 framework were sufficient to capture the achievement of the project outputs (such as the construction of
 distribution lines and number of solar PV systems installed) and the increase in the number households
 with access to electricity. These indicators were specific, measurable, relevant and timebound, but some
 were not achievable, such as the number of household solar systems and the amount of credit and
 guarantee extended to financial institutions, because the demand for these project activities was not
 adequately assessed at appraisal. The results framework did not include any indicator capturing the quality,
 reliability and availability of electricity supply through grid. The M&E arrangements were complex; five
 ministries and three agencies were responsible for collecting M&E data, and a Project Steering Committee
 chaired by the MEMD and consisting of the representatives of other ministries and agencies was to
 convene regularly to provide guidance to project implementation based on the M&E data.



b. M&E Implementation
  The agencies responsible from collecting M&E data, and the project coordination unit prepared the
  quarterly progress reports (QPRs), but these were in the form of simple Excel-based spreadsheets. The
  QPRs “were not comprehensive enough and lacked adequate narrative to explain issues and remedial
  actions” (ICR, p32). The weaknesses in the results framework to measure the outcomes achieved
  because of increased access to electricity or those related to service delivery were not addressed during
  implementation. Some indicators were revised or deleted depending on the change in the project scope
  without being formally processed through project restructurings. The Project Steering Committee could
  only meet three times during project implementation adversely affecting the effective implementation of
  M&E.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E findings were effectively used to prepare project implementation plans, but these plans were
  not implemented according to the schedule to complete the project activities before project closing. The
  M&E findings led to some revisions in the project scope such as the dropping of the pico and micro-
  hydropower projects and narrowing of the credit and guarantee mechanism, but these revisions were

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Energy for Rural Transform III (P133312)



  mostly because of inadequate preparation at appraisal. The M&E data were used to provide evidence of
  application of inputs and achievement of outputs but not outcomes. The output-orientation of the project
  objective restricted the use of M&E data to show what happened as a result of increased access to
  electricity. The M&E findings led to the follow-on project of EASP. However, a project third in a three-
  project series should have provided more robust M&E data for the achievement of the project results
  beyond simple counting of the household connections or number of solar PV systems installed.



  Overall, although the M&E utilization was partially effective in changing course when obstacles to project
  implementation occurred, there were significant shortcomings in the M&E system’s design and
  implementation. Therefore, the quality of M&E is rated Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category B under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and triggered the
   Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Physical and Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.10), Involuntary Resettlement
   (OP/BP 4.12), and Forests (OP/BP 4.36) safeguard policies.

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): The project was classified as Category B because of site
   specific, temporary, and low impacts on environment such as solid and hazardous waste disposal, dust,
   noise, air and water pollution, vegetation clearance, and excavation and earthworks. Because the exact
   location and alignment of the distribution lines to be constructed under the project were unknown at
   appraisal, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared and disclosed in
   country on July 29, 2014, and at the World Bank’s InfoShop on September 8, 2014. The Environmental and
   Social Impact Assessment (ESIAs) for the first two distribution lines were prepared and disclosed in country
   on March 23, 2015, and the World Bank’s InfoShop on March 27, 2015. The implementation of the
   safeguards policies suffered from inadequate implementation capacity of the REA. There were significant
   shortcomings in reporting issues related to environmental and social (E&S) issues. The monitoring and
   supervision of the implementation of safeguard policies was inadequate. The ISRs note issues with
   environmental management such as excavated pits posing safety risks to communities, murram heaps left
   in wetland and roadsides, and uncleared wayleaves that could potentially result in power outages through
   contact with three branches (ISR No:16, p.6). During project implementation, there were nine work related
   injuries and one case of gender-based violence that were not reported adequately but subsequently
   identified and addressed in accordance with the World Bank policies.

   Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04): The project triggered this safeguard policy because of its likely impacts on
   wetlands and forests that could be natural habitats for some animals. The project team identified cases of
   excess murrum not removed but deposited on wetlands that are habitats to aquatic mammals, amphibians
   and birds.



                                                                                                  Page 15 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Energy for Rural Transform III (P133312)



  Physical and Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.10): The project triggered this safeguard policy because of
  the potential impact of the project activities on known and unknown physical cultural resources in the project
  areas. The project team confirmed that the project did not have an impact on any physical or cultural
  resources during project implementation.

  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): The project triggered this safeguard policy because it was
  expected that the construction of the distribution lines would have required some land acquisition along the
  distribution corridors. Because the exact location of and routing of most of the distribution lines were not
  identified at appraisal, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared and disclosed in the country
  on July 29, 2014 and at the World Bank’s InfoShop on September 8, 2014. The Resettlement Action Plans
  (RAPs) for the first two distribution lines were prepared and disclosed in country on March 23,2015, and at
  the World Bank’s InfoShop on March 27, 2015. The RAPs for the remaining 19 distribution lines to be
  constructed under the project were to be prepared upon the identification of their location and alignment.

  The project had significant non-compliance issues with this safeguard policy during project implementation
  that led to project implementation delays. The project activities started without payment of compensations to
  project-affected persons (PAPs), which was also a significant issue during the implementation of the
  previous ERT-2. In the final stages of project implementation in September 2022, it was identified that half
  of the grid extension and intensification works were non-compliant with the Involuntary Resettlement
  safeguard policy (ICR, p.33). The quarterly progress reports did not include any information related to the
  non-payment of compensations to PAPs. As a result, the project activities were put on hold. In addition to
  the inadequate supervision capacity of the owner’s engineers and the contractors, the insufficient
  safeguards implementation capacity of the REA was the main reason for inadequate implementation of this
  safeguard policy. The World Bank and the government agreed on a Post Closure Action Plan to address all
  outstanding safeguard issues following the project closing. The World Bank project team continues to
  monitor the implementation of the Action Plan.

  Forests (OP/BP 4.36): The project triggered this safeguard policy because of the possibility of power lines
  passing through forest areas. The ESMP provided guidance how the impact of the project on forests would
  have been assessed and addressed. The project constructed four distribution lines that affected six forests
  reserves, four of which are under the oversight of the National Forests Authority (NFA), and the remaining
  two under district local governments of Kole and Mubende. The civil works were completed without paying
  compensations to the NFA and the district local governments, which was against the requirements of this
  safeguard policy. The reasons were the lengthy time for the finalization of the memorandum of
  understanding with the NFA, the disagreements between the Chief Government Valuer (CGV) and the NFA
  in aligning the separate valuations, and the delays in obtaining the CGV’s approvals. The World Bank
  project team continues to monitor the implementation of the Action Plan that includes actions to address the
  issues related to the implementation of this safeguard policy.

  Overall, the project was noncompliant with the World Bank safeguards policies of Environmental
  Assessment, Involuntary Resettlement, and Forests. Inadequate implementation of these safeguards
  policies adversely affected project implementation, as a result of which some project activities could not be
  completed before project closing.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Energy for Rural Transform III (P133312)



   Financial Management

   The unaudited interim financial reports and semi-annual internal audit review reports were submitted with
   significant delays. The suggestions in the independent audit reports were followed by the internal audits
   but they were conducted irregularly. Although the Inspector General of Government conducted a corruption
   investigation on some projects implemented by REA, which led to the reorganization of REA as a
   department under MEMD, the investigation did not find any issues of corruption or misuse of funds
   associated with the project. The restructuring of REA disrupted some payment processes (such as
   payments to PIU staff, consultants, contractors, and PAPs) until the transfer of the project to the new
   project implementing agency under the MEMD was complete. The project team confirmed that all project
   funds were accounted for at project closing.

   Procurement

   The procurement followed the World Bank procurement guidelines and policies, but procurement was
   significantly delayed. Main issues were insufficient capacity of the staff responsible for procurement,
   inadequate documentation, and delays in receiving approvals from the contracts committees of the project
   agencies. Bids were mostly incomplete, which required revisions and clarifications further delaying the
   procurement process. Although the assessment of the REA highlighted insufficient procurement capacity,
   necessary measures were not taken to address this issue at appraisal. After lengthy discussions with REA,
   the project supported the establishment of a project implementing agency within REA, which included
   procurement specialists, but this could only be achieved in 2019, one year before the original project
   closing date. The procurement capacity further weakened when two procurement specialists left the project
   when REA was merged under the MEMD as a department. Overall, the shortcomings in procurement
   adversely affected project implementation and the operational and administrative efficiency of the project.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                 IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 The number of household
                                                                                 connections achieved under the
                                 Moderately          Moderately                  project, especially through solar
Outcome
                                 Satisfactory        Unsatisfactory              homes systems, was
                                                                                 significantly lower than targets.
                                                                                 The efficacy of the project in

                                                                                                   Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Energy for Rural Transform III (P133312)



                                                                                  achieving the project objective is
                                                                                  rated Modest. Although not a
                                                                                  direct criterion to rate outcome, it
                                                                                  is also important to note (for
                                                                                  lesson-learning purposes) the
                                                                                  project’s non-compliance with
                                                                                  the Bank’s safeguards policies
                                                                                  on Environmental Assessment,
                                                                                  Involuntary Resettlement, and
                                                                                  Forests.
                                                                                  There were significant
                                                                                  shortcomings at quality at entry
                                 Moderately           Moderately                  regarding the preparedness of
Bank Performance
                                 Satisfactory         Unsatisfactory              the project and the support to
                                                                                  REA in increasing its project
                                                                                  implementation capacity.
                                                                                  There were significant
                                                                                  shortcomings in the M&E
Quality of M&E                   Substantial          Modest
                                                                                  system’s design and
                                                                                  implementation.
Quality of ICR                   ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

This review has drawn three lessons based on the information in the ICR.

Insufficient capacity, implementation, and supervision of the safeguards policies can
adversely affect the achievement of project results and objectives. Project implementation
significantly suffered from issues related to the implementation of the Involuntary Resettlement and
Forests safeguards policies. These issues were not appropriately reported in the progress reports.
About one year before project closing, the project team identified that 50 percent of the distribution
line works were completed or started without the compensation payments to the project-affected
people and the agencies that are in charge of forests. The project’s non-compliance with the
safeguards policies continued during and after project implementation. The low readiness of the
project at the start of project implementation was a one of the main reasons because the distribution
line extensions to be constructed under the project were not identified (except two line segments);
therefore, Resettlement Action Plans could not be prepared. The weak capacity of the project
implementing agencies was another reason for the insufficient implementation of the safeguards
policies.

Strengthening of the project implementing agency’s institutional capacity during project
preparation and setting up of a dedicated project implementation unit can be critical in
successfully implementing complex projects. Although the project was the third in a three-project
series, the main project implementation agency, i.e., REA, had insufficient project implementation
capacity. The project did not finance any upfront capacity strengthening activities during project
preparation. As the ICR (p.35) reports “project preparation did not include establishment of an ERT-
3 dedicated team at REA and staffing levels and composition were inadequate for a much larger

                                                                                                     Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Energy for Rural Transform III (P133312)



project size than the previous ERT phases.” It took three years after the start of the project for a PIU
to be formed but it still had insufficient capacity. The merger of REA under the DEMD was another
setback in project implementation because some specialists left the project, and the institutional
memory was lost. Procurement, safeguards policies implementation, and contract management
suffered from insufficient implementation capacity.

Insufficient assessment of the capacity of financial markets can result in low achievement of
the project results expected from credit and guarantee facilities offered under a project. The
financial intermediaries that were to benefit from the project’s credit and guarantee facilities found
these products risky and marked up the interest rates. These products that were to be used for the
financing of solar PV systems were new to the financial market, and because of the risks involved in
financing solar PV systems, the financial intermediaries offered higher interest rates to hedge their
risks. The absence of subsidies to end users for the installation of the solar PV systems was another
shortcoming of the project design. The insufficient assessment of the marker resulted in lower
demand for these financial products and fewer number of solar PV systems installed by households.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is concise and candid. It is a tightly written and complete critique of the project. It is narrative is highly
evaluative. The report including its annexes provides a robust base to adequately assess the project’s
performance and the achievement of the project objective not limited to achievements of the indicators. The
quality of analysis is high. The interrogation of the evidence is sufficient; the salient points are summarized
concisely; and the linking of evidence to findings are clear. The report is internally consistent and broadly
responds to the Bank guidance, except the section on fiduciary compliance, which is missing, and the
information on safeguards implementation is insufficient. The lessons are based on the specific experiences
and findings of the project and are sufficiently linked to the narrative. However, although the report clearly
provides strong evidence for the significant shortcomings in project implementation that led to the under
achievement of the project results, it still attempts to justify the outcome and bank performance ratings in the
satisfactory range, which are not supported by evidence. Similarly, the discussion of the M&E quality justifies a
modest rating, but the ICR attempts to justify a substantial rating, which is also not supported by evidence.

Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                        Page 19 of 20
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Energy for Rural Transform III (P133312)




                                                                        Page 20 of 20
