     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Buenos Aires Flood risk management (P145686)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024043

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P145686                                     AR Buenos Aires Flood risk management

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Argentina                                   Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-86280                                  01-Mar-2022                                        191,768,791.43

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Jun-2016                                 01-Sep-2023

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           200,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            193,300,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        191,768,791.43                                               0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Craig Phillip Kullmann       Fernando Manibog             Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (Schedule 1), the Project Development Objective (PDO) was to strengthen
   the Autonomous City of Buenos Aires to efficiently manage flood risk and improve the drainage systems in the
   Cildáñez Basin, Maldonado Basin and Vega Basin. The PDO did not change during the life of the project, and
   this review has assessed the PDO achievement in terms of the following two objectives:

          I. Strengthen the Autonomous City of Buenos Aires to efficiently manage flood risk


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Buenos Aires Flood risk management (P145686)



        II. Strengthen flood defenses in the Cildáñez Basin, Maldonado Basin, and Vega Basin

   As per the Loan Agreement, the second PDO focused on the output level of improved drainage. For the
   purpose of this ICRR, IEG recommends that the second PDO be imputed to focus on the outcome level,
   which is restated as “Strengthened flood defenses in the Cildáñez Basin, Maldonado Basin, and Vega Basin.”
   The PDO outcome targets for the number of people benefiting from the project were expanded in scope
   during the second restructuring of the project. Since the targets were expanded no split evaluation is
   required.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Institutional Development for Flood Risk Management. (US$31.2 million at appraisal,
   and US$24.8 million actual). This component financed:

   Subcomponent 1.1. Hydrometeorological observation, surveillance, and alert system: The subcomponent
   was to be totally financed with counterpart funds and includes the design and implementation of an
   integrated hydro-meteorological observation, monitoring, alert, alarm, and response system (Sistema
   Hidrometeorológico de Observación, Vigilancia y Alerta - SIHVIGILIA) to increase the Borrower’s severe
   weather forecasting capacity and to improve its flood preparedness and emergency management and
   recovery. (PAD, p. 8)

   Subcomponent 1.2. Flood Risk Financing and Protection Scheme: The subcomponent involved a strategy
   for flood risk financing and a program for the protection of homeowners and small and medium enterprises,
   including inter alia: (i) the design of a probabilistic flood risk model; (ii) the construction of flood exposure
   data bases; (iii) the design of an advanced claims management system; (iv) the development of an
   innovative financial mechanism for risk transfer; and (iv) the carrying out of a capacity building process
   aimed at the Autonomous City of Buenos Aires (CABA) officials and potential users of the financial
   mechanism of risk transfer. (PAD, p. 9)

   Subcomponent 1.3. Flood Risk Social Communication and Education: (i) the provision of grants to NGOs
   with the purpose of raising awareness on flood hazard within local communities; (ii) the design and
   implementation of communication strategies for city dwellers to raise awareness on flood hazards; (iii) the
   carrying out of an education program on flood hazards, risks, vulnerability, and prevention for professionals
   in the education and construction sectors, and the provision of support to CABA to train communities in the
   poorest neighborhoods on emergency response; (iv) the provision of support for the update of the CABA’s
   regulatory frameworks (building norms); and (v) the carrying out of an international workshop for the
   exchange of experiences and sharing of knowledge on flood risk management. (PAD, p. 9)


                                                                                                       Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AR Buenos Aires Flood risk management (P145686)



  Subcomponent 1.4. Capacity Building for Flood Risk Management: (i) the strengthening of the CABA’s
  capacity for flood risk management, including support to the Flood Risk Management Council; (ii)
  the acquisition of equipment to increase CABA’s capacity to respond and recover from flooding; and (iii) the
  provision of technical assistance to design and disseminate participatory contingency plans. (PAD, p. 9)

  Component 2: Flood Mitigation Infrastructure. (US$290 million at appraisal, and US$278.5 million
  actual). This component financed three subcomponents:

  Subcomponent 2.1. Cildáñez Stream Basin: (i) works to develop flood retention areas in the basin to delay
  flows to the Riachuelo River; (ii) construction of networks to improve the water distribution and wastewater
  collection in low-income neighborhoods and informal settlements located in the basin; (iii) construction of
  drainage channels to improve the existing storm drainage infrastructure in the Basin by increasing its
  storage and flow capacity; and (iv) civil works to enhance the urban public space in the basin. (PAD, p. 9)

  Subcomponent 2.2. Maldonado Stream Basin: The construction of approximately thirty-one kilometers of
  secondary and tertiary drainage networks in the Maldonado stream Basin. (PAD, p. 9)

  Subcomponent 2.3. Vega Stream Basin: (i) the construction of a large drainage tunnel with an estimated
  length of 8.4 kilometers; and (ii) the construction of approximately 9.8 kilometers of secondary and tertiary
  drainage networks in the Vega Basin. This subcomponent would also finance the supervision of the tunnel
  works. (PAD, p. 9)

  Component 3: Project Management. (US$4.3 million at appraisal, and US$8.8 million actual). This
  component financed: (i) the provision of support for project management, including audits, M&E, technical
  assistance, training, and operating costs; and (ii) the development and implementation of comprehensive
  baseline and post-project data collection and analysis to allow the monitoring of project results and impacts.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total project cost was estimated at US$326 million but the actual total cost was US $312
  million.

  Financing: At appraisal, the IBRD financing was estimated at US$200 million. The amount disbursed was
  US$191.8 million, which was 96 percent of the loan. The project refunded the undisbursed amount to the
  World Bank.

  Borrower Contribution: The Borrower committed and disbursed US $120.8 million in counterpart
  financing.

  Dates: The Project was approved on June 22, 2016, became effective on December 7, 2016, and was
  closed on September 1, 2023, following one extension that added 18 months to the project period. A Mid
  Term Review (MTR) was conducted from April 20-28, 2020. There were two restructurings of the project
  that included the following:

        On April 30, 2019, a level 2 restructuring modified: (i) the implementing agency and institutional
         arrangements, (ii) results framework, (iii) components and costs, and disbursement and



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      AR Buenos Aires Flood risk management (P145686)



                                           procurement arrangements. At the time of the first restructuring US$138.27 million (69 percent) was
                                           disbursed.

                                         On November 15, 2021, a level 2 restructuring modified: (i) the implementing agency, institutional,
                                           and procurement arrangements, (ii) results framework, and (iii) extension of the loan closing date. At
                                           the time of the first restructuring US$157.27 million (79 percent) was disbursed.




   3. Relevance of Objectives

               Rationale
               The PDOs remained relevant to the World Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF FY19-FY22). The
               focus areas of the CPF are: (i) Supporting Argentina’s Access to Long-term Private Financing; (ii)
               Addressing Key Institutional Constraints for Better Governance and Service Delivery; and (iii) Supporting
               Argentina to Implement its Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC). The PDOs supported the third focus
               area and specifically Objective 10 - Building Resilient and Low-Carbon Cities through investments in
               mitigation and adaptation activities to reduce the impact of flooding events. (CPF, p. 32).

               The PDOs are aligned with the City of Buenos Aires 2018 Resiliency Strategy as well as the government’s
               hydraulic master plan that was developed with previous World Bank financing of the Flood Protection
               Project (P006052) that closed in 2006. This project builds on lessons learned from a predecessor project -
               the Urban Flood Prevention and Drainage Project (P088220), which closed in 2012 and that highlighted the
               importance of investing in non-infrastructure activities such as preparedness and flood risk management
               systems in addition to infrastructure, which this project incorporated. (PAD, p. 4; ICR, p.13). The design of
               the project is aligned with the capacity of the client. While the Bank has been involved in flood mitigation
               since the early 2000s in CABA through two previous projects, the frequency and intensity of
               hydrometorialical events has increased with climate change. In 2013, the City of Buenos Aires experienced
               of the heaviest storms in nearly 50 years causing direct damages that amounted to US$300 million.
               Additional hydrometeriological events in 2012 and 2013 caused an additional US$50 million in damages.
               (PAD, p. 3) Given the most recent CPF, coupled with the City’s resilience strategy, and increased climatic
               events, the project is rated as highly relevant.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR Buenos Aires Flood risk management (P145686)



Strengthen the Autonomous City of Buenos Aires to efficiently manage flood risk.

Rationale
The theory of change (ToC) in the Implementation Completion Report (ICR, p. 8) identified that the outcome
of interest was to strengthen the Autonomous City of Buenos Aires to efficiently manage flood risk. The mix of
inputs identified are adequate to reach the outcome. These included the design and development of: (i) an
integrated hydrometeorological observation, monitoring, alert and alarm system; (ii) financing of a strategy for
flood risk financing; (iii) design of a flood risk education and communication strategy; (iv) training of
communities in vulnerable neighborhoods; (iv) support to the CABA in updating their regulatory frameworks,
and (vi) financing knowledge exchanges with other countries on flood management.(ICR, p 21-22)

As a result, the expected outputs would have been an integrated hydrometeorological observation,
monitoring, alert and alarm system built, a flood risk financing strategy developed, flood risk education and
communications strategy and materials developed, vulnerable communities trained in flood risk reduction and
response, new regulatory frameworks developed, and knowledge exchanges with other countries conducted.

As a result of these outputs, expected intermediate outcomes would have been: monitoring, alert, and alarm
systems are in operation and functioning and information is being disseminated to the population in a timely
manner, flood risk financing strategy being implemented, improved perceptions, knowledge, attitudes, and
behaviors around flood risk mitigation and response among citizens as a result of education and
communication efforts, vulnerable communities responding to alerts from city officiales, clarified roles and
responsibilities among authorities being implemented as a result of regulations, and increased knowledge and
improved planning as a result of knowledge exchanges.

The result of these intermediate outcomes would be the PDO outcome of strengthened Autonomous City of
Buenos Aires to efficiently manage flood risk thus contributing to higher level outcomes of reduced
vulnerability to floods, increased resilience to climate change, and improved standard of living of low-income
populations.

The ToC’s activities, outputs, intermediate outcomes, and outcome provide a logical and properly
sequenced causal chain to reach the PDO outcome target. The ToC was comprehensive in addressing both
government capacity and its systems, as well as community capacity to manage flood risks. The project
financing leveraged the goverment's own contributions to reach the PDO outcome.

OUTPUTS:

The output level indicators for this objective in the results framework included:

      69 hydrometeorological stations installed and/or used to inform the Hydrometeorological Observation,
       Surveillance, and Alert System (SIHVIGILA). (Original target was 33). (achieved) (ICR, p.18). The
       SIHVIGILA started operating in 2018 with 33 stations that were installed by the project, and
       subsequently added 36 pre-existing stations that were incorporated to strengthen the robustness of
       the system.
      The counterpart amplified its communication and education efforts after the second restructuring
       through digital and in-person interactive platforms that included the construction of an environmental
       education center for schools and the general public to learn about water cycles and flood risk
       management. The inputs and scale of the outputs achieved are plausibly linked to the intermediate


                                                                                                  Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR Buenos Aires Flood risk management (P145686)



         outcome reported below on shifts in perceptions among the population related to management of
         flooding events.
        45,000 people reached through communication campaigns on flood risk management. (Original target
         was 3,000 people, revised at second restructuring to 10,000 people). (exceeded) (ICR, p.18).
        861 vulnerable people trained on flood risk management issues. (Original target was 670 people,
         revised at second restructuring to 800 people.) (achieved) (ICR, p. 18). These efforts focused on
         vulnerable neighborhoods in the city of Buenos Aires.
        705 people participated in workshops related to flood risk management. (Original target 150 people,
         revised target during second restructuring to 600 people) (achieved) (ICR, p.18)
        30,000 people benefited from educational programs in schools on flood risk management. (Original
         target was 400 people, revised target during second restructuring to 3,200) (exceeded) (ICR, p.18).
         The Ministry of Education incorporated flood risk management and disaster preparedness into their
         primary and secondary education sectors helping dramatically surpass this target. (ICRR interview)

The ICR reported the following additional outputs that did not have targets and were not included in the
results framework, but are related to inputs in the ToC that would contribute to CABA’s capacity to manage
flood risk:

      The project supported the updating of CABA’s regulatory framework for urban planning by introducing
         prevention criteria in planning and decision-making, incorporating essential water risk management
         concepts, and the delineation of water risk areas in the new urban planning code. The updates also
         included zoning regulations to restrict development in high-risk flood areas. In addition, the project
         provided guidance on flood resilient infrastructure, and advised on green infrastructure for retention
         and infiltration areas. Through these updates to the regulatory framework and their implementation,
         the project has contributed to the strengthening of CABA's capacity to manage flooding risks. (ICR, p.
         17) During implementation, the project supported knowledge exchanges with other countries on the
         use of nature based solutions, which were adopted into CABA’s city-wide planning strategies to help
         mitigate flood risks. (ICR, p. 23)

OUTCOMES:

The outcome level indicators for this objective in the results framework were:

      Weather forecast warnings issued based on data from the hydrometeorological network: The
         SIHVIGILA is generating forecast reports and alerts every 12 hours and detailed 7-day reports. Real-
         time information and short-term, precise weather forecasting alerts are issued up to 120 minutes in
         advance of a hydrometeorological event and are shared with Civil Defense, General Directorate of
         Rainwater System, Emergency Medical Care System, firefighters, and police, who in turn can
         articulate the necessary measures, coordinate among institutions, and optimize resources
         strengthening CABA’s emergency response. (achieved) (ICR, p.16)

      Flood Risk Management Council: The Flood Risk Management Council was established by decree
         No. 287 in 2016. The evidence that the council is executing its designated functions includes: (i)
         convening interministerial quarterly meetings, (ii) defines actions and measures to be taken by
         stakeholders during planning exercises and during emergencies on a regular basis. (achieved) (ICR,
         p. 18 and ICRR interview). The council was the entity that determined the need for the Ministry of


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR Buenos Aires Flood risk management (P145686)



       Education to incorporate flood risk management and disaster preparedness into the primary and
       secondary education sectors which was done.
      Perceptions on flood risk: 3.37 index score of beneficiaries’ perception towards flood events on a
       scale of 1-5. The baseline was 2.85 and the original target was 3.42. (not achieved). This is based on
       independent evaluations contracted by CABA at baseline, mid-term, and project close. The index is
       made up of a series of questions such as, (i) How prepared is the city to deal with floods?, (ii) How
       prepared do you feel you are to deal with a flooding event?; (iii) What is the probability that this area
       will currently flood? While the target of the index was not achieved, the perceptions of the population
       based on their experience shifted, on average, in a positive direction on how flooding events are
       handled and their perceptions of risk to flooding. This indicator is plausibly linked to the activities and
       outputs related to the education, communication, and training investments that were made by the
       project. Moreover, these perceptions are also likely influenced by the infrastructure that was
       constructed related to PDO 2.

The ICR reported the following additional outcomes that did not have targets and were not included in the
results framework, but helped strengthen the capacity of CABA to manage flood risks:

      Flood maps were produced and are used part of the emergency planning exercises. (ICRR interview)

While the ICR’s ToC adequately captured the causal chain, there were minor shortcomings that included:
(i) measuring the PDO outcome, (ii) a lack of clarity on the methodology used for the perception index on the
management of flooding events, and (iii) no critical assumptions were made in the ToC. Weaknesses in
measuring the PDO outcome are discussed below in the M&E section. The lack of information on whose
perceptions were changed given the broad range of the target audience from school children to adults was a
minor weakness. The ICR’s ToC did not specify its underlying assumptions that need to be in place to
achieve the PDOs. Despite those shortcomings, based on the achievement of the outputs, intermediate
outcomes, and final outcomes, it is highly likely that the Autonomous City Buenos Aires – authorities and
citizens in the target basins – are better equipped to manage flood risk as a direct result of the project’s
activities, and thus the project’s efficacy in achieving Objective 1 is rated Substantial.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the drainage systems in the Cildáñez Basin, Maldonado Basin, and Vega Basin

Rationale
The ToC in the Implementation Completion Report (ICR, p. 8) identified that the outcome of interest was to
improve drainage systems in the targeted basins. IEG has imputed a higher level of PDO outcome such as
strengthen flood defenses in the Cildáñez Basin, Maldonado Basin, and Vega Basin.



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR Buenos Aires Flood risk management (P145686)



The inputs identified are adequate to reach the outcome. These included the financing of: (i) flood retention
areas, (ii) civil works to enhance urban public space, (iii) a large drainage tunnel, and (iv) construction of
secondary and tertiary drainage networks.

As a result of these inputs, expected outputs would have been the completed construction of: (i) flood
retention areas, (ii) civil works to enhance urban public space, (iii) a large drainage tunnel, and (iv) secondary
and tertiary drainage networks.

As result of these outputs, expected intermediate outcomes would have been: (i) increased storage and flow
capacity, and (ii) reduced urban flood-prone areas. As a result of these intermediate outcomes it is expected
that the PDO outcome target would be strengthened flood defenses in the targeted basins contributing to
longer-term, higher level outcomes of reduced vulnerability to floods, increased resilience to climate change,
and improved standard of living of low-income populations.

The ToC was clear that vulnerable populations were expected to benefit from some of the investments. This
pro-poor design element was explicit in the PAD, the results framework, and was monitored during
implementation. Similar to PDO 1, there were no critical assumptions made in the ToC, which was a
shortcoming. For example, one logical assumption would have been that the entity receiving the new
drainage infrastructure responsible for operation and maintenance has increased budget.

OUTPUTS:

The output level indicators for this objective in the results framework included:

      8.4 km of drainage tunnel constructed. This tunnel is over 5.3 meters in diameter and benefits more
       than 13 densely populated neighborhoods in the city. (Original target was 8.4 km) (achieved) (ICR, p.
       19 and 20)
      42.30 km of secondary and tertiary drainage conduits constructed. The baseline for secondary and
       tertiary systems was 11 km. New systems constructed under the project were 6.5 km in the Cildanez
       Stream Basin, and 24.75 km in the Maldonado and Vega Stream Basin totaling 42.3 km with baseline.
       The technical designs of infrastructure were updated during implementation due to changes in CABA’s
       topography, leading to more efficient systems and increasing the benefits (protected land area and
       more beneficiaries with reduced impacts). At the time of ICR writing, CABA had 5.25 km that was
       under contract and being constructed adding to the area of land protected and new beneficiaries,
       which was estimated to be completed by March 2025. (ICR, p.19) (Original target was 41 km)
       (achieved) (ICR, p. 19 and 20)
      60 m3/s increased drainage capacity in the targeted areas from constructed infrastructure. (Original
       target, 60 m3/s). (achieved) (ICR, p.20).
      18 km2 of land areas protected from flooding after rainstorm events with an intensity of up to the
       equivalent of Tr=10 years. (Original target was 3.5 km2, revised at first restructuring to 8 km2, revised
       again during second restructuring to 18 km2) (achieved) (ICR, p.19 and 20).



OUTCOMES:

The outcome level indicators for this objective in the results framework included:


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                AR Buenos Aires Flood risk management (P145686)




                                    3,001,287 people directly benefited from investments in infrastructure to mitigate floods. Additional
                                     people are expected to benefit from the 5.25 km of secondary and tertiary stormwater networks in the
                                     target basins that will leverage the investments from the project. (ICR, p.20) Beneficiary figures are
                                     based on two sources: (i) the 2022 census data for the population living in the target basins and (ii)
                                     mobility surveys for daily commuters who transit the basins. Census data provides the most accurate
                                     information for residents within the basin, and the mobility surveys estimates were proportioned to
                                     account for those transiting in and out of the intervention basins. (Original target was 3,000,000
                                     people). (achieved). Based on 2022 census data 54 percent of the population living in the basins
                                     were female. (ICR, p.19)
                                    47,000 vulnerable people benefited from flood protection measures. (Original target was 20,000,
                                     revised target during second restructuring to 47,000 people.) (achieved)

                             The Project resulted in fully achieving the original PDO targets, resulting in high efficacy rating.

                            The project enhanced the flooding defense mechanisms for CABA by increasing the storm water system
                            capacity to protect the population in the targeted basins. With the increase in storage and flow capacity it is
                            expected that the completed works will reduce vulnerability to floods including low-income areas, limit
                            damages to assets, and reduce interruptions to employment and transit.

                            The ICR’s ToC did not make any assumptions regarding the achievement or sustainability of the outcomes
                            such as adequate budget to operate and maintain the new infrastructure, which was a shortcoming. The
                            interview with the task team confirmed that additional budget allocation was provided to the Ministry of Public
                            Space and Urban Hygiene for operation and maintenance of the new infrastructure.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The ICR documented the achievement of the output, intermediate, and outcome indicators. Despite the minor
                            shortcomings in measuring the indicator related to perceptions, the project's overall efficacy rating is a strong
                            Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency


                                                                                                                                    Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AR Buenos Aires Flood risk management (P145686)



Ex Ante Economic Efficiency: At appraisal, the internal rate of return (IRR) for Component 2: Flood Mitigation
Infrastructure was estimated at 21 percent with a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$ 334 million for the investment
based on three benefit streams: (i) reduction of asset losses, (ii) less traffic disruptions, and (iii) reduction of
illnesses caused by lake pollution. The methodological approach and benefit streams employed were
appropriate and standard practice for the sector. Component 1: Institutional Development for Flood Risk
Management was analyzed separately using a benchmarking technique. At appraisal, the IRR for Component 1
was estimated at 36 percent with a Net Present Value of US$129.2 million based on comparisons to other
countries that have undertaken similar capacity building efforts. (ICR, p.21) For reference, the NPV calculation
used a discount rate of 10 percent. (PAD, p.79)

Ex Post Economic Efficiency: The economic analysis at project completion for Component 2 in the ICR
included the same benefits streams and modeling approach identified at appraisal, which follows standard
practice for the sector and these types of projects. The Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) at closing was
estimated at 17 percent with a NPV of US$ 224 million. The analysis for Component 1 estimated an EIRR at 44
percent with a NPV of US$129.3 million. The ex-post analysis also used a discount rate of 10 percent.

Operational and Administrative Efficiency: The project was designed to be implemented over 5.5 years, and
its implementation started at a rapid pace with disbursements reaching 69 percent by the time of the MTR in
April 2020. However, the project did experience delays because of factors that were outside the control of the
project implementation unit. These factors included: (i) changes required to procurement packages because the
central government decided to build railway line that conflicted with CABA’s stormwater drainage plans, and (ii)
currency fluctuations resulting in an 18-month extension. (ICR, p.25) While the COVID-19 pandemic did play
some role in the delays, the procurement and currency fluctuations drove the extension. (ICRR interview)
Despite these challenges, the project was implemented within the original allocated budget. The impact of the
currency fluctuation and devaluation of the peso are reflected in the lower net present values of the project's
costs and benefits as compared to appraisal figures. (ICR, p.21)

Conclusion. The project's estimated EIRR at 17 percent is higher than the range of 6-10 percent discount rates
suggested for Latin America’s upper middle-income countries in the World Bank economic analysis guidelines.
This result, as well as the administrative measures taken to mitigate further delays, keep the project under
budget, and still achieve its results, indicate that the efficiency of this project is substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      100.00
 Appraisal                                                  21.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      100.00
 ICR Estimate                                               17.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable


                                                                                                      Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AR Buenos Aires Flood risk management (P145686)



* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The PDO was highly relevant to the government and Bank strategy for Argentina. Efficacy of the two PDOs to
strengthen the Autonomous City of Buenos Aires to efficiently manage flood risk and strengthen flood defense
mechanisms in the Cildáñez Basin, Maldonado Basin and Vega Basin - was rated as a strong substantial
accounting for the shortcomings in measuring PDO 1 outcomes.

The economic analysis showed that the project had an EIRR greater than regional discount rates for upper
middle-income countries. The project adjusted the design to address factors outside the control of the project
implementation unit. These adjustments included increasing the PDO targets along with an extension of the
closing date yet maintaining the same budget resulting in a substantial efficiency rating. Overall, the outcome
was rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Based on the information in the ICR, the following issues pose modest risks to the development outcome:

      Technical and Government Ownership Risks. The ICR indicates that there are no immediate risks
       that could undermine the development outcomes achieved by the project. Arrangements for operation
       and maintenance of the infrastructure and the drainage works have successfully been transferred to
       the Ministry of Public Space and Urban Hygiene – the ministry responsible for managing the
       networks. The ICRR interview confirmed that this ministry has a budget line for operation and
       maintenance of the new infrastructure. The capacity building efforts for flood risk mitigation had
       substantial ownership from all groups implementing them, thus increasing the likelihood that these
       initiatives continue being relevant for the city. (ICR, p. 28)
      O&M Financing Risk. The main risk was related to the operation and maintenance of the SIHVIGILA
       due to its operating cost. Despite CABA having budget allocations for its implementation, the current
       economic situation, and any future downturns, could put pressure on city administrators to reduce
       public expenditure and that could pose a threat to the SIHVIGILA. (ICR, p.28)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was well aligned with the government and CABA’s priorities of flood risk mitigation and had
  high strategic relevance. The Bank team facilitated a preparation process that resulted in technically and
  financially sound design. This was demonstrated by the amount of counterpart financing to achieve the

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Buenos Aires Flood risk management (P145686)



  PDOs. The environmental and social risks were well identified, and the project was accurately classified
  as a category A project. The design of the project was aligned with the capacity of the client, and the
  project was explicit on serving poor and vulnerable populations as reflected in the PDO indicator. The
  implementation arrangements were adequate and reflected the reality of the local context at the time, and
  the project had well advanced procurement packages during the preparation phase. The Bank team
  consisted of an array of experts to help guide the client in the design, and it built upon the lessons
  learned from previous flood mitigation projects such as the Urban Flood Prevention and Drainage Project
  (P088220). Given the robustness of the preparation, the quality of entry is rated Satisfactory, with the
  minor shortcoming related to activities that were included in the design, but ultimately dropped because
  the client did not see value in executing them. These activities did not impact the efficacy or efficiency
  ratings.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team benefited from having a task team leader that continued throughout the design and
 execution of the project. This continuity allowed for a trustworthy relationship to be developed between the
 implementing agency and the Bank, and facilitated good communication to make course corrections as
 needed. (ICR, p. 28) In addition, the main task team was present in-country enabling them to closely
 monitor the progress of the project implementation through frequent field trips and meetings with the client.
 The Bank team and implementing agency had to contend with exogenous factors such as the COVID-19
 pandemic, which they adjusted to through virtual missions. Moreover, the macro-fiscal crisis and the
 devaluation of the Argentinian peso against the dollar was outside the control of task team and
 implementing agency, but despite these shocks the project was able to deliver on performance indicators.

 The task team also supported the adjustment of the project timeline when the implementing agency was
 forced to make changes to the engineering designs, because of the central government’s decision to build
 a railroad line that would impact the original designs. This was unanticipated and was the main reason for
 the extension of the project closing date, but the task team supported the necessary changes. Through
 close engagement with the client and monitoring, the team used the two restructurings to proactively
 address issues that arose during implementation. In addition, the team provided technical assistance and
 trust fund support to the implementing agency on innovative green infrastructure that influenced the
 implementation of the project. (ICR, p.32) The factors that effected implementation delays were outside the
 control of the Bank and the implementing entity, and Bank team took proactive measures to restructure
 which allowed the project to fully achieve the targets with its available budget. Moreover, the Bank was
 proactive in supporting the implementing entity with technical assistance to support the project outcomes
 and build the capacity of the client. These efforts result in a satisfactory rating. (ICR author)

 Given there were only minor short-comings at the design phase, the overall Bank performance rating is
 Satisfactory.




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Buenos Aires Flood risk management (P145686)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework adequately captured the outputs and intermediate outcomes, but could have been
 stronger at the outcome level. PDO 1 had two binary outcome indicators to measure whether the
 institutional capacity to efficiently manage flood risk was strengthened, which was a short-coming.
 Measuring changes in institutional capacity implies measuring changes in policies, procedures, and
 behaviors to efficiently carry out functions, and this can be difficult to quantify in a project context. However,
 a proxy measure for improvements in institutional capacity is the satisfaction of the end user with the
 service or information that is being provided by the service delivery institution. An alternative to having the
 PDO 1 indicator - “weather forecasting warnings based on data from hydrometeorlogical network – yes/no”
 - , may have been “beneficiary satisfaction with CABA’s ability to communicate flood risk information in a
 timely manner”. The weaknesses of the PDO 1 outcome indicators was underscored in the ICR.

 The project adequately measured the outputs regarding education, communication, and training that
 reached an array of stakeholders in school and non-school settings. However, the linkage between the
 training and education efforts across the array of actors and the perceptions on managing flood risk was
 less clear, because the target audience for measuring perceptions was not well defined. Moreover, the
 ICR’s ToC was not explicit about any assumptions of what the education and communication efforts in the
 school and non-school setting would lead to.

 For PDO 2, the inherent challenge in measuring outcomes in a flood reduction project such as a reduction
 in damaged assets or interruptions with traffic or employment is the timing of when the infrastructure is
 completed and operational, the occurrence of hydrometeroglocial events that would demonstrate the
 benefits of the enhanced design capability of the infrastructure, and the timing of the project closure. Unlike
 other projects such as water supply, sanitation, or parallel sectors such electricity, those projects have a
 predictable production elements that produce inputs to transmission and distributions systems such as
 volumes of water per day or kilowatts hours per day of electricity that influence outcomes at the household
 level. Whereas flood reduction projects may be designed for a 50 or 100 year flood, those events or smaller
 ones may not happen in the window of completing the infrastructure and project closure thereby making it
 difficult to rely on project monitoring data to measure outcomes. Measurement of outcomes may need to
 happen after project closure. In such projects, modeling the outcomes based on the installed design
 capacity for purpose of evaluation is an acceptable practice.

 The project carried out a baseline, mid-term, and end line surveys to augment other administrative data
 sources used to measure outputs, and intermediate outcomes. The data sources to capture beneficiaries
 residing in the targeted basins and those transiting in and out of the basins were robust and adequate.




                                                                                                       Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Buenos Aires Flood risk management (P145686)



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E implementation was done in a satisfactory manner and was conducted by the project
  implementing unit. The Bank team provided close support during implementation and strengthened the
  capacity of M&E staff in the project implementation unit. Bi-annual reports were submitted and at least 2
  supervision missions were conducted per year along with a series of technical meetings. (ICR, p. 26) The
  close supervision by the Bank team helped ensure the quality of the information being reported was high.

  The Bank team was proactive in adjusting or adding indicators during implementation to better capture
  the projects impacts, and dropping indicators that were no longer relevant because of dropped activities
  during the restructurings. For example, at the second restructuring a series of indicators were added that
  captured beneficiary perceptions around satisfaction with the flood mitigation water works, and of flood
  resilience. This was a positive development aside from the shortcoming on better defining the population
  whose perceptions were being measured given the expansive education and communication efforts.
  These results were captured in a series of independent surveys financed by the project. Likewise, the
  project made a change in the education activities, and decided to give more emphasis on flood risk
  management in the public education system, which entailed a specific indicator being added at
  restructuring to capture the number of beneficiaries of educational programs on flood risk management in
  schools.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E system was proactively used by the project implementing unit and the Bank team during
  implementation at the output level. The project implementation unit also had to rely on independent
  mobility surveys from the Transportation and Public Works Secretariat to track the number people that
  commuted through the project intervention areas to capture and estimate the total number of
  beneficiaries that benefited from the project but did not reside in the intervention areas. The interview
  with the Task Team confirmed that the beneficiary numbers extracted from those surveys reflected only
  the population transiting in and out of the targeted basins. These surveys were conducted in 2019, 2020,
  and 2021. As previously mentioned, the project measured beneficiary perceptions of flood risk at
  baseline, mid-term, and endline, which is good practice. The Bank team closely monitored procurement
  and tracked physical progress of infrastructure installation, which informed the decision to undertake
  restructuring and adjust indicators in the results framework to reflect changes in the project.

  The overall quality of M&E is rated modest. The M&E system adequately captured the achievement of
  the development objective of the project; however, the results framework had minor shortcomings such
  as indicators that could have possibly better measured PDO 1 with respect to CABA’s capacity to
  efficiently manage flood risks. PDO 1 indicator was a yes/no indicator as to whether forecast warnings
  based on the SIHVIGILA were being issued. An indicator that measured changes in beneficiaries
  satisfaction with information on flood risk may have better reflected the desired outcome.

  While the project captured an array of indicators to support the overall performance record of the project,
  the weakness in PDO 1 outcome indicators resulted in the rating for M&E being Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Buenos Aires Flood risk management (P145686)




10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Project was designated as Category A. Environmental and social risks were deemed high because of
   the large-scale tunneling activity. The safeguard policies triggered were Environmental Assessment (OP
   4.01), Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11, Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12), and Projects on
   International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 because of the common waterway shared with Uruguay. (ICR, p.26-
   27).

   Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA), including an Environmental and Social Management
   Plan (ESMP), were developed for each of the interventions related to the Cildáñez, Vega and Maldonado
   subcomponents. All safeguard-related policies were complied with, and the safeguard ratings were
   satisfactory throughout most of the implementation period. (ICR, p.27) The ICR reported that CABA’s staff
   who were responsible for the socioenvironmental management were well experienced and gained extensive
   knowledge during implementation, specifically with respect to community involvement and citizen
   engagement activities. (ICR, p27)

   In the last year of the project, citizens filed complaints regarding the piloting of nature-based solutions in the
   city over concerns with the interventions’ effectiveness in flood mitigation as well as environmental and
   social impacts. The project implementation unit reinforced their stakeholder engagement and
   communication processes, and the complaints were addressed and closed satisfactorily. (ICR, p.27)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: The project complied with the Bank's financial management requirements. During
   implementation, the FM arrangements allowed for the recording of all Project transactions and balances,
   supported the preparation of regular and reliable financial statements, and were subject to external audits
   which were found acceptable to the Bank. No accountability issues were flagged during implementation
   except for one ISR that rated financial management as Moderately Unsatisfactory due an overdue 2019
   financial audit report. The project closed with a satisfactory rating for financial management.

   Procurement: All procurement processes followed World Bank standards, and no misprocurement was
   declared throughout the project's implementation. Procurement processes slowed down near the end of
   the project because of staff turnover, which resulted in inadequate transfer of project knowledge and
   experience with Bank regulations. In addition, the depreciation of the Argentinian peso contributed to the
   slowdown during implementation. The project procurement rating was rated as satisfactory
   throughout project implementation with a slight downgrade to moderately satisfactory in the last year
   because of the procurement staff turnover. (ICR, p.27)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)


                                                                                                       Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Buenos Aires Flood risk management (P145686)



   The ICR reports various positive unintended impacts that included: (i) improved international coordination
   on flood risk management, (ii) incorporation of nature-based solutions in city-wide strategies, (iii)
   methodology for evaluating costs and benefits of nature-based solutions developed for CABA, and (iv) the
   inclusion of flood risk management in education programs. Given that almost all of these were captured in
   some form in the PAD, the ICRR does not consider them unintended impacts. Improved international
   coordination was envisioned at project design through financing international workshops. While not
   referred to in the PAD as nature-based solutions, the document explicitly mentions retention ponds as part
   of the project. The inclusion of flood risk management in education programs was brought into the project
   design during implementation and was reflected in the results framework. The one activity that may not
   have been envisioned at design, but supported with technical assistance was the methodology for
   evaluating costs and benefits of nature-based solutions. During implementation, the Bank team made
   significant efforts to support the client and connect them with international experience. Nurturing this
   activity, beyond international workshops, contributed to CABA joining the C40 Cities Climate Leadership
   Group and signing a cooperation agreement with the city of Copenhagen. This partnership in turn
   influenced CABA’s thinking on nature-based solutions in their city-wide flood mitigation and climate
   strategy. These efforts impacted CABA’s thinking beyond just the project intervention sites, and while not
   explicitly in the project design it had a larger impact than what was expected.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

      The Bank’s long-term engagement with the client can enhance prospects for
         implementation success. This project built on previous Bank engagement and adjusted the
         design by incorporating lessons learned from previous in-country experiences. Notably, the
         project moved beyond building infrastructure to also investing in flood warning systems,
         education programs, and capacity building at the community level for emergency
         response. The comprehensive approach and long-term relationship demonstrate that the
         thinking of the client and Bank evolves over time to address challenges that will improve
         sustainability and resilience. The Bank’s Multiphase Approach (MAP) can serve as an
         appropriate mechanism when dealing with development problems and reforms that span
         multiple project cycles.


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Buenos Aires Flood risk management (P145686)



       Limited Bank staff turnover during implementation can allow trust to be built with the
        client and can have a positive impact on implementation success. The Bank team had
        one local TTL be part of the design, implementation, and completion, which can allow for
        trust to develop between the Bank team and client. Difficult implementation challenges and
        the need to make quick course corrections can be influenced by the level of trust and quality
        of relationships between the Bank and the client. These relationships go beyond one project
        cycle. As this project showed, the thinking by the Bank team and the client evolved over time
        and took a more comprehensive approach to ensure sustainability and resilience. There was
        limited Bank staff turnover among the extended team as well such as the environmental and
        social specialists which proved important for the success of a large scale, high risk, and
        complex project.
       A strong citizen engagement strategy is needed to increase the client’s ability to
        achieve development outcomes. This project demonstrated the impact of having a strong
        citizen engagement and education program as part of the design. This is particularly
        important in flood mitigation projects that rely on the communities’ input not only for planning,
        but also for participation in risk reduction activities including early flood warning systems.
       Combining green and grey infrastructure can provide a holistic and resilient approach
        to flood mitigation infrastructure investments. Historically flood mitigation has depended
        on grey infrastructure to improve drainage and increase basin flow capacity to evacuate
        excess runoff. This strategy is an essential part of flood mitigation, but this project
        demonstrated that incorporating green infrastructure can be equally as
        important. Repurposing public lands such green areas or parks to allow for runoff retention
        can reduce peak flows, improve ground water availability, and provide cheaper and cost-
        effective solutions for city-wide flood management and climate strategies.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  Yes, given the accelerating severity of flooding events globally, the positive outcomes of the project, and the
  Bank’s strong engagement with the client, a more in-depth assessment could yield important insights
  regarding the success factors for projects of this type and their applicability in similar contexts.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well-written, concise, provided a good analysis, and did a good job of documenting the results and
data sources. The narrative was clear and supported the ratings. The ToC was adequate as it captured the
overall logic of the project. The documentation of data sources that were provided in the main body of the ICR
or in the footnotes increased the robustness of the document. The ICR also provided good documentation in
the annexes to show project implementation of all its components, in addition to the list of contracts supported
by the project. A minor shortcoming of the ICR was the lack of incorporation of more details regarding the

                                                                                                     Page 17 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AR Buenos Aires Flood risk management (P145686)



beneficiary survey completed at the end of the project, particularly regarding details of the perception index on
flood management. A summary report of the final perception index was shared separately by the Task Team.

The ICR captured the proactive nature of the Bank team in supporting the client with course corrections,
appropriately updating the results framework through restructurings – while remaining within the framework of
the ToC. The ICR also documented the technical assistance that informed project implementation and city level
flood mitigation and climate strategies that went beyond the project intervention sites. The M&E section of the
ICRR mentioned the challenges related to measuring PDO 2 outcomes; however, the ICR for this project, and
other flood reduction projects, would benefit from documenting a timeline of when infrastructure interventions
were put into operation, and a record of significant hydrometerological events that may have occurred during
the life of the project. This would allow the ICR to demonstrate whether it was feasible to capture outcomes
during the life of the project. While recognizing some of the minor shortcomings, the overall rating for the quality
of the ICR is Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 18 of 18
