     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EQRP (P148110)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023910

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P148110                                    EQRP

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Mongolia                                   Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-54880                                 31-Dec-2019                                          27,075,670.58

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Jun-2014                               30-Jun-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           30,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            29,999,897.99                                                0.00

 Actual                                        27,075,670.58                                                0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Joy Antoinette De Beyer    Judyth L. Twigg              Susan Ann Caceres               IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The PDO was identical in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) and Financing Agreement (FA). It was
   stated as follows: “The Project Development Objectives are to improve the quality of education for primary
   school children in Mongolia, with particular emphasis on improving native language and mathematical skills,
   and strengthen school-level planning” (FA, p. 4; and PAD, p. ii).

   At a second restructuring (2020), the PDO was revised to add an additional aim, as follows: “The revised PDO
   would be ‘to improve the quality of education for primary school children in Mongolia, with particular emphasis

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EQRP (P148110)



   on improving native language and mathematical skills, strengthen school-level planning, and increase support
   for child welfare transfers during the COVID-19 emergency’” (Restructuring Paper, p. 10).

   In this case, application of the split rating methodology due to the added objective would not change the
   overall efficacy or Outcome ratings. To avoid unnecessary complexity, a split rating is therefore not used in
   this Review.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  15-Jun-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Improving learning outcomes (Appraised cost: US$14.9 million, Revised cost: US$11.4
   million, Actual cost: US$10.75 million).

   The purpose of this component was to ensure that by the end of grade 2 of primary school, Mongolian
   students could read fluently and had mastered basic numeracy and math skills. Sub-component 1.1 would
   scale up several key interventions of the predecessor Rural Education and Development (READ) project
   nationally. That project, which was implemented from 2006-2013, aimed to improve rural students' access
   and use of quality learning materials and improve teachers' skills. Specific activities under this sub-
   component were to include provision of books and materials, creation of school libraries, a public reading
   campaign, development of scientific and mathematics-focused children’s books, content development for
   special needs children, and an impact evaluation/assessment. Sub-component 1.2 would support a national
   rollout of skills assessments of native language and mathematics for grades 1 and 2 students and a
   national assessment for grade 5. The project would support: (i) development and validation of the early
   grade assessment instruments; (ii) training of teachers in appropriately using the instruments and
   interpreting results; (iii) on-site monitoring and support on the correct use of the instruments; and (iv)
   development of corrective and/or preventive policy and tailored-made interventions. With respect to the
   grade 5 assessment, the project intended to support: (i) strengthening of the Education Evaluation Center
   (EEC) to administer and analyze the assessment; (ii) developing and validating the standardized
   assessment test; and (iii) training for school administrators and teachers in preparation for the nationwide
   administration of the assessment, including: (a) administering the test; (b) scoring and grading; (c) data
   capture and entry; (d) developing and administering quality control mechanisms of the results; and (e) using
   the results to support systems and policies for pedagogical and curricular improvement.

   Component 2: Pre- and in-service professional development of teachers (Appraised cost: US$3.3
   million, Revised cost: US$3.1 million, Actual cost: US$2.58 million).


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  EQRP (P148110)



The purpose of this component was to upgrade teacher quality by helping teachers develop the appropriate
tools to provide individualized support for all children to improve their learning outcomes, in particular
reading and mathematical skills for grades 1 and 2. Sub-component 2.1 aimed to support primary education
Teacher Training Institutions throughout the country by (i) providing high quality teaching and learning
equipment and materials, especially for early grade reading and mathematics; (ii) funding in-service training
for teacher trainers; and (iii) a review of the practicum programs for teacher trainees, especially relating to
teaching and learning practices of early grade reading and mathematics. Both pre- and in-service training
programs planned to develop: (a) sample scripts that would help teachers initiate children into reading, and
(b) teaching methods and materials to improve skills that have been shown to be highly predictive of later
mathematical skills. Sub-component 2.2 would support (i) in-service pedagogical training for teachers,
especially in the use of early grade learning materials for reading and mathematics and in classroom-level
assessments of achievement; (ii) in-service training and hands-on support to improve academic leadership
of school principals, and (iii) strengthening the capacity of and providing enabling support to district and
provincial education officers, methodologists, school principals, and teachers. The project would
also support carrying out classroom observations using the internationally comparable Stallings instrument
to measure teachers’ use of instructional time, materials, and core pedagogical practices. This would help
assess the effectiveness of the training provided and derive lessons learned to feed back into the pre- and
in-service teacher training programs.

Component 3: Implementation of a school support program (Appraised cost: US$6.1 million, Revised
cost: US$8.6 million, Actual cost: US$7.3 million).

This component would scale up the Ministry of Education and Science’s (MES) “Talent Program” of school
financing from the initial 100 pilot schools to all primary schools in the country. It would provide about
US$3,000 per school per block of financing for them to implement an approved school quality enhancement
proposal. This would transfer funds from the MES to schools to spend autonomously to implement an
approved school proposal that included objectives, targets, and a budget. All primary schools nation-wide
would be able to apply for this financing, whose broad purpose would be to increase the quality of
education, including providing enrichment opportunities for students. Independent annual audits would be
conducted to ensure that financing was used in compliance with the approved proposals. The component
included support for increasing the time available for learning, along with the development of a school-level
planning function. A School Support Handbook, developed as an attachment to the Project Operation
Manual, identified broad areas of eligible expenditures such as co-curricular activities, management, staff
development, services, teaching materials, furniture and equipment, and minor maintenance.

Component 4: System management, monitoring, and evaluation (Appraised cost: US$5.7 million,
Revised cost: US$1.9 million, Actual cost: US$1.45 million).

This component would assist MES to effectively implement the project with the support of qualified technical
assistance (TA). The TA would include: (i) a chief technical advisor and financial management and
procurement specialists attached to the office of the Project Director; and (ii) qualified consultants attached
to the working groups established for project implementation. The component would also finance an impact
evaluation to assess the effectiveness of the project in improving reading and mathematics learning
outcomes in primary schools by supporting (i) the Department of Monitoring and Evaluation of the MES and
the EEC to integrate student learning outcomes into the tracking of learning trends; and (ii) capacity building
for the MES in financial management, internal audit, and procurement.




                                                                                                  Page 3 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    EQRP (P148110)



  Components 5: Social Welfare Transfers to Families of Needy Students (Appraised cost: US$5
  million, Actual cost: US$5 million).

  This component was added at the second Restructuring in 2020 to support government efforts to provide
  cash transfers to poor households to help offset income shocks. As part of a US$1.8 billion government
  COVID-19 emergency relief package, the project was asked to contribute up to US$5 million to top up cash
  transfers under the Child Money Program for children aged 0-18 years.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Costs: Total project costs were estimated at appraisal at US$30 million over five years. (The
  system-generated part of the ICR shows a revised amount of $29,999,898 which the project team was
  unable to explain; presumably a system error.) The final disbursements at closing were US$27,075,671,
  90.25 percent of the original amount committed. The allocations for the components were revised during the
  restructuring to reflect expected disbursements, given implementation progress and use to date, and to
  enable reallocation of funds for child welfare payments in response to the income shocks caused by
  COVID-19. The allocations to components 1, 2 and 4 were reduced from US$14.9 million to US11.4 million,
  US$3.3 million to US$3.1 million, and US$5.7 million to US$1.9 million respectively; US$5 million was
  allocated for child welfare payments; and the allocation to component 3 (the school grants program) was
  increased from US$6.1 million to US$8.6 million. The percentage of the revised allocations disbursed for
  each component ranged from 76 percent (component 4) to 100 percent (component 5).

  Project Financing: The project was fully financed by an IDA credit of US$30 million (IDA-54880). The
  lending instrument was Investment Project Financing with Disbursement–Linked Indicators (DLIs) to
  sharpen the focus on results. Funding for components 1 and 3 was planned to be disbursed against
  evidence that DLI annual targets had been achieved and eligible expenditures incurred, with verification
  done semi-annually by a third-party.

  Borrower/Recipient Contribution: No financial contribution was expected from the Borrower (PAD, p. 2).

  Dates: The project was approved on June 6, 2014, and became effective a little more than a year later on
  August 17, 2015. A mid-term review was held in May 2018. The project closed on June 30, 2023, after
  three extensions (3.5 years later than the original closing date).

  The project was restructured three times (all Level 2). The first restructuring, in June 2015, extended the
  closing date by one year to compensate for a delay in effectiveness caused by a government restructuring
  in 2014, and updated the designated Recipient’s representative from the Ministry of Economic Development
  (which had been abolished) to the Ministry of Finance, and change the name of the implementing agency
  from the Ministry of Education to the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science.

  A more consequential second restructuring in June 2020 supported Mongolia’s efforts to lessen the
  economic and educational impacts caused by COVID-19. The following changes were made: (1) distance
  learning and other strategic education activities were added to support learning during the pandemic; (2) the
  DLI approach was cancelled because it had not been used (although most results were in fact being met,
  the government used the more familiar procedure of reimbursement against statement of expenditure); (3)
  the year 5 DLI targets were dropped, and the funds released were reallocated; (4) a new component was
  added to support child welfare during the COVID emergency through the Child Money Program (CMP), and

                                                                                                  Page 4 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EQRP (P148110)



   a new disbursement category was added for this component; (5) an additional fifth cycle of school grants
   was added to Component 3 to help enable schools to address the learning lags resulting from COVID
   closures; (6) the PDO was revised to add the new component, and the results framework was modified in
   accordance with the restructuring; and (7) the closing date was extended by two years to December 31,
   2022. At the time of the Restructuring, total disbursement was US$16.52 million, 55 percent of the original
   allocation.

   The third restructuring in December 2022 extended the closing date by six months to June 30, 2023, to
   provide time to complete activities that had been delayed by long school closures, and to complete an
   evaluation of the project’s effectiveness.

   A split evaluation will not be undertaken. Although a split evaluation is usually indicated when the PDO
   changes, in this case, the outcome ratings would be the same under both the original and revised
   objectives. Furthermore, the overall scope of the project did not change significantly, with additions and
   items dropped balancing each out. The scope of the project was increased by adding social welfare
   payments and distance learning activities, enabled by dropping the year five targets for some of the original
   activities, and with corresponding changes made in the PDO indicator targets and Intermediate Results
   Indicators (IRIs). Although one of the PDO indicator targets was set slightly lower than originally intended,
   and the grade 5 evaluation and fifth-year targets for some activities were dropped in the second
   restructuring, these changes were offset by the additional activities (child welfare payments, fifth round of
   school funding, and distance learning activities).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Alignment with Country Strategy

The project's objectives were well aligned with the WBG’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY21-
FY25 goals (at project closing). Improving the quality of primary education is an important contributor to the
CPF overarching goal of supporting inclusive and sustainable growth and resilient recovery. The additions
to the project in the 2020 restructuring helped address the impact of COVID-19 on education by introducing
e-learning platforms and online education content, especially for helping schools deliver catch-up lessons,
teacher professional development, and school-based management and opportunities to reach remote
populations. The project was aligned with the CPF focus on improved quality of life, and its objective of
improving the quality of education.

Suitability to Country Context

The project was consistent with the goals and objectives of “Vision-2050,” which sets out Mongolia's long-
term development goals; with the government policy on education (2014-2024); and with Mongolia’s
Education Sector Mid-Term Development Plan (2021-2030). The latter new strategy identified the sector
priorities as to enhance the equity, quality, and relevance of education services in the country, and
incorporates the effective implementation of this project.



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 24
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      EQRP (P148110)



               Having successfully extended access to basic education, the government placed more emphasis on
               improving the quality of primary and secondary education. The country needs skilled workers able to cope
               with rapid changes resulting from the country’s new mineral wealth, transition to middle-income status,
               increasing rural to urban migration, and structural changes in its labor market. These factors increase the
               need for the education system to deliver better quality skills (cognitive, non-cognitive, and technical skills) to
               help its citizens deal with complex and unexpected tasks and to continue to learn throughout their lives.
               This imperative implied a sharpened focus on increasing the quality of education, starting from the earliest
               ages, which was the project objective.

               Relationship to Sector Experience

               The project followed and built on an IDA-financed Rural Education and Development (READ) project, 2006-
               2013, that aimed to enhance the quality of education in rural primary schools by improving students’ access
               and use of quality learning materials and improving teachers’ skills through professional networks and
               learning. This project scaled up the activities of the READ project nationwide and continued to support the
               government's efforts to improve education quality, with specific focus on Mongolian language and
               mathematics teaching and learning in basic education.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve the quality of education for primary school children in Mongolia, with particular emphasis on
                             improving native language and mathematical skills

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change was that improvements in the quantity and quality of learning and teaching materials,
                             and in teaching skills and methods (through teacher training), provision of grants to schools to address the
                             needs they identified, and regular student achievement assessments, would together result in improvements
                             in the quality of primary school education, especially in native language and mathematics, as evidenced by
                             improved student learning achievements.



                             Outputs and Intermediate Results

                                        The Mongolian language textbooks used in primary grades were analyzed and found to be deficient in
                                         several ways. Standard requirements and criteria for selecting and writing reading texts for the subject
                                         of Mongolian language were developed to help in selecting and guiding how to develop reading texts.

                                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 24
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
EQRP (P148110)



     New, better quality reading books were developed consistent with these requirements, incorporating
     input from representatives of the Mongolian Institute for Educational Research (MIER), Faculties of
     Linguistics and Literature of the Mongolian National University of Education (MNUE), Language and
     Literature Institute, Council for National Language Policy, textbook writers, the General Authority for
     Education (GAE), children’s book authors, and primary teachers. Each primary grade class in 553
     schools received a full set of reading books, a total of nearly half a million books (468,995).
     Textbooks, workbooks, and science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and other
     learning materials were also provided to schools across the country. For many rural schools, these
     were the first materials received in many years.
    STEM tool sets were introduced in 625 primary schools, and 15,425 sets of tools were supplied. The
     tool sets were designed to provide all primary grade students with opportunities to apply what they
     learned in mathematics, science, technology, and other subjects using real tools, to better understand
     the causes of natural things and phenomena and the laws on which science experiments were based,
     and to stimulate their interest, teamwork skills, independent learning, creative thinking, and inventing
     skills.
    At least one or two primary education teachers from each school were selected as the focal point and
     trained as STEM trainers, to provide cascade training to all primary education teachers in how to
     implement the STEM program. The GAE converted the STEM teaching resources into electronic
     format and created a methodological manual for future use and reference.
    Various electronic learning platforms were introduced, the internet network was developed, and
     computers and smart devices were supplied to support students' learning and distance learning.
    School libraries were set up in schools without them, and additional books were provided to schools
     with libraries. A book selection committee was established, and a catalogue of the best children's
     books was developed. An online module was developed through the education management
     information system that schools could use to order books for their libraries, which were then delivered
     to them. The MES also ordered and provided books for Kazakh children in Bayan-Ulgii province in
     cooperation with the MIER.
    The project supported capacity building of school librarians, to help sustain and encourage full use of
     the libraries.
    A new student assessment methodology and process were developed, and the national assessment
     structure was reformed, including technical, technological, and software upgrades to ensure the safety
     and reliability of assessment data. A working group of experts developed criteria for student
     achievement in each subject. Skill training was provided to assessment specialists and to staff to
     enable them to implement the assessment reforms and interpret the data.
    Student formative assessment—early grade reading (EGRA) and early grade mathematics (EGMA),
     new in the Mongolian primary education evaluation system—were adapted, developed, and
     disseminated nationwide. The assessment results informed development of new pedagogical
     approaches to teaching reading and mathematics to primary grade students, as well as guidelines for
     selecting and developing appropriate teaching materials. The assessments results have fed into
     teacher training.
    The project supported the first assessment of first-grade students' school readiness. In a pilot
     assessment in 2021-2022 of 23,462 students from 325 schools, the average performance was 61
     percent. The national school readiness assessment in 2022-2023 of 70,049 students from 2,524 first
     grade classes of 650 state-owned schools had an average score of 73 percent.
    Many schools (387) received distance learning materials during COVID-19.



                                                                                               Page 7 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EQRP (P148110)




      An evaluation of learning losses after students returned to school in September 2021, after about 18
         months of school closures during COVID, aimed to identify the challenges of distance learning and the
         content lag for each grade and subject. The findings were used to create guidelines for school
         management and teachers to create and carry out an action plan to identify groups with the greatest
         learning losses, address the losses, and train teachers. All grants in Cycle 5 of the school grant
         program (SGP) were allocated to projects aimed at eliminating learning loss and supporting e-
         transition of education.
        A progress assessment conducted nationwide in May 2022 of 244,480 students in grades 1-5 in
         Mongolian language (including Kazakh and Tuva), mathematics, English, physical education, music,
         visual arts, technology, and health education, to assess the impact of the actions to address the
         learning losses, found improvements at every primary grade, but persistent gaps in 35 of the 72
         learning objectives in the primary school curriculum.
        Mongolia participated in the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) for the first time
         with project support. After preparatory work, a pilot was done in 19 schools in 2021. A full-scale study
         was completed in 2022, with results submitted to the Organization for International Cooperation and
         Development.
        Teacher training programs and continuous professional development (CPD) opportunities were
         provided through the project. In-service training regulations were changed to replace training every
         fifth year with continuously organized competence development. Another change was to direct funding
         to teachers and their chosen development targets instead of to the institutions organizing CPD.
        Project support for inclusive education included the establishment of a resource room (called Model
         Child Development Centers) in one school in each of the 21 aimags (provinces), furnished and
         equipped with books, teaching and learning materials, computers and other special equipment, toys
         for special needs, and printed and audio books suitable for children with special needs. Training was
         delivered by facilitators from the MIER and General Authority of Education for school administrators,
         training managers, primary teachers, and disability education specialists in all 21 schools. A training
         module on how to use the center and materials for each type of disability was developed. When a
         survey of mainstream teachers found that 66 percent reported not being ready or confident to teach
         children with special needs, a special needs education team was employed to mentor teachers in their
         schools. Content was developed for special needs children.
        A Mongolian Sign Language standard curriculum and related electronic materials were developed for
         the MNUE undergraduate program to train special needs education teachers. The project also
         provided support to six special education schools, giving each a US$ 5,000 grant to help improve the
         learning environment and update materials, equipment, and resources.



Intermediate Results Indicators

All twelve relevant IRIs in the revised results framework were met or exceeded (ICR, pp. 12-13). The table
below shows the baselines, targets, and actual achievements for each IRI, showing the original IRIs as well
as the revisions.

                                             IRIs, baselines, targets, and results for Objective 1
Indicator                                      Status at 2020 Restructuring                       Baseline     Target



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EQRP (P148110)




IRI1: Number of schools benefiting from full
set of reading books available in the             New                                            0               500
classrooms
IRI 2: Mongolia participation in PISA 2021
                                                  New                                            No              Yes
assessment
IRI 3: Number of schools that received
distance learning materials for distribution      New                                            0               300
during COVID-19 emergency
IRI 4: Number of inclusive education
                                                  New                                            0               22
resource rooms available
                                                  Revised. Original IRI was “System for learning
IRI 5: Large-scale primary/secondary              assessment at the primary level." ICR reported
                                                                                                 0               4
learning assessments completed                    that the target was increased from 3 to 4 (p.
                                                  56).
IRI 6: Percentage of grade 2 teachers
                                                  Target revised up from +80 percentage points
reporting native language assessment                                                             0               93
                                                  from baseline
results
IRI 7: Percentage of grade 2 teachers
                                                  Indicator revised to drop subtraction from
reporting assessment results on: (a)
                                                  assessment. Target revised up from an           0              89
addition, and (b) identification of missing
                                                  increase of 60 percentage points over baseline.
numbers in a sequence
                                                Wording revised to include all primary school
IRI 8: Of the total number of primary school
                                                teachers (not only grades 1 and 2) and to
teachers to be trained during the project life,
                                                change the success criterion from “achieved
the average percentage that improved their                                                     0                 65
                                                intended competency levels” to “improved their
knowledge in native language assessment
                                                knowledge." Target revised from an increase of
methodology
                                                60 percentage points over baseline.
                                                Wording revised to include all primary school
IRI 9: Of the total number of primary school
                                                teachers (not only grades 1 and 2) and to
teachers to be trained during the project life,
                                                change the success criterion from “achieved
the average percentage that improved their                                                     0                 65
                                                intended competency levels” to “improved their
knowledge in early grade mathematical
                                                knowledge." Target revised from an increase of
skills assessment
                                                60 percentage points over baseline.
IRI 10: Average percentage of the school
year allocated for instruction in the           No change                                      59                65
classroom
IRI : Mongolia participation in PISA 2022       New. Replaced “Roll out of Grade 5 National
                                                                                               No                Yes
assessment                                      Assessment," which was dropped
IRI 14: Students benefiting from direct
                                                                                               0                 506,000
interventions to enhance learning.              Revised indicator, was not in PAD results
                                                framework.
                                                                                               0                 240,000
Sub-Indicator: Female students… (etc)
Dropped indicator not reported on:



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EQRP (P148110)




Number of additional qualified primary
teachers resulting from project interventions



Outcomes

The PDO indicator target for improvement in native language skills was not met. The average number of
words read correctly per minute at the end of grade 2 increased by 2 percent, from 44 to 45, compared to the
original target increase of 20 percent, slightly revised in 2020 to a numeric target of 50 words per minute (a 14
percent increase). Improvements were similar for boys and girls: from 40 to 42 for boys, and from 47 to 48 for
girls. Reading scores were higher at the midline evaluation than at the endline (Annex 10, p. 69), at just over
46 words per minute, meeting the interim target for that year. (The original indicator required that the reading
be “with comprehension”; this clause was dropped in 2020 because it required merging results from two
separate tasks in the assessment. The change is moot because the simplified target was not met.)

The PDO indicator for improvement in mathematical skills was partially achieved. The average number
of correct additions per minute at the end of grade 2 increased from 14 to 15, a 7 percent increase, compared
to the original target of a 10 percent increase, and the more ambitious revised target of 16 correct additions
per minute (a 14 percent increase). Girls and boys started at the same baseline. Girls showed no
improvement, while boys improved by more than the target, from 14 to 17. Midline mathematics scores were
not collected; the baseline survey was not done until 2017. (The original indicator included both addition and
subtraction, but the latter was dropped in 2020 to simplify data collection by requiring one rather than two
tasks to be assessed.)

The ICR noted that even these modest gains are a positive result, given the enormous disruption to learning
that resulted from schools being closed from January 2020 through September 2021 as a result of COVID-19.
Mongolia closed schools for longer than most countries, and many countries have reported losses in test
scores as a result of COVID-related school closures. By contrast, the project assessment summarized in
Annex 10 shows gains in far more tasks assessed than tasks that failed to show gains.

Moreover, the end-line evaluation was done after the summer vacation, rather than at the end of the school
year. Assessments of American elementary school children show large declines in learning during summer
vacations (an average of 21-18 percent for grades 1-3 in a large, nationally representative sample from the
USA: Atteberry, A., & McEachin, A. (2021). "School’s Out: The Role of Summers in Understanding
Achievement Disparities," American Educational Research Journal, 58(2), 239-282.
https://doi.org/10.3102/0002831220937285).

The project team (conversation on March 18, 2024) explained that project activities were subject to many
delays, starting with taking an entire year for the project to become effective. Mongolia is highly centralized,
and this—along with frequent changes in Ministry staff—often caused delays in decisions. The teacher
training that was expected to be very important in driving improvements in teaching quality and student
learning outcomes did not get underway until 4 or 5 years into the project. The teacher training in math mostly
took place in 2021/22, close to the end of the project.



Rating

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EQRP (P148110)



Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthen school-level planning

Rationale
The theory of change was that offering schools grants directed towards specific improvement objectives,
and giving schools the authority to manage their proposed projects themselves, would provide motivation and
the means for schools to improve their planning capacity as well as improve schools.



Outputs and Intermediate Results

The School Grant Program (SGP) offered schools the chance to apply for grants to improve the quality of the
education they provided. The planning skills to be developed required the schools to assess what they
needed to do to improve education quality, write grant proposals which defined an objective, determined
targets for the objective, and outlined activities and a budget, and then successfully carry out the proposed
activities to achieve the targets and objectives. Results and the accomplishment of the project objectives
were assessed regularly. The ministry and local teams monitored each cycle of the SGP, and external
evaluations were conducted for each cycle. The measure of success was that an increasing percentage of
schools would be successful in getting these grants, that there would be high levels of beneficiary satisfaction
with the activities supported by the grants, and that an increasing percentage of the school that received
grants would achieve the targets and objectives defined in their proposals, an indicator of improving skills in
thinking through and planning and achieving the implementation of the activities.

Five rounds of school grants (SGP) were implemented, funding a total of 2,113 projects and benefiting all 650
elementary schools in the country, including 50 grants to primary education specialists at local education
departments and 62 to parent-teacher associations. The grant goals frequently supported achievement of the
first project objective; for example, the grant focus areas included improving the quality, learning environment,
and outcomes in science subjects; improving native language skills and encouraging children to read books;
promoting mathematical thinking; developing teachers in their workplaces and increasing opportunities to
learn from others and exchange experiences; and encouraging teachers to learn to use electronic learning
materials and applications to eliminate learning losses.

MES and a local team monitored each cycle of the SGP, and external evaluations were conducted for each
cycle. The ICR reported that the quality of the projects submitted for the grant improved from cycle to cycle
(ICR, p. 14).

Both relevant IRIs were exceeded: the percentage of schools under the project using school grant funding
for pedagogical-related activities was 78 percent compared to the 60 percent target; and beneficiary
satisfaction with school grant-supported activities (assessed through surveys) was 74 percent, above the 70
percent target.




                                                                                                  Page 11 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EQRP (P148110)



Outcomes

The indicator for this objective was the percentage of schools receiving grant financing through the
project that successfully achieved the school proposal objectives and agreed targets. The target for the
first year was just 10 percent, increasing to 30 percent in the second year, and then to 70 percent from the
third cycle. In the first three years, the interim targets were met or exceeded (Cycle 1: 66 percent, Cycle 2: 52
percent, Cycle 3: 70 percent). In Cycle 4, the result fell to 55 percent because project activities were
interrupted, canceled, or not fully completed due to the disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The
fifth cycle results were not reported in the ICR, but overall, the ICR reported the achievement at 64 percent,
substantially meeting the target.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Increase support for child welfare transfers during the COVID-19 emergency (added at second Restructuring)

Rationale
The theory of change was that cash transfers to families would help protect the welfare of children from the
impact of COVID-related effects.

Mongolia had an existing “Child Money Program” (CMP) that was providing monthly cash transfers of the
equivalent of $7 per child to poor households. The 2020 Restructuring Paper explained that: “This program is
an important safety net for lower income households. According to the Household Socio-Economic Survey
(HSES 2018), the CMP covers 87 percent of poor households. CMP benefits are important for lower-income
households, in particular the bottom 10 percent of households who rely on this monthly transfer as more than
10 percent of their income.” (Restructuring Paper 2020, p2). This existing Government system of social
assistance for children included beneficiary databases, payment systems, human resources and monitoring
mechanisms. Such cash assistance programs reach households quickly, with minimal administrative costs.

Outputs

An important part of the GoM response to COVID-related income losses was a relief package of US$1.8
billion that included an increase (for six months) in the CMP amount per child from $7 to $36, for the 1.19
million children aged 0-18 in families receiving CMP. The aim was to help poor households with children
offset lost income, to protect child nutrition and well-being. The EQRP was asked to contribute up to US$5
million towards the estimated cost of US$32 million per month of the increase in the CMP transfers.
(Contributions were made also from other WB projects and other Development Partners to help the
Government to finance its COVID response.) The project team identified savings that were reallocated to the
new component to contribute to the Child Money Program (CMP). The funds were transferred as planned, in
a timely way.

Outcomes


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 24
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               EQRP (P148110)



                            The indicator was fully met: US$5 million was distributed through the “Social Welfare Fund top up allocated
                            to children during the COVID-19 emergency." Such cash transfers are well documented to be an efficient and
                            effective way to reduce child poverty.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            One PDO target was fully met, one substantially met, one partially met, and one not achieved. The
                            intermediary indicators were met or exceeded. The gender-specific goal that 52 percent of the beneficiaries
                            should be female was substantially achieved (at 51 percent). Student test scores may have been higher had
                            the evaluation been done at the end of the school year, rather than after the long vacation.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Ex ante efficiency assessment

   The project was expected to yield positive private returns (presumably through higher lifetime earnings) and
   developmental impact through productivity and income gains resulting from better educational attainment and
   quality. Higher-quality primary education was expected to yield gains through lower repetition and dropout rates,
   higher enrollment rates, better long-term cognitive development, and greater school attainment. In addition,
   improved educational quality could help ease socio-economic inequality by addressing inequality in
   opportunities, fostering improved nutritional outcomes, and providing other benefits.

   The PAD reported that a cost-benefit analysis (CBA) of Component 1 (national scaling up the READ project that
   provided science- and mathematics-focused books for primary school children via classroom libraries) and
   Component 2 (improving teaching quality through a cascaded scheme of in-service teacher training), based on
   the actual quantity and costs of the earlier READ project and a reasonable projection of project costs, estimated
   significant returns. The CBA estimated a combined net present value (NPV) of US$2.09 million and an internal
   rate of return (IRR) of 13 percent. Individual assessments of each component were reported also to have shown
   promising returns. The NPV from higher educational attainment resulting from access to books via classroom
   libraries was estimated at US$0.95 million. The IRR from the classroom libraries scheme was 12 percent. The
   in-service teacher training scheme NPV was US$1.14 million, and the IRR was 14 percent. These results were
   robust to changes in “virtually all of the critical variables” (PAD, p. 13). However, no details were provided of


                                                                                                                           Page 13 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EQRP (P148110)



what benefits were assumed (or any other assumptions) or how monetary values were assigned to the projected
benefits.



Ex post efficiency assessment

The ICR did not replicate the CBA done during appraisal “due to unavailable information of the analysis
conducted at that stage and the absence of direct measures for assessing the achievement of the project's
objectives. EQRP is centered on enhancing the quality of education, and it lacks a direct metric for quantifying
the return on this aspect of quality improvement” (ICR, p. 16).

The ICR did attempt an estimate of the IRR, but without providing convincing substantiating data. The ICR
asserted that the average number of words read correctly per minute at the end of grade 2 rose from 44 to
45 words (ICR, p. 47), but this is not consistent with the PDO results reported, or with the data in Table 11,
Annex 4 (ICR, p. 48), which shows an increase from 32 to 34 words per minute. The alleged improvement was
offered as the basis for asserting “that supporting improvement in basic reading skills will increase likelihood of
students to complete at least higher secondary degree and increasing probability of getting out of poverty
between 8.6 percent to 31.5 percent (if they complete the university degree)” (ICR, p. 48). The ICR thus listed
the estimated ex-post IRR as in the range of 8.6-31.5 percent. The claim that a 14 percent improvement in one
measure of reading proficiency at the end of grade 2 translates into a strong increase in the probability of
completing secondary school or a university degree is unsupported and unconvincing. No details of the data or
assumptions used to make this IRR estimate are provided.



Efficiency of design

The ICR made the case for an efficient project design, citing “over four decades of research [that] have
demonstrated the crucial role textbooks and learning and teaching materials play in improving learning quality,
encouraging students to learn, and improving test scores. In particular, textbooks have been found to be the
most cost-effective educational input when it comes to enhancing student achievement" (Read T., 2015). There
is substantial evidence in support of their importance, especially in low-income nations where they address
challenges such as teacher training gaps, large class sizes, parental illiteracy, and a lack of home reading
materials (Read, 2016). However, the literature makes clear that these materials are most effective when paired
with other interventions, such as teacher training, and are not by themselves likely to have an impact (McEwan,
2015)” (ICR, p. 46).



Efficiency in use of resources (efficient implementation)

The ICR judged project implementation to be cost-effective, noting that the unit cost per book produced (a major
project activity) was below US$1, less than half the cost in the previous project, and that the project delivered
teacher training more cost-effectively than other Bank-funded projects.

The restructuring decisions that helped address the challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic are a positive factor
in implementation efficiency. The project offered crucial support to help maintain the quality of learning during
COVID-related school closures, potentially preventing significant additional learning loss. Furthermore, through

                                                                                                      Page 14 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EQRP (P148110)



providing learning materials and child support during the COVID-19 pandemic, the project helped Mongolia to
maintain its low drop-out rate: the primary education completion rate was stable around 98 percent (ICR, p. 16),
whereas very large increases in dropout rates have been seen in some countries (Moghli & Shuayb, 2020).

The implementation delays (only partly due to COVID disruptions) indicate some inefficiencies: project
implementation was rated Moderately Unsatisfactory or Moderately Satisfactory in Implementation Status and
Results Reports (ISRs). Changes in project in leadership, staffing vacancies in the project management unit
(ICR, p.20), and “challenges in decision-making by the government” (ICR, p. 21) contributed to delays.

Overall: Project design included a well-focused set of interventions justified by strong research findings and
interventions to protect against welfare and learning losses during the disruptive school closures. There was
some evidence of efficient implementation (low unit costs of books and teacher training, well-implemented
school grants and child welfare payments, resources to support remote learning during school closures).
However, the ICR's economic analysis was not adequately supported with a credible set of assumptions and
data, and there were considerable delays and inefficiencies in project implementation. On balance, this Review
finds efficiency Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    61.00
 Appraisal                                                13.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The overall outcome is Moderately Satisfactory based on High relevance, Substantial efficacy, and
Modest efficiency. The US$ 30 million project was disbursed fully, most project activities were completed, and
there were substantial additional activities to address COVID (without any increase in funding). All IRI were met
or exceeded, though there was mixed achievement of PDO targets, ranging from fully achieved, through
substantial, partially, and not achieved. Notably, learning outcomes and student drop-out rates did not show the
decline that was seen in the USA (and many other countries) as a result of COVID-related school closures,
even though schools were closed for longer in Mongolia than in many countries. Activities funded under the
project likely contributed to this achievement.




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EQRP (P148110)



a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The fact that project goals and activities were part of the MES national reform agenda reduces the risk to the
project outcomes being sustained.

The books and learning materials supplied to schools will need to be replaced at some point, but they should
provide years of sustained use. Because teacher training was provided to large numbers of teachers, using
cascade training, teachers should be able to support each other and new teachers to be trained as well. With
appropriate commitment to continued use of student assessment by the government, and especially if
teachers see the assessments as helpful (rather than a burden), then, so long as funding is available, the
activities should be able to be sustained. The impact of the activities funded by the school grants are likely to
last, especially as schools were able to develop and implement their proposals to match their perceived
needs. However, additional rounds of grants would likely require external funding.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project addressed an important development challenge in its focus on improving the quality of
  education at primary level. It had a clear focus and theory of change, and a strong monitoring and
  evaluation (M&E) design, as noted below. Project design was relatively simple with a limited number of
  activities and a clear, logical results chain. Implementation arrangements were clearly described.

  Project preparation was described in the ICR as “a consultative process between the Bank and the
  government” (ICR, p. 24). The technical design drew heavily on a pilot program completed under the
  precursor READ project, which had shown strong results. This experience facilitated this
  project's preparation and launch. The design incorporated lessons learned during the pilot project. For
  example, textbooks were provided to teachers to take back to their schools with them after being trained
  on their use, saving on distribution costs and ensuring that teachers had the materials they needed to
  immediately implement what they had just learned. The design also drew on relevant international good
  practice, and the ICR noted that the Bank team had expertise gained from the READ project in Mongolia
  and from supervising multiple projects worldwide that also focused on improved learning outcomes and
  school-level planning (ICR, p. 24).

  The PAD included detailed lists of the technical assistance that was expected to be needed. Risks were
  thoughtfully assessed, and careful mitigation measures were included in the project. The project design
  was sufficiently flexible to allow a robust response to the disruptions caused by measures to address
  COVID. Thorough and relevant assessments and evaluation mechanisms were included (as noted in the
  M&E section below).



                                                                                                     Page 16 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EQRP (P148110)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 During the project’s nine years (between appraisal and closing), there were four Task Team Leaders
 (TTLs). The ICR reported that smooth transitions were secured by overlapping missions and co-TTLships
 (ICR, p. 24). Supervision missions were adequately staffed with specialists in education, financial
 management, procurement, and safeguards. Locally based operational staff with responsibility for financial
 management, procurement, and safeguards helped solve problems quickly and provided continuity,
 familiarity with the local context, and support in day-to-day dialogue. The project team engaged regularly
 and actively with the government, supporting its efforts to implement the project. When implementation
 challenges arose, the team took the measures needed to build capacity of the government team to address
 them. Safeguards compliance was monitored regularly. Mission decisions and project progress were
 clearly documented in aide-memoires and ISRs.

 Proactive measures were taken to restructure the project: three times to extend the closing date, and a
 more substantial restructuring to support Mongolia’s efforts to lessen the economic and educational
 impacts caused by the COVID-19 emergency. A mid-term review took place in April-May 2018, about three
 years into project implementation. It confirmed that project activities remained fully aligned and integrated
 with the government’s action plan and goals. Baseline values for the PDO-level outcome indicators were
 established. The second restructuring reflected a thorough and thoughtful assessment of implementation
 progress and of the new needs that had arisen as a result of the COVID-19 disruptions. When COVID-19
 prevented physical visits, missions took place virtually.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PAD noted that “strengthening monitoring and evaluation [was] at the heart of the project” (PAD, p.
 42). The use of DLIs aimed to improve government reporting mechanisms on project implementation and
 impact, and to emphasize a focus on results. The MES Monitoring and Evaluation Department was
 responsible for M&E activities, in close collaboration with the working group established for that purpose.
 The PAD provided details of who was responsible for data collection, aggregation, and reporting at all
 levels (school, province, and central). Provision was made for hiring specialists in M&E and impact
 evaluation as part of the implementation support plan.


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EQRP (P148110)



 Most reporting was integrated into standard statistical and finance reporting requirements within MES,
 although some special reporting on school support program actions and deliverables was needed. Annual
 third-party verification and "spot check" verification during Bank supervision was expected to help ensure
 the validity of project progress reports. Where appropriate, data collected was planned to be disaggregated
 by gender.

 The results framework in the PAD included three PDO indicators and ten IRIs, all clearly described, with
 data sources, methodology, and responsibility for data collection identified, and annual targets specified.
 Many baselines were to be collected in the first or second year of the project, so annual targets were
 specified as expected percentage increases over the baselines.



b. M&E Implementation
  The relevant departments of MES monitored the project indicators, as well as DLIs until they were
  dropped. Data were provided semi-annually and reviewed by the Bank. As planned, a third-party verifier
  was hired by MES, selected competitively based on terms of reference (TOR) acceptable to the Bank.
  Regular Bank implementation support missions jointly undertaken with the government supervised the
  validation process. The MES hired a part-time M&E consultant to strengthen its technical skills in this
  area and regularly updated the project results indicators. However, after the M&E consultant left, it took
  several years to hire a suitably qualified replacement, contributing to challenges around reporting and
  collecting project information. The project team explained (virtual meeting on 3/18/24) that the
  MES struggled with project data collection because some schools and districts were unresponsive to
  requests, and supervision budgets did not allow visits to nudge compliance. The COVID-related closures
  had a positive impact on this issue because the MES started to hold Zoom meetings, and this regular
  face-to-face contact improved data collection.

  The evaluation of the impact of the project on student reading and mathematics skills was done through
  the baseline and end-line student assessments. The mid-line reading assessment was done, but
  because the baseline math assessment was delayed, there was no mid-line assessment. There was
  considerable work to be done in developing the assessment tools, and in training teachers how to
  administer them and how to interpret and use the results. Several of the indicators were simplified during
  restructurings, notably the two PDO indicators for student learning, by dropping the requirement for
  reading with comprehension in addition to reading correctly, and dropping subtraction from the indicator
  of mathematical skills. This was to help ensure consistent and correct measurement; it should probably
  have been done earlier in project implementation, at the time the baseline values were collected, when
  the need for simplification would have been evident.

  The project team noted that MES was committed to wanting to measure and understand the project
  impact, and the last extension was largely to enable the end-line evaluation to take place. Delayed
  permission for the evaluation team to do its work prevented the evaluation from taking place at the end of
  the school year; it had to wait until after the summer when the schools reopened. This is an important
  factor when considering the end-line learning outcomes, as it is well-documented (see citations above)
  that children “forget” or “lose” some of what they learned the previous year during the summer vacation,
  making learning outcomes lower—perhaps significantly so—after the summer vacation. Had the final
  evaluation been done on time at the end of the school year, the PDO indicators might well have
  measured much higher learning results.



                                                                                                   Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EQRP (P148110)




c. M&E Utilization
  Utilization of M&E and promoting mainstreamed M&E and its utilization in education was integral to the
  project design. A new student assessment methodology and process were developed, and the national
  assessment structure was reformed, including technical, technological, and software upgrades to ensure
  the safety and reliability of assessment data. A working group of experts developed criteria for student
  achievement in each subject. Skill training was provided to assessment specialists and to staff to enable
  them to implement the assessment reforms and interpret the data.

  Student formative assessment—EGRA and EGMA, which were new in the Mongolian primary education
  evaluation system—were adapted, developed, and disseminated nationwide. The assessment results
  informed development of new pedagogical approaches to teaching reading and mathematics to primary
  grade students, as well as guidelines for selecting and developing appropriate teaching materials. The
  assessment results also fed into teacher training. The project also supported the first assessment of
  first-grade students' school readiness.

  An evaluation of learning losses after students returned to school in September 2021 after about 18
  months of school closures during COVID aimed to identify the content lag for each grade and subject.
  The findings were used to create guidelines for school management and teachers, and to create and
  carry out an action plan to identify groups with the greatest learning losses, address the losses, and train
  teachers. All grants in Cycle 5 of the SGP program were allocated to projects aimed at eliminating
  learning loss and supporting e-transition of education. A nationwide progress assessment in May 2022
  of 244,480 students in grades 1-5 in Mongolian language (including Kazakh, Tuva), mathematics,
  English, physical education, music, visual arts, technology, and health education assessed the impact of
  the actions to address the learning losses, and found improvements at every primary grade, but
  persistent gaps in 35 of the 72 learning objectives in the primary school curriculum.

  The project team also noted (conversation on 3/18/2024) that the SGP was good example of M&E
  utilization. The schools provided interim and final reports on their grant use, and the MES used the
  reports to identify where the schools needed help and support. The program criteria were changed in
  response to reviews of project progress. Initially, the grants were focused on enrichment activities for the
  students (music, theatre, etc.), but as MES monitored project progress, they decided to change the
  criteria so that grant activities directly supported the goals of the project. Also, some schools used their
  grants to carry out their own formative assessments to better understand where their students were
  falling short and needed additional support.

  Overall, the ICR's discussion of M&E Quality was sparse, but the project team provided additional
  details.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues


                                                                                                    Page 19 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    EQRP (P148110)



a. Safeguards
  The project was rated environmental category B (Partial Assessment) and triggered two safeguard policies:
  Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 and Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10. The restructurings did not
  change the assessments of social, environmental, or fiduciary risks, and therefore did not trigger additional
  safeguard policies. No construction was planned or carried out, and so no environmental assessment was
  required. The project had no (or minimal) adverse environmental impacts. The Environmental Assessment
  policy was triggered by the need to assess and take into account, in an integrated manner, the social
  aspects of the project impacts on Indigenous People communities.

  Policy 4.10 was triggered because the project included activities to improve the quality of education for all
  primary schools in Mongolia, including schools where ethnic minority children were enrolled. As required by
  OP4.10, an Indigenous People Planning Framework (IPPF) was prepared by the client, disclosed locally on
  February 20, 2014, and an English version was disclosed on March 13, 2014. The ICR reported that the
  project took account of all elements in the IPPF in all project activities, and that ethnic minorities were
  equally included in project activities. For example, consistent with requiring data collection through baseline
  information about ethnic minorities, learners in Bayan-Ulgii were included in the initial, mid-term, and end-
  line project evaluations, all research conducted during the project (such as diagnostic and progress
  assessment), the PISA assessment of international academic achievement, and the School Readiness
  Assessment. In compliance with providing information to ethnic minorities affected by the implementation of
  the project and obtaining free and prior opinions, information about the SGP, including grants open to
  parent-teacher associations, was shared with relevant stakeholders and all schools in Bayan-Ulgii aimag.

  In Bayan-Ulgii aimag, the requirement to provide primary education in the native, i.e. Kazakh language, and
  to teach in Mongolian from middle school onward, proved impractical. Textbooks were available in
  Mongolian only, and the very poor Kazakh translations used, as well as the inadequate language skills of
  many teachers, negatively affected implementation of the curriculum and children's learning. Content and
  Language Integrated Learning (CLIL) was chosen as an effective method to address this. The project
  supported piloting of CLIL methodology by (1) capacity building training and mentoring for teachers and
  specialists by the MIER; and (2) observation of classes by the local specialist assigned by the MIER, to
  support and advise teachers to help them master the CLIL methodology. The pilot was evaluated by
  comparing learning outcomes before and after the pilot in schools and classes that participated in the pilot,
  and control classes. The evaluation indicated that the CLIL methodology was effective in supporting
  acquisition of Mongolian language skills by Kazakh children (reading, writing, speaking, and listening).
  Based on the results of the pilot study, a model for unit planning and lesson planning using the CLIL
  methodology was developed. The project distributed reading books in Kazakh to Bayan-Ulgii province
  primary grade students, translated the STEM training manual into Kazakh, and facilitated intermediate and
  advanced Mongolian language training for teachers. Development and distribution of Kazakh-Mongolian
  and Mongolian-Kazakh dictionaries were organized by the project to support implementation of the standard
  curriculum of Mongolian language. In addition, the element of arrangements for providing ethnic minority
  citizens with information and receiving feedback in advance in the monitoring and evaluation mechanism
  was implemented in all project monitoring, professional and methodological advisory activities, and external
  evaluations. This made it possible to evaluate the effectiveness of the project in providing educational
  benefits to ethnic minority children (ICR, p. 24)

  Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) rated safeguard compliance moderately satisfactory or
  above throughout the project's lifetime. The ICR lacked an explicit statement of compliance, but the project
  team confirmed that there was compliance with the Bank's safeguard policies.


                                                                                                   Page 20 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    EQRP (P148110)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management: The project audit reports were all completed as required. There were issues with
  budget approvals. The project implementation unit was considered a public budget entity, according to the
  Order of the Minister of Finance (No.4 2021), and thus the annual budget threshold for the project was set
  by the Ministry of Finance. This threshold was usually much less than required for the planned project
  activities, some of which had to be postponed. In 2021, the cost of the project activities implemented
  exceeded the budget threshold, resulting in a “limited opinion” in the Financial Audit Report. The Law on
  State Savings passed in 2022 prohibited some expenditures from being financed through project funds,
  including but not limited to classroom training, procurement of furniture, domestic and international travel,
  and project operational costs (such as car usage and stationery).

  Procurement was carried out in accordance with World Bank guidelines (ICR, p. 24). The MES was
  responsible for all technical aspects of procurement, including packaging of contracts, procurement
  planning, preparation of TORs and Technical Specifications, and defining the evaluation and qualification
  criteria. MES also participated in bid/proposal evaluation and was responsible for contract supervision and
  management. Procurement under the SGP was conducted by the participating schools using simple
  procurement methods described in the School Support Handbook.

  An assessment of the capacity of the General Procurement Agency (GPA) and MES to implement
  procurement under the project was carried out during appraisal (PAD, p. 15). Two key risks were identified:
  (i) new MES and GPA staff members were relatively new to World Bank procurement procedures; and (ii)
  possible lack of coordination between the GPA and MES could delay procurements. Risk mitigation
  measures were agreed, including: (i) the MES would hire/assign a Procurement Specialist with
  qualifications and TOR acceptable to the Bank to coordinate procurement activities with the GPA within
  three months of effectiveness; (ii) the Bank (or training institutions acceptable to the Bank) would provide
  procurement training to key GPA and MES staff as needed; and (iii) GPA and MES would agree on
  standard processing times for procurement and a detailed procurement plan with dates for key milestones,
  including submission of TORs and technical specifications. The draft procurement plan for the project was
  prepared by MES and updated annually or as required to reflect project implementation needs. In addition
  to the agreed Procurement Specialist, the project also hired technical consultants to assist with
  procurement document preparation, bid evaluation, and contract management.

  Some of the key procurements, notably the endline data collection, third-party monitoring of the fifth cycle
  of school grants, and consultancies for improving the information technology infrastructure in education
  and project closing reporting, were delayed due to state budget restrictions and a transfer of procurement
  responsibilities to the new GAE. However, in general procurement was rated as satisfactory.

  ISRs rated financial management and procurement moderately satisfactory or above throughout the
  project's lifetime. The ICR lacked an explicit statement of compliance, but the project team confirmed that
  there was compliance with the Bank's fiduciary policies.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)

                                                                                                  Page 21 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EQRP (P148110)



   The school closures during COVID demonstrated that using information technology, electronic and online
   educational materials, and smart and effective use of electronic devices can offer educational benefits.
   Teachers and school leaders learned how to use technology to keep their schools operating despite the
   closures, and the teacher and student resources that were developed during the school closures proved to
   be of continued value after schools were reopened. The MES also discovered that on-line meetings could
   be an effective way of supervising project activities and improving data collection.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

These lessons are drawn from the ICR (with editing).

Cash transfers to families can provide important welfare benefits for children in mitigation of
income shocks. The cash support provided to families through the Children's Welfare Fund had a
positive impact. Parents and community representatives emphasized that this financial support
played an important role in meeting the basic needs of children, such as food, health, school
supplies, and electronic communication needed to continue schooling remotely.

Teachers and students need adequate computers and computing skills to enable productive
use of technology for education. During the COVID-related school closures, teachers and
students had to rely fully on e-learning and teaching. The experience demonstrated the potential of
information technology to support children's self-directed learning and teacher training, using on-line
interactive lessons and other resources, and self-paced learning options. However, some teachers
and families did not have computers with high enough performance quality, or adequate
connectivity, or computer skills.

Online teaching and learning resources need to be developed and stored in a well-structured
and user-friendly way. Teachers frequently saved the original versions of interactive lessons they
developed on their personal computers or Facebook groups, because schools lacked a centralized
system for securely storing such materials. This increased the risk of losing work and reduced



                                                                                                    Page 22 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       EQRP (P148110)



opportunities for wide sharing. Also, security of electronic data and resources created by teachers
need to be managed and enhanced at the school level.

A local support team with a specific focus worked well as a way of supporting teachers to
learn, adopt, and improve new teaching methodologies. Local early-grade mathematics
assessment support teams that monitored and consulted with teachers to provide constructive
feedback proved effective. The teams made regular visits to schools, during which they observed
teaching practices and provided immediate consultation, advice, and support.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear and provided a good description of project design, an unusually thorough account of project
activities, and extensive details of the evaluations that are the basis for assessing the project
achievements. There is a clear account of the chain of evidence linking activities, outputs, and outcomes. The
ICR mostly follows guidelines. The lessons are thoughtfully selected. The Annexes were completed with care
and diligence. Annex 9 provides extensive information on project activities and outputs. Annex 3 i correctly
completed with all original, revised, and actual costs (unlike many ICRs). Annex 4 cites useful research results
on learning losses during COVID-related school closures, but it does not state which countries the studies
covered and how relevant they might be to Mongolia. Annex 7 offers a useful and systematic summary of the
changes made in the second restructuring, although this could have been even clearer if the text had
distinguished between things that remained unchanged (which appear in both “Original” and “Revised”
columns), and things that were added or dropped.

The ICR's main weakness is that the assessment of M&E is poor and incomplete. The section on M&E design
comments on implementation rather than on design, and the section on M&E utilization lacks any information
on whether or how the data were communicated to stakeholders or used. There is no discussion of the
reliability of the data on project results. A discussion of trends in indicator data would have helped make clearer
the extent to which project outcomes were derailed by COVID. There is no information on any other activities
(for example, funded by other donors) that might have contributed to the project results. Another shortcoming
with the ICR is the lack of details on data and assumptions used to make the estimate of the project's rate of
return.

Finally, the ICR did not include explicit statements about compliance with the Bank's safeguards and fiduciary
policies (although the project team confirmed this subsequently).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 23 of 24
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
EQRP (P148110)




                                                                  Page 24 of 24
