     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD NATP Phase 2 (P149553)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0024074

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P149553                                   BD NATP Phase 2

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Bangladesh                                Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 COFN-C1430,IDA-56650,TF-A0720             30-Sep-2021                                        159,514,341.45

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 05-Jun-2015                               30-Jun-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          183,490,000.00                                    7,430,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           167,633,302.68                                    5,087,640.73

 Actual                                       165,013,245.53                                    5,087,640.73




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally               J. W. van Holst              Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   This project is the second phase of a three-phase Adaptable Program Loan (APL) aimed at long-term
   engagement to support institutional reforms in research and agricultural extension systems in Bangladesh.

   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of this second phase of the National Agricultural Technology
   Program (NATP-II) as articulated in the Financing Agreement (FA, page 5) was identical to the one stated in
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 11) and aimed to:


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD NATP Phase 2 (P149553)



   "Increase agricultural productivity of smallholder farms and improve smallholder farmers’ access to
   markets in selected districts."

   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on the following two objectives in Section 4 of this review:

   1. To increase agricultural productivity of smallholder farms in selected districts.

   2. To improve smallholder farmers’ access to markets in selected districts.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following five components:

   1. Enhancing Agricultural Technology Generation (appraisal cost: US$52.00 million, actual cost:
   US$33.39 million). This component financed two research windows, Competitive Research Grants (CRGs)
   and Program-Based Research Grants (PBRGs). Those were implemented by the Bangladesh Agricultural
   Research Council (BARC) for a demand-driven and market-oriented approach to agricultural research. To
   strengthen the institutional capacity of the public research system, this component also invested in technical
   assistance for BARC in research management, institutional coordination, and policy formation, as well as
   PhD scholarships.

   2. Supporting Agricultural Technology for Crops Development (appraisal cost: US$66.00 million,
   actual cost: US$77.12 million). This component supported the Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE)
   to mobilize farmers into common interest groups (CIGs), enhance public extension services, and
   promote good agricultural practices and climate-smart agriculture practices. This component also supported
   on- and off-farm mechanization by providing matching grants (Agriculture Innovation Funds II and III, ‘AIF-2’
   and ‘AIF-3’) to CIGs and local entrepreneurs. To facilitate farmers’ access to markets, this component
   supported formation of producer organizations (POs) and invested in development of marketing
   infrastructures including commodity collection market centers (CCMCs).

   3. Supporting Agricultural Technology for Fisheries Development (appraisal cost: US$37.00 million,
   actual cost: US$46.91 million). This component supported the Department of Fisheries (DoF) to
   mobilize fisheries farmers into CIGs, enhance extension services by capacitating local extension agents for
   fisheries (LEAFs), promote climate-resilient and innovative aquaculture technologies, and support reliable
   supply of quality fish seed. AIF-2 and AIF-3 financed CIGs and local entrepreneurs. POs were formed and
   marketing infrastructures were developed including post-harvest service centers (PHSCs).

   4. Supporting Agricultural Technology for Livestock Development (appraisal cost: US$47.00 million,
   actual cost: US$56.87 million). This component supported the Department of Livestock Services (DLS) to
   mobilize livestock farmers into CIGs, enhance extension services by capacitating community extension
   agents for livestock (CEALs) and service delivery agents, promoted climate-resilient animal husbandry

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BD NATP Phase 2 (P149553)



  practices, and support reliable supply of inputs including promoting fodder cultivation and vaccination
  campaigns. AIF-2 and AIF-3 financed CIGs and local entrepreneurs. POs were formed and marketing
  infrastructures, with collection points (CPs), were developed.

  5. Project Management (appraisal cost: US$12.00 million, actual cost: US$6.87 million). The Project
  Management Unit (PMU) established at the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) coordinated and facilitated the
  overall implementation and management of the project.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost was estimated at US$214.00 million. The actual cost was US$210.41
  million (ICR, Data Sheet, page 2).

  Financing. The project was financed through an IDA Credit worth US$176.06 million and a Grant from
  the Agency for International Development (USAID) in the amount of US$7.43 million. These amounts were
  revised down to US$162.55 million and US$5.09, for the IDA Credit and the USAID Grant, respectively. The
  actual amounts disbursed were US$159.93 million for the IDA Credit and US$5.09 million for the USAID
  Grant. US$13.44 million of IDA funds were cancelled. The project was co-financed through the International
  Fund for Agriculture Development with US$23.86 million of which US$20.32 million were disbursed.

  Borrower Contribution. The Government of Bangladesh was expected to contribute US$6.65 million and
  the project beneficiaries were expected to contribute US$6.50 million. The actual amount contributed was
  US$20.08 million (ICR, Data Sheet, page 2). The ICR did not provide a disaggregation of this amount.

  Dates. The project was approved on June 5, 2015 and became effective 15 months later on September 5,
  2016. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on April 28, 2019 which was 9 months beyond the PAD
  specified date for the MTR on July, 31, 2018 and two years and seven months after effectiveness. The
  project closed on June 30, 2023 which was two years and nine months beyond the project original closing
  date on September 30, 2021.

  The project was restructured twice, both Level 2, as follows:

  1. On March 1, 2021, when the amount disbursed was US$120.83 million, in order to revise the Results
  Framework, change components and their cost, extend the Credit closing date from September 30, 2021
  to June 30, 2023, reallocate funds between disbursement categories (US$14 million of IDA and IFAD
  commitment was reassigned from components 1 and 5 to components 2, 3, and 4 to support farmers in
  response to the COVID-19 pandemic), and change the implementation schedule. According to the
  Restructuring Paper (paragraph 6), the closing date required an extension to accommodate delays and
  allow enough time for the full achievement of the PDO. The project experienced delays in disbursements
  due to slow preparation of the Development Project Proposal (DPP) and Project Implementation Manual
  (PIM), delays in recruitment of a project director, and slow approval of IFAD co-financing (Restructuring
  Paper, paragraph 5).

  2. On June 15, 2023, when the amount disbursed was US$165.01 million, in order to change components
  and their cost, cancel undisbursed funds of US$13.44 million from IDA, and reallocate between
  disbursement categories.



                                                                                                  Page 3 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD NATP Phase 2 (P149553)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. At the time of project appraisal in 2015, the agriculture sector played a key role in
rural economic growth of Bangladesh as it constituted 17% of GDP. Nearly 67% of the country’s population
lived in rural areas, with over 43% of the labor force engaged in agriculture. However, the poverty rate in
rural areas was relatively high at 26.7% in 2016. Thus, the growth of the agriculture sector continued to be
a key driver of rural poverty reduction, to achieve the middle-income country status by 2021 and eliminate
extreme poverty in the country by 2030. The growth of the agriculture sector relies on agricultural
productivity growth, generation of improved technologies and their adoption by farmers and other actors. To
achieve income increase for farmers, diversification of production, value addition, and access to markets
supported by robust research and extension systems are required. NATP-II aimed to support the
Government of Bangladesh (GoB) priority of increasing farm yields, diversifying agricultural production, and
promoting value chain integration by improving agricultural research and extension.

Previous Bank Experience. The World Bank has broad experience in supporting agricultural projects
regionally, including in Bangladesh, India and Pakistan. In addition, the World Bank has international
experience in different regions of the World. This project (NATP-Phase II) would specifically benefit from the
experience and lessons learnt under the Bank-funded NATP-I, which was implemented from 2007 to 2014
in 120 Upazilas across Bangladesh. Two key lessons from NATP-I were: (i) To expand the focus of the
research and extension service agenda toward more agriculture commercialization, value chain, and
agrobusiness areas; and (ii) To streamline implementation arrangements of complex projects to achieve
greater coordination, efficiency, and accountability. The Bank with its accumulated experience and the
specific lessons under NATP-I, is in a strong position to guide the implementation of NATP-II.

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the Bank's Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS) for Bangladesh (CPS, FY2011-FY2014). Specifically, agriculture was highlighted in Pillar 3,
Vulnerability, Adaptation and Inclusion, and the sector also contributes to growth (Pillar 2), and benefits
from initiatives designed to improve governance (Pillar 4). The CPS was revised in 2015 and, inter alia, the
revisions called for a follow-up to NATP-I for implementation starting FY2015.

At the completion of this project, the PDO continued to be in line with the Bank's Country Partnership
Framework for Bangladesh (CPF, FY2023–FY2027). The CPF emphasized the critical role of the
agriculture sector in creating economic opportunities in rural areas where most poor households reside.
NATP-II directly contributed to the CPF's higher-level objective (b) (socioeconomic inclusion) and was
relevant to the CPF Objective Indicator 5.2: Enhanced participation in higher-value agricultural activities in
rural areas. The project also contributed to CPF's higher-level objective (a) (increased private sector jobs)
by improving access to markets, especially promoting agri-entrepreneurship. Finally, NATP-
II would contribute to CPF's higher level objective (c) (enhanced climate and environmental resilience) by
promoting climate-smart agriculture practices.

Consistency with Government Strategies/Priorities. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the
Government's Sixth Five Year Plan (FY2011–FY2015) which envisaged more inclusive growth and the
eradication of extreme poverty. NATP-II supported the Government's strategic priorities in agriculture,


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BD NATP Phase 2 (P149553)



               namely, increasing production, achieving food security, supporting adaptation to climate change, and
               enhancing nutrition through access to safer and more diversified food.

               At project completion, the PDO continued to be in line with Government's priorities for the agriculture sector
               as outlined in the Plan of Action of the National Agricultural Policy (2018) which emphasized policies and
               investments that support diversification, nutrition, and value chain development.

               Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. The PDO (Increase agricultural productivity of
               smallholder farms and improve smallholder farmers’ access to markets in selected districts) statement was
               clear, focused, and pitched at targets for agricultural productivity and access to markets, which reflected an
               adequate level of ambition. At appraisal and completion, the PDO was in line with both the Bank's strategy
               and Government priorities for the agriculture sector. Therefore, Relevance of Objectives is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase agricultural productivity of smallholder farms in selected districts.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported the following activities:

                             1. Enhancing agricultural technology generation. This would be achieved through improving the performance
                             of the national agricultural research system (NARS) and strengthening of agricultural research
                             institutions. Improving the performance of the agricultural research system was expected to contribute to the
                             development of innovative agricultural technologies, which represent an essential ingredient for achieving
                             higher farm yields.

                             2. Crop Development. The project would support improving the outreach and quality of crop extension and
                             advisory services by strengthening the skills of public extension workers, develop farmers’ skills to scale-up
                             the dissemination of Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs) including those developed under NATP-I, promote
                             farm and off-farm mechanization to increase crop productivity, and strengthen institutions involved in the crop
                             sector, through capacity development and selected investments in infrastructure. This was expected
                             to increase farm yields and also diversify agricultural production.

                             3. Fisheries Development. The project was designed to promote an integrated approach to achieve
                             productivity, quality and output increases through technology transfer. Specifically, NATP-II would provide
                             support for the sustainable development of inland culture fisheries (small scale aquaculture ponds) and inland
                             capture fisheries. This included scaling-up NATP-I Good Aquaculture Practices for the production systems

                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD NATP Phase 2 (P149553)



prevailing in the project area, promoting community-based fisheries management, supporting the participation
of fisheries Community interest groups (CIGs) and producer organizations (POs) in value chains, and
reinforcing research-extension-farmers linkages and strengthen the capacity of fisheries institutions. The
project would also support a number of investments to support fish farming in the project area including: the
promotion of specific fish production models involving improved fish varieties, the production of better quality
fish seed, the introduction of appropriate fish feed, the application of relevant fisheries management tools,
and the restoration of aquatic habitat. These activities would result in achieving better fish productivity and
quality.

4. Livestock Development. The project was expected to support strengthening livestock support services
institutions (including food and feed safety and quality, animal health), improving livestock extension services,
and reinforcing the linkages between research, extension and livestock farmers; scaling up outreach
programs to reach out to a larger number of farmers; and facilitating the participation of smallholder farmers in
selected livestock markets. These activities were expected to result in achieving better livestock productivity
and quality.

The expected outputs of the stated activities included: number of innovative agricultural technologies
generated, demand driven extension developed, extension services improved, number of technologies and
practices promoted, and number of grants invested in production and post-harvest processing machinery.

The intermediate outcomes as a result of the above-mentioned outputs included: strengthened institutional
capacity of NARS, strengthened field institution for farmers to access technology and information, scalable
technologies demonstrated in the project area, improved performance of NARS, farmers adopted improved
technologies and GAPs, and improved farmers' access to machinery.

These intermediate results combined were expected to contribute to increasing agricultural productivity of
smallholder farms in selected districts.

Overall, the ToC reflected relevant activities that were directly connected to the outputs, intermediate
outcomes and the PDO in a plausible causal chain. However, the ToC as reported in the ICR lacked the
critical assumptions that underpinned the achievement of Objective 1.

Outputs/Intermediate Results (based on Annex 1 in the ICR unless referenced otherwise)

1. Crops

      95.26% of the targeted clients were satisfied with the agricultural and rural advisory services provided
       exceeding the target of 93%.
      4,708 technology adoption and marketing sub-projects were financed through the Agricultural
       Innovation Fund (AIF) and were under implementation or completed significantly exceeding the target
       of 993.
      788,583 clients including 263,615 females adopted an improved agricultural technology promoted by
       the project exceeding both the overall target of 640,000 and the female target of 224,000.
      212 technologies were demonstrated in the project areas exceeding the target of 51.
      241 collaborative research/extension sub-projects were under implementation/completed exceeding
       the target of 130.



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD NATP Phase 2 (P149553)




      4,009,360 client days of training were provided including 1,446,646 days for females exceeding both
       the overall target of 4,000,000 and the female target of 1,400,000.
      695,700 crop farmers were mobilized into 27,150 crop CIGs and received 1,860,450 client days of
       training (no targets provided).
      173,349 technology demonstrations were conducted, and 536,979 cumulative technology adoption
       were recorded (no targets provided).
      1,803 AIF-2 grants were awarded to crop CIGs (no targets provided).

2. Fisheries

      105,640 fisheries farmers were mobilized into 5,282 fisheries CIGs and received cumulatively 683,850
       client days of training (no targets provided).
      32,602 technology demonstrations were conducted, and 68,068 cumulative technology adoptions
       were recorded.
      960 AIF-2 grants were awarded to fisheries CIGs (no targets provided).
      7,704 beneficiaries around 40 beels (open-water wetland) were reached by the community-based beel
       management programs for open capture fisheries (no targets provided in the PAD).

3. Livestock

      207,750 livestock farmers were mobilized into 8,282 livestock CIGs and received cumulative 702,450
       client days of training (no targets provided).
      45,889 technology demonstrations were conducted, and 183,556 cumulative technology adoptions
       were recorded (no targets provided). Major practices adopted by farmers include improved shed
       management, balanced feeding, and scheduled vaccination and de-worming (ICR, paragraph 39).
      1,080 AIF-2 grants were awarded to livestock CIGs (no targets provided). 60% of the grants were
       towards purchasing live animals to multiply and the remaining 40% financed purchasing equipment
       such as chopper machines and feed crusher/mixing machines (ICR, paragraph 38).

Outcomes

      By completion, the project mobilized 1,009,090 smallholder farmers (of which 366,885 were women)
       exceeding the target of 1,000,000 (PDO outcome indicator 3) and organized them into 40,514 farmer
       groups (CIGs). The project beneficiaries were in 270 selected Upazilas of 57 districts of the country
       across agro-ecological zones, including 107 Upazilas, which were covered by NATP-I and 163
       Upazilas were added under NATP-II. The project also continued to support over 17,000 CIGs formed
       by NATP-I (first-generation CIGs), with approximately 350,000 smallholder farmers in 110 old
       Upazilas. In addition, 1.9 million CIG and non-CIG members were supported by the COVID-19
       response activities implemented by the project (PDO indicator 3b).
      The project supported three sub-sectors, crop, fisheries, and livestock and fully achieved the targets
       for productivity increase (PDO outcome indicator 1). Out of six targets for PDO outcome indicator 1 on
       productivity increase, five were exceeded, while one was significantly achieved at 98% based on data
       collected from a sample of farms from the 270 Upazilas selected as project beneficiaries. For crop
       yields, the average per hectare yield of paddy rice increased from a baseline of 4.70 tons per ha to
       6.30 tons per hectare exceeding the target of 5.40 tons per hectare, and the tomato increased from a
       baseline of 30 tons per hectare to 38.43 tons per hectare exceeding the target of 36 tons per hectare.

                                                                                                Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD NATP Phase 2 (P149553)



       For livestock productivity, milk yield (liter milk/day/cow) increased from a baseline of 3.00-liter
       milk/day/cow to 5.83-liter milk/day/cow exceeding the target of 3.90-liter milk/day/cow, and beef
       increased from a baseline of 160 kg live weight/cattle to 257.19 kg live weight/cattle exceeding the
       target of 225 kg live weight/cattle. For fish productivity, aquaculture pond farming increased from a
       baseline of 3 ton/ha to 5.28 ton/ha exceeding the target of 4.80 ton/ha, and for open capture yield
       increased from 0.70 ton/ha to reach 1.37 ton/ha significantly achieving the target of 1.40 ton/ha. Final
       targets for aquaculture were obtained through demonstration data while for crops and livestock the
       final numbers were from the impact assessment survey.
      The ICR (footnote #12) explained that establishing a counterfactual through a control group was not
       possible because the project design promoted benefit leakages to non-direct beneficiaries such as
       through CIG and non-CIG gathering events. This reduced the difference in benefits between control
       and treatment groups and therefore did not permit an assessment of the project’s impact. Therefore,
       to estimate the net benefits generated by the project two sources of information were used. One
       source was a set of 251,840 project-managed demonstration plots for field crops where estimates of
       yield changes were based on crop cutting measurements during project implementation. The second
       source was a third-party impact analysis which used a sample survey of farmers in the 270 Upazilas
       covered by the project to determine baselines for average yields of various enterprises established
       based on farmers’ recall of yields before the project compared with yields achieved by the time the
       project closed (ICR, Annex 6.2).

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project achieved the above-mentioned productivity increases
across the three supported sub-sectors through promoting technology adoption. This was facilitated by three
main project activities: strengthening field institutions for farmers to access technology, disseminating
technologies through demonstrations and training, and providing access to finance through matching grants
mechanism. For the two PDO outcome indicators measuring this objective (indicators 1 and 3), the project
exceeded its targets for: two crops (rice and tomato), livestock (milk and beef), pond aquaculture, and
significantly achieved its target for open capture. The project also exceeded its target for PDO outcome
indicator 3 as mentioned above. Further, all four intermediate indicators on productivity increases achieved
their targets. Despite these positive results, there were concerns in the ICR regarding the absence of project
baselines, the robustness of the quality of the studies used to inform the M&E system, the significantly
delayed operationalization of the Project Management Information System (PMIS), and the use of beneficiary
farmers' recall as a substitute for a survey of non-beneficiaries to estimate the extent to which results such as
yield increases were attributable to the project.

In light of the leakage of project benefits to non-direct beneficiaries and the evidence assembled to
compensate for this challenge described in the ICR to assess the project’s efficacy, this review concludes that
the efficacy with which Objective 1 “to increase agricultural productivity on smallholder farms in selected
districts” was almost fully achieved and is therefore rated Substantial.




Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD NATP Phase 2 (P149553)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve smallholder farmers’ access to markets in selected districts.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported the following activities:

1.The project supported establishing crop producer organizations and facilitating stronger collaboration with
the private sector for agri-business development on agri-processing, market access for smallholders, as well
as for the establishment of machinery hire-services. Also, the project supported promoting farm and off-farm
mechanization to increase crop productivity, farm output and diversification, as well as to increase efficiency
in crop handling, reduce post-harvest losses and support processing.

2. The project supported establishing fisheries producer organizations, and the creation of more suitable
market linkages for better access to markets and improved realization of value for the product. The project
invested in promoting climate-resilient and innovative aquaculture technologies. The project also piloted a
support scheme for two fisheries POs which were supported in accessing district markets through improved
marketing infrastructure (fish landing centers), comprehensive skills development through training-of-trainers,
and support with further market linkages

3. The project also supported establishing livestock producer organizations and facilitating the participation of
smallholder farmers in selected livestock markets. In addition, the project promoted food and feed safety
issues at various levels of the commodity value chain, particularly for meat and dairy products. For goat and
beef meat, the project supported community-level product aggregation, funded simple slaughter facilities, and
promoted market linkages through close collaboration with the private sector for further processing and
marketing.

 The expected project outputs of the afore-mentioned activities included: grants invested in post-production
machinery, and marketing solutions. The intermediate outcomes from the above-mentioned outputs included
improved farmers' access to machinery and market access for production. All these activities and
intermediate outcomes combined were expected to improve smallholder farmers’ access to markets in
selected districts

Overall, the ToC reflected relevant activities that were directly connected to the outputs, intermediate
outcomes and the PDO in a plausible causal chain. However, the ToC as reported in the ICR lacked the
critical assumptions that underpinned the achievement of Objective 2.

Outputs/Intermediate Results (based on Annex 1 in the ICR unless stated otherwise)

1. Crops

      30 crop Producer Organizations (POs) were formed. The skills trainings for POs focused on (a) post-
       harvest management to mobilize large-scale high-quality products and (b) business planning so that
       the POs have strong business orientation and help farmers obtain bargaining power and access to
       market information and services. The project also helped POs identify selected domestic markets at
       Upazila or district level, supermarket chains, and processing companies, and facilitate contractual
       arrangements between POs and those actors (ICR, paragraph 41).

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD NATP Phase 2 (P149553)




      30 CCMCs were established and operated by POs. CCMCs were mini-packhouses equipped with
       marketing and processing appliances (such as weights and plastic crates) and logistics assets (such
       as rickshaw-vans and pickup trucks).
      287 AIF-3 grants were awarded to crop POs and local entrepreneurs. the funded subprojects focused
       on logistics or processing proposed by selected PO members and rural entrepreneurs. The majority of
       sub-projects (218) invested in pickup trucks (ICR, paragraph 43).

2. Fisheries

      22 fisheries POs including 2 special POs were formed. Those included 17,400 PO members, including
       10,360 CIG member fish farmers from 518 CIGs and feed dealers, fish traders, and other input
       suppliers. Training and technical assistance to POs covered business planning, financial
       management, income generation and savings, post-harvest handling, and food safety. The project
       facilitated POs’ linkage with upstream value chains (aqua inputs suppliers, feed dealers, and so on) as
       well as downstream (aqua businesses and logistics providers (ICR, paragraph 45).
      Post harvest landing centers were established and operated by 2 specialized POs. Those were mini-
       processing plants with water and ice supply and cold storage.
      228 AIF-3 grants were awarded to fisheries POs and local entrepreneurs. Funded sub-
       projects focused on logistics, processing, and value addition. The top five investments were aerators,
       feed processing machines, transportation vehicles, ice factories, and mini-fish processing centers
       (ICR, paragraph 47).

3. Livestock

      120 livestock POs were formed with 3,600 members in 60 Upazilas across 39 districts in the project
       area. The project identified over 200 milk collectors (Goalas) in the area where 103 dairy POs
       operated and provided capacity building for these Goalas in hygienic transportation to reduce post-
       harvest loss and improve food safety (ICR, paragraph 49).
      183 AIF-3 grants were awarded to livestock POs and local entrepreneurs. About 60% of the sub-
       projects were engaged in transportation and marketing such as pick-up trucks and cooling vans. The
       remaining 40% of grants funded machineries such as milk chillers, feed processers, and chick
       hatcheries (ICR, paragraph 50).

Outcomes

      By project completion, the total volume of agricultural commodities from three sub-sectors sold
       annually (PDO Indicator outcome 2) reached 13,071 Metric Tons (MT) exceeding the end target
       of 12,520 MT. Cumulative sales also reached 67,194 MT significantly exceeding the target of 33,760
       MT.
      The cumulative sales from 30 crop POs reached about 37,000 MT, including 2,593 MT of commodities
       exported to Malaysia, the UAE, and other countries. The ICR reported that some POs developed
       regular sales arrangements with local, regional buyers including national agri-food brands such
       as PRAN Foods (paragraph 44). Also, the cumulative fish sales by 22 fish POs reached 11,971 MT
       including 2,927 MT through the online platform. Finally, cumulative sales of livestock products through
       107 marketing arrangements identified by the project reached 11,255 MT of livestock products (ICR,
       paragraph 51).


                                                                                               Page 10 of 22
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               BD NATP Phase 2 (P149553)



                            Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project improved smallholder farmers’ access to markets in
                            selected districts through supporting new infrastructure/ institutional arrangements. This included forming and
                            training POs for the three supported sub-sectors, financing matching grants to fund sub-projects that would
                            contribute to improved market access as noted above. In addition, the project facilitated establishing market
                            linkages between the POs and agri-companies to increase market access for smallholders. The project
                            exceeded its PDO outcome target as noted above for both the annual and cumulative sale volumes.
                            However, there were M&E challenges (as discussed under Objectives 1 and 2). For example, for reasons
                            explained in Section 4 baseline data for productivity were based on the recall of smallholders. In the
                            absence of baseline data for market access it was reasonably assumed to be zero which meant that the
                            assessment of increased access to markets due to the project was determined by the volume of agricultural
                            commodities sold through arrangements funded by the project.

                            Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial with minor shortcomings.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. The project exceeded its outcome targets in terms of increasing
                            agricultural productivity of smallholder farms and improving smallholder farmers’ access to markets. However,
                            there were challenges facing the assessment of net productivity increases because of the “leakage” of project
                            benefits to untargeted beneficiaries and the consequent impossibility of defining a control group.
                            Nevertheless, a solution which simulated a counterfactual was designed for productivity increases and for
                            market access the baseline was logically assumed to be zero. Also, the project exceeded its target for COVID
                            (target achieved was 1.9 million compared to the end target of 1.8 million) beneficiary coverage which
                            supported a total of 1 million households (about 6% of farm families in Bangladesh).




                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

   ex-ante


                                                                                                                             Page 11 of 22
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         BD NATP Phase 2 (P149553)



      At appraisal the economic rate of return (ERR) was estimated at 31% and the corresponding net present
         value at US$49.9 million using a discount rate of 12% (PAD, page 88).
      Project benefits were expected to derive from: (i) increased productivity; (ii) increased price pass-through
         resulting from improved market access; and (iii) reduction in production costs in some cases.
      The project’s economic viability assessment was based on projecting net benefits from the project’s
       interventions, and computing the project’s internal rate of return, economic rate of return, and net present
       value. The yield, cost and analytical assumptions drew from NATP-I experience.
      Sensitivity Analysis. The estimated economic rate of return remained robust under hypothetical scenarios
       of a 10% decrease in expected net
       revenues and/or a 10% increase in project costs where the estimated ERR dropped to 25% in each
       case. In the that both scenarios materialized the estimated ERR dropped to 20%.
      Overall, the PAD EFA as presented in Annex 6 drew on the experience of NATP-I and reflected logical
       assumptions from the NATP-I EFA analysis. This review concluded that the analysis provided an
       adequate justification of this project’s investments.

ex-post

      At completion, the project's overall ERR was estimated at 30.10%, with an estimated NPV of US$89.5
         million over a 20-year period and a discount rate of 12%. While this was slightly lower than the ERR at
         appraisal (31%), it was still comparable. The ex-post EFA largely followed the same methodology at
         appraisal to ensure consistency and comparability.
        The ex-post EFA was based on a standard cost-benefit analysis which considered all project costs and
         benefits and, to the extent possible, assessed the net impact of the project by comparing the ‘with
         project’ and ‘without project’ situations as explained in the assessment of the efficacy with which
         Objective 1 was achieved in Section 4 above.
        Sensitivity Analysis. The analysis showed that the returns to project investments remain robust even
         under severely adverse scenarios. For example, a two-year delay in project benefits dropped the ERR to
         20.4% while a one-year delay dropped it to 24.3%. Also, a 30% reduction in net benefits (due to higher
         input cost/lower output prices/attrition) dropped the ERR to 21.4% while 50% and 70% reductions in net
         benefits (due to higher input cost/lower output prices/attrition) reduced the ERR to 14.7% and 6.5%
         respectively. Finally, external shocks (price or climate) every two years dropped the ERR to 22.9% and
         every three years dropped the ERR to 25.6%.
        Implementation Efficiency. The project closed 33 months beyond its original closing date. This delay was
         attributed to significant delays with the implementation of some project activities, which was exacerbated
         by the COVID-19 pandemic which further slowed the implementation progress. Also, delays in some key
         procurements undermined the quality of project implementation. At the time of project closing, US$13.44
         million from IDA commitment was canceled as those were undisbursed funds, and the total project costs
         were US$214.14 million. Despite the extension of the project’s closing date, a lower share of the project
         budget was spent on project management than estimated at appraisal (3.2% compared to 5.6%).
         Further, the reallocation toward components 2 and 4 allowed the project to reach a slightly larger number
         of project beneficiaries at no extra cost.
        Overall, the EFA at completion was detailed enough, reflected realistic assumptions, and provided a
         convincing justification of the project investments.

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. While the ex-post ERR at 30.1% was slightly lower than the 31%
estimated at appraisal, it was still significantly higher than the discount rate at 12%. The sensitivity analysis at
completion validated the robustness of the ERR under different scenarios as discussed above. Also, at

                                                                                                        Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BD NATP Phase 2 (P149553)



completion, the unit cost for the project per beneficiary (smallholder farmer) at US$163.5 was lower than
the appraisal estimate of US$221. Overall, the project’s efficiency is rated Substantial.




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                 31.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              30.10
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. The project exceeded its outcome
targets in terms of increasing agricultural productivity of smallholder farms and improving smallholder farmers’
access to markets. Also, the project exceeded its target for beneficiary coverage. Efficiency was also rated
Substantial based on the estimated ex-post ERR of 30.1% which was still comparable to the 31% estimated at
appraisal.

Based on the assigned ratings for the three outcome criteria, the overall Outcome is rated Satisfactory due to
minor shortcomings pertaining to the evidence of the efficacy of the project’s agricultural achievements, and of
the project's overall efficiency.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

According to the ICR the following risk could potentially impact the Development Outcome:

       Institutional risk. Beneficiaries were mobilized into CIGs to improve peer learning and facilitate the
        dissemination of inputs and services from the project. However, without the project, it is unclear
        whether CIGs would have sufficient incentive to operate. Also, the local extension service network

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD NATP Phase 2 (P149553)



      and participatory extension strategy financed by the project were a key factor in achieving technology
      adoption and subsequent agricultural productivity increases. The project developed an exit and
      sustainability plan for Farmers Information and Advice Centers/Community Extension Agents for
      Livestock/Local Extension Agents for Fisheries, at project closing, but it was unclear how many of
      these service centers will become institutionalized into the Government’s regular extension and
      advisory network. MoA has already decided to scale up the program by adding 2,950 Farmers
      Information and Advice Centers across the country. However, the livestock and fisheries sub-sectors
      do not have a clear plan to sustain their parts of Farmers Information and Advice Centers and retain
      private field workers who were trained by the project. Therefore, it is expected that after project
      closing, some farmers will have less access to technical advisory services and possibly weakened
      community links to exchange and access information, inputs, and services (ICR, paragraph 94).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic relevance and approach. The project was the second phase of the NATP program in
         Bangladesh. The project was strategically relevant and in line with the Government priorities. The
         PDO was also in line with the Bank strategies (see Section 3 for details). Agriculture continues to
         be considered essential for economic development, and a comprehensive approach was
         expected to help reduce poverty and support rural development.
        Technical, financial and economic aspects. NATP-II was designed as a multidimensional
         project that integrated research, extension, supply chain, and marketing activities of crops,
         livestock, and fisheries. The project aimed to contribute to productivity increases, agricultural
         diversification, food and nutrition security, market linkages, and livelihood improvements of small
         and marginal farmers. The project design benefited from the lessons and experience of NATP-I
         (see Section 3). Overall, the project benefited from a clear design that reflected focused and
         logically sequenced activities. However, according to the ICR (paragraph 69), the coordination
         between research and extension activities needed to be more developed. Also, the compatibility
         of matching grants should have been assessed against the local conditions to better align with the
         ground-level reality (ICR, para 68). Nevertheless, the PAD included a thorough economic and
         financial analysis that provided a convincing justification of the project’s investments.
        Poverty, gender, and social development aspects. The project supported activities that aimed
         to improve the livelihood of small and marginal farmers. This was expected to reduce poverty in
         the project areas. Since about 36% of the project beneficiaries were women, the project set a
         gender strategy to ensure women’s involvement in various activities implemented by the project.
         This included: a gender-sensitive allocation of resources, women-targeted leadership promotions,
         and consideration of gender friendliness in evaluating newly developed technologies. The Results
         Framework (RF) included several gender disaggregated indicators to capture the participation of
         women in the project activities.
        Environmental and Fiduciary aspects. While the project had adequate environmental
         arrangements, financial management faced some challenges. Financial management
         experienced "significant delays in resolving audit observations on internal control, and there still
         are pending audit observations (ICR, paragraph 84)." Also, procurement had weaknesses that
         contributed to implementation delays (ICR, paragraph 85).

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD NATP Phase 2 (P149553)



      Implementation arrangements. The project had a complex implementation arrangement with
       four Project Implementation Units (PIUs) and one Project Management Unit (PMU). It involved
       four line departments the covered research and the three commodity value chains. The project
       was implemented under the responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture (lead implementing
       agency) and the Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock. The project was fully integrated in the
       Government's administration so as to promote the use of existing government structures at
       central level, and when available, at decentralized levels. A PMU was set up to oversee
       implementation of project activities, carry out day-today project management functions, facilitate
       coordination among components, and liaise with the World Bank on all project implementation
       related aspects. However, coordinating four line agencies from two different ministries proved
       challenging for the PMU.
      Risk assessment. Eight risks were identified at appraisal with an overall rating of Substantial.
       The risks related to political and governance, sector strategies and policies, institutional capacity
       for implementation and sustainability, and fiduciary were all rated substantial. While the risk
       assessment was realistic and identified most risks, some were underestimated. Also, the
       proposed mitigation measures were not as effective as expected. The risk related to fiduciary
       challenges proved to be more serious than initially anticipated as FM and procurement activities
       faced difficulties in the management of large-size procurements in a transparent
       manner. Also, mitigating the risk associated with coordinating four line agencies from two different
       ministries required a capable PMU with strong leadership complemented with qualified technical
       experts, and external technical assistance providers. However, it took the project two years to
       assign a project director and the PMU was burdened with too many experts in the PMU while
       experiencing shortage in field-level staff (ICR, paragraph 90). Further, the risk relating to staff
       hiring was also underestimated as the hiring process was hindered by the lengthy bureaucratic
       procedures in decision-making and processing. This was exacerbated by a mismatch between the
       project’s financial offer to attract and retain talent and the market remuneration. These risk-related
       weaknesses "compromised the smooth and effective implementation of the project (ICR,
       paragraph 90)."
      M&E arrangements. M&E activities were expected to be outsourced to an external specialized
       firm; however, this did not materialize as planned. Aggregating all M&E-related tasks under a
       single agency complicated the procurement process. This arrangement undermined M&E
       activities, and some activities were cancelled, including collecting data for baseline, mid-term,
       end-line, and impact assessments. Overall, M&E arrangements were not optimal at the design
       stage.

Summary of QAE Assessment. The project was strategically relevant. Design featured
a multidimensional approach that integrated research, extension, supply chain, and marketing activities.
While environmental aspects were adequate, fiduciary aspects faced serious challenges. Implementation
arrangements also faced challenges in coordinating four line agencies from two different ministries. The
risk assessment was realistic and identified most risks. However, some risks were underestimated, as
noted above. M&E arrangements had shortcomings as the envisioned recruitment of a specialized
external M&E firm did not materialize. Overall, Quality at Entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory due to
moderate shortcomings pertaining to risk mitigation measures, M&E arrangements, and, to a lesser
extent, implementation arrangements.




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD NATP Phase 2 (P149553)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The World Bank conducted nine implementation support missions and two technical missions over
        the project implementation duration. According to the ICR (paragraph 91) the missions were staffed
        with specialists relevant to the project activities.
       The Bank team also held monthly meetings to track progress against agreed actions and to
        provide needed operational support. The project benefited from workshops organized by the Bank
        to cover with specific themes including M&E and Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emission analysis
        trainings. The Bank also organized study tours to India to support the PMU and PIUs staff to
        improve their capacity for effective project implementation. The ICR noted that the World Bank
        allowed the client to come up with solutions or jointly developed solutions in an inclusive manner.
       The Bank team proactively restructured the project twice, first to address the ramifications of the
        COVID-19 pandemic, and second, to better align the project with the Government priorities.
       A notable shortcoming was focusing on inputs/outputs instead of outcomes in the project related
        studies. While the project carried out a number of studies, the quality of these studies was not
        robust (ICR, paragraph 92). The project could have benefited from a more focused approach that
        included deeper analysis in a reduced number of studies. According to the ICR (paragraph 92) "the
        midterm review was a missed opportunity in this regard."

 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. The Bank team guided the project towards a
 successful outcome despite the complex nature of the implementation arrangements. The project team
 provided technical support and was proactive in restructuring the project in the face of the COVID-19
 pandemic as well as to align with the shift in priorities of Government. The Bank team could have provided
 stronger guidance on the project studies as well as the MTR to better serve the assessment of the
 outcomes. Overall, however, Bank Supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 Based on the assigned rating to QAE and Bank Supervision, the Overall Bank Performance is rated
 Moderately Satisfactory due to moderate shortcomings pertaining to QAE.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) since it was not yet required by the Bank at the
        time of appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR included a ToC that reflected the relationship between the

                                                                                                 Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD NATP Phase 2 (P149553)



          project activities, outputs, intermediate outcomes and PDO outcomes in plausible causal chains.
          This Review reconstructed a ToC narrative for each objective based on the detailed project
          description in the PAD (Annex 2) in combination with the ToC reported in the ICR.
         The PDO was composed of two objectives (see section 2), which were assessed based on the
          following three PDO outcome indicators: 1. Farm Productivity: Increase in the yield of selected
          agricultural commodities. This indicator monitored the annual yields of key commodities (selected
          from crops, fisheries and livestock) in the new NATP-II areas. It showed how the yield-gap has
          narrowed over the lifetime of the project with farmers’ adoption of new technologies and good
          agricultural practices, 2. Market Access: Volume of agricultural commodities sold annually through
          new structures/arrangements promoted by the project. This indicator provided information about the
          improvement in the participation of smallholder farmers in markets. It measured the throughput
          marketed via commodity collection points, rural markets, contract farming and other new
          arrangements facilitated by the project. This indicator also helped in determining project impact on
          farm income, and 3. Direct project beneficiaries. This indicator measured the cumulative number of
          farmers who were members of Common Interest Groups (CIGs), and reported on the share of
          female members. Overall, the PDO outcome indicators were directly connected to the
          two objectives, measurable, and reflected reasonable targets. However, baseline data
          were reported for the first outcome indicator only and more disaggregated value chain information
          could have been considered for the market access indicator to measure project impact better.
         The Results Framework included seven intermediate results indicators (IRIs) to track the progress
          of the different project activities. The IRIs were measurable, reflected reasonable targets, and were
          connected to the project activities. However, strengthening the institutional capacity of the NARS
          was not adequately captured.
         The M&E system design also called for rigorous beneficiary analysis, namely; information and
          communication technology-based project monitoring and decision-making; and baseline, midline,
          and endline household surveys.
         Overall, M&E design reflected an adequate Results Framework (RF) that included relevant PDO
          outcome indicators and IRIs. While M&E activities were expected to be outsourced to an external
          specialized firm, this did not materialize. Also, strengthening the institutional capacity was not
          adequately captured as noted above in Section 7.



b. M&E Implementation
       According to the ICR (paragraph 77) "the project managed to collect reliable data based on
         adequate choice of method, collection procedure and verification. Progress reports were shared
         with the respective ministries periodically, and with the World Bank annually."
        However, M&E implementation was challenging given the project’s complexity and its
         implementation across the four PIUs, and the lack of a third-party monitoring, since the project
         could not recruit an M&E firm as planned. This resulted in aggregating all M&E-related tasks to be
         performed under a single agency. An internal M&E team consisting of an M&E specialist at the
         PMU and PIUs’ M&E cells were tasked with the conduct of regular project monitoring and data
         collection. However, M&E capacities in the implementing agencies was limited and lacked
         experience with IDA-funded projects in Bangladesh.
        Data from the NATP-I end-line were used as baseline for productivity indicators under the NATP-II
         because conducting a new baseline did not materialize - given the failure to recruit an external
         M&E specialized firm.

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD NATP Phase 2 (P149553)



        Data at the field level were collected by the PIUs’ field officers through a decentralized M&E
         system. Data were then aggregated at the PIUs for further analysis at the PMU. M&E activities
         utilized various types of remote monitoring tools including mobile tablets and Kobo Toolbox were
         introduced. An M&E workshop was organized to improve the capacity of in-house M&E team.
        While an ICT-based PMIS was introduced, this was several years after commencement of project
         implementation. As a result, most of the M&E during the project period was covered by Excel-
         based data collection and interpretation, which limited its timely use.
        Overall, M&E implementation was challenging and did not proceed as envisioned at appraisal.



c. M&E Utilization
       "The lack of a baseline survey proved to be a challenge for accurately evaluating the project’s
         effect on farm productivity variables at project closing (ICR, paragraph 79)."
        As an alternative to the absence of a baseline survey, the project supported many studies; one
         survey sought to generate baseline data by using questionnaires which asked farmers to recall
         historical information. However, the quality of these reports "was not necessarily robust (ICR,
         paragraph 79)." Further, the results of the studies were not translated into concrete follow-on
         activities to provide a feedback loop for implementation improvement.
        The project could have benefited from the analysis of disaggregated data through a more
         targeted and succinct approach to better assess outcomes. This would have helped
         understand the drivers of project results, attribution, and lessons learned for future interventions.

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. While M&E design was comprehensive, M&E implementation
  arrangements did not materialize as envisioned. A baseline survey could not be conducted, and this
  negatively impacted the accuracy of the assessment of project outcomes. Finally, M&E data could not
  be effectively utilized to inform changes to project implementation strategy. Therefore, M&E Quality is
  rated Modest. However, the ICR provided sufficient evidence to justify a substantial efficacy rating and
  collected information eventually based on a number of separate surveys of the project's
  achievements vis a vis crop productivity.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

 a. Safeguards
         Environmental Category and Safeguards. NATP-II was classified as a “Category B” under OP/BP
           4.01 with a partial assessment as the environmental impacts were likely to be small-scale, site
           specific and with no irreversible impacts. Also, NATP-II was not expected to have any significant
           adverse social impacts; it would build on the achievements of the previous project to adequately
           address Gender and Social Inclusion. Two environmental and one social safeguard policies were
           triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09),
           and Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10). An Environmental Management Framework (EMF), a Pest

                                                                                                     Page 18 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BD NATP Phase 2 (P149553)



         Management Plan (PMP), a Social Assessment and a Social Management Framework (SMF) were
         prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal. The SMF included a Gender and Inclusion Framework
         (GIF).
        Compliance with Environmental and Social Safeguards. According to the ICR (paragraph 81)
         "the project met environment compliances, as it ensured completion of the safeguard activities in
         relation to the Environmental and Social Framework." The ICR also stated that "the project complied
         with related social safeguards (paragraph 82)." A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was
         established. The GRM received 8,341 (DAE: 3,252 grievances up to the project closing), all of which
         were effectively resolved, and none remains outstanding (ICR, paragraph 83).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
        Financial Management (FM). FM was challenging given the complex decentralized operation with
         multiple cost centers. That said, NATP-2 was compliant in FM requirements in submitting the
         interim unaudited financial reports and audited financial statements of the project throughout the
         project implementation period. While there were a few minor unreconciled balances of utilization of
         funds between the Designated Account and Client Connection, the interim unaudited financial
         reports were acceptable to the World Bank (ICR, paragraph 84). However, there were significant
         delays in resolving audit observations on internal control, and there were still pending audit
         observations. At closing, the project successfully submitted the final withdrawal application, closed
         financial books, and dispersed operational bank accounts at the field level. NATP-2 served as a
         pilot project in Bangladesh for the implementation of IBAS-PMAP (Project Management Accounting
         Portal). The IBAS-PMAP featured a real-time FM system including budgeting, accounting, and an
         automated payment system for project transactions. At project closing FM compliance was rated
         Satisfactory.
        Procurement. Procurement performance was challenging and experienced some shortcomings.
         There were delays in some key procurement activities that undermined the quality of project
         implementation. For example, the M&E package ended up being canceled, and procurement for the
         development of the PMIS was not processed until June 2020. The procurement for the IA was also
         delayed, which prevented the project team from investing enough time to improve the quality of the
         output due to the time constraints toward project closing. Further, there were a significant number
         of complaints relating with procurements throughout the project life. The World Bank team
         recommended that an Independent Procurement Panel be instituted to mitigate against ongoing
         procurement complaints. It was not clear whether the Bank's recommendation was acted upon.
         Finally, during COVID-19 pandemic some procurement activities were significantly impacted due to
         the inability to hold physical evaluation committee meetings and collect signatures of evaluation
         committee members. This emphasized the need for digitization of the procurement process (ICR,
         paragraph 87). At project closing procurement compliance was rated Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None.



                                                                                                 Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD NATP Phase 2 (P149553)




d. Other
   The ICR (paragraph 56) reported that "the project developed and promoted several climate-smart
   agriculture practices. Most of the 11 technologies developed and disseminated by the project can be
   considered climate smart. A greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions accounting for selected crop technologies
   showed that adoption could achieve an annual net reduction of GHG emissions, compared to a ‘without’
   project scenario, of between 0.15 tCO2e per year for solar system-based irrigation pump technology, 0.47
   tCO2e for bio-organic fertilizer and improved soil health, and even up to 6.5 tCO2e for replacing tobacco
   with improved maize production. In addition, about 10% of PhD research projects financed by the
   project focused on research topics related to climate adaptation, resilience, and mitigation."



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory         Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included five lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. To ensure timely dissemination of technologies, investments in research need to be also
supported with adequate financial and dissemination tools and activities. A typical research
lifecycle is longer than the standard period of a project financed by the World Bank. While this
project successfully generated 40 scalable technologies it required more time for these technologies
to be adopted at scale and to contribute to productivity increase. This emphasizes the relevance of a
support program like NATP in which technologies generated under NATP-I were disseminated under
NATP-II.

2. To improve market access and value chain development for smallholders, robust technical
assistance for a significant period of time is needed to ensure the achievement of
sustainable outcomes. Given the commercial nature of agriculture, public sector capacity requires
significant technical assistance from specialists to facilitate liaison with market actors, to develop
value chains and enable a transparent, equitable and efficient business environment. NATP-II
identified external technical assistance to provide such professional services for three sub-sectors,
but could not maintain this support throughout the project period. After the departure of the external



                                                                                                  Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BD NATP Phase 2 (P149553)



technical assistance, local field-level support for POs and market actors did not emerge thus
jeopardizing sustainability.

3. The public demand-driven decentralized agricultural extension system that was welcomed
by beneficiaries earned support for it to be sustained. The project experience showed that the
bottom-up approach for extension planning enabled the institutions to introduce demand-driven
extension planning region by region. While it took a long time to set up Farmers Information and
Advice Center (FIAC) facilities and popularize them amongst farmers, local extension service
stations at the Upazila level were welcomed by smallholders according to a beneficiary survey at
project closing. The MoA decided to expand the FIAC network, but ministries responsible for
livestock and fisheries had at project closing not allocated any resources to support a decentralized
extension system through FIACs or a similar approach for livestock and fisheries.

The following lesson is emphasized by IEG:

4. Projects featuring research and extension activities could benefit from a coordination
mechanism to maximize benefits. According to the ICR NATP-II suffered from weak coordination
between research and extension components (paragraph 69). There could have been better
coordination among research and extension components and the PIUs to develop regular channels
to share information from the research sector and provide feedback from the field and along the
value chain.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

     Quality of Evidence. The ICR provided an adequate evidence base to support the achievements
        reported. However, the lack of a baseline study was a concern. As an alternative to the absence of a
        baseline survey, the project supported many studies; some surveys sought to generate baseline data by
        using questionnaires which asked farmers to recall historical information.
       Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear links between evidence and findings to the extent possible
        and used the evidence base to serve the arguments under the different sections. However, the absence
        of baseline survey undermined the assessment of outcomes.
       Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.
       Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the standard structure defined in the Guidelines and used
        available evidence to justify the assigned ratings.
       Conciseness. Overall, the ICR was well written, provided a clear and concise coverage of project
        activities, and candidly reported on most shortcomings. However, the section on the risk to the
        development outcome could have benefitted from further details.




                                                                                                  Page 21 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD NATP Phase 2 (P149553)



Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. The ICR included a plausible assessment of outcomes despite
some shortcomings. The lessons drawn by the ICR were relevant. Most sections were concise and reflected
relevant evidence. Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial with some minor shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                            Page 22 of 22
