     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Caixa Solid Waste Mgt (P124663)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0024111

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P124663                                    BR Caixa Solid Waste Mgt

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Brazil                                     Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-11236,TF-11237,TF-B0773,TF-B0774 30-Jun-2022                                               26,827,061.36

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 05-Dec-2011                                31-May-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           33,268,957.83                                   33,268,957.83

 Revised Commitment                            26,485,290.44                                   31,705,596.24

 Actual                                        26,827,061.36                                   26,827,061.36




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Katharina Ferl             Vibecke Dixon               Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   Since the project was a Carbon Finance project it did not require a Project Appraisal Document (PAD)
   (according to the guidelines applicable at the time of approval). Also, the project did not have a financing
   agreement in which the objective was stated. Furthermore, it was blended with the Integrated Solid Waste
   Management and Carbon Finance Project (P106702) which PAD described the Carbon Finance activities
   as its component 2.2 (Technical Assistance to strengthen Caixa’s institutional capacity to manage, supervise
   and monitor solid waste management investments).


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Caixa Solid Waste Mgt (P124663)



   Therefore, the objective of sub-component 2.2 “to strengthen Caixa’s institutional capacity to manage,
   supervise, and monitor solid waste management investments” will be used as the objective of the project.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included one component that aimed to strengthen Caixa’s institutional capacity to manage
   credits and design appropriate lending products for investment in the waste sector and blend these,
   wherever viable, with Carbon Finance. The World Bank was to provide the necessary technical support to
   build the Caixa team’s capacity to apply the necessary World Bank policies in sub-projects, to allow Caixa
   to serve as both a financial intermediary for future on-lending IBRD resources to the private and public
   sectors for finance investments, as well as for managing Carbon Finance Initiatives that generate carbon
   credits.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$28.05 million. Actual cost was US$26.83 million (due
   to exchange rate fluctuations).

   Financing: The project was financed by a World Bank Trust Fund (TF-11237) in the amount of US$4.29
   million (of which US$3.85 million disbursed), a Trust Fund (TF-11236) in the amount of US$21.47 million (of
   which US$21.32 million disbursed), a Trust Fund (TF-B0774) in the amount of US$2.08 million (of which
   US$1.59 million disbursed), and a Trust Fund (TF-B0773) in the amount of US$204,909 (of which
   US$43,317 disbursed).

   Borrower: It was not planned for the Borrower to contribute to the project financing.

   Dates: The project was approved on December 5, 2011, and became effective on the same day. The
   project’s original closing date was June 30, 2022. The actual closing date was May 31, 2023, i.e., the
   project was extended by 11 months.

         According to the World Bank team (May 17, 2024), until June 2020, the roadmap in the World Bank
          portal for CN projects was not operational. Therefore, following the Carbon Finance Guidelines at
          the time, two new Emissions Reductions Purchase Agreement (ERPAs) (TF0B0774 and TF0B0773)
          were processed and approved offline, without a project restructuring.
         On June 27, 2022, the project was restructured to change the loan’s closing date by 11 months from
          June 30, 2022, to May 31, 2023, due to the São Gonçalo Landfill and the Petrolina Landfill
          experiencing significant delays in verification due to their higher performance in landfill gas
          generation.

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Caixa Solid Waste Mgt (P124663)



         The MTR was conducted in December 2014 together with the World Bank loan P106702. According
          to the World Bank team (May 17, 2024) at that time, implementation progress reports for the Carbon
          Finance operation were filed together under P106702.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. According to the PAD (of project P106702) in 2007, 141,000 tons of waste
were collected daily in Brazil. Only 39 percent of the country’s 5564 municipalities adequately disposed of
their waste. Approximately 32 percent of municipalities deposited waste in controlled landfills, and 30
percent of municipalities deposited waste in open dumps. Urban cleaning and solid waste management
(SWM) services were the responsibility of municipalities. However, financial resources were generally
inadequate, and municipalities spent a small proportion of their budgets on SWM. Many municipalities had
limited investment capacity and access to credit for SWM services reinforcing the need for private sector
involvement in SWM.

At the time of appraisal, Brazil was among the most proactive countries in the Latin American region in
pursuing Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) opportunities. Both the private sector and civil society saw
Carbon Finance as a suitable tool to help attract foreign investment and technology transfers. In the solid
waste sector, carbon credits were seen as an important enabling factor for improvements in final disposal
and treatment, as well as for making the closing of existing dumps financially viable.

Alignment with the government strategy. The objective of the project supported the government’s 2010
National Solid Waste Policy Law, which defined the responsibilities and tools for SWM by introducing
concepts such as contaminated area, product life cycle, selective collection, social control, waste
management etc. The project was also in line with the 2022 National Solid Waste Plan, which established
strategies, guidelines, and targets for the sector over a 20-year timeline. Furthermore, the project supported
Brazil’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) and policies on methane reduction. In April 2022, Brazil
submitted its updated NDC objective which aims to reduce economy-wide emissions by 50 percent by
2030, compared to 2005 levels.

Alignment with the World Bank strategy. The objective of the project was in line with the World Bank’s
Brazil Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (FY18-23) under results area 12 (improved environmental
management, biodiversity conservation and climate change mitigation). The CPF emphasized that the
World Bank will support Brazil in designing and implementing policies and investments to reach its COP21
National Determined Contribution (NDC) targets.

The government requested the World Bank’s assistance in mobilizing external resources by increasing
access to climate finance and private sector investments for mitigation activities. Since the World Bank
was the trustee of the Carbon Partnership Facility it was sought to bring together buyers and sellers of
carbon credits under the CDM of the Kyoto Protocol.

The objective was pitched at a relative output level to address a key development issue and was in line with
the government’s policies as well as the World Bank’s most recent CPF.


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 11
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BR Caixa Solid Waste Mgt (P124663)




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen Caixa’s institutional capacity to manage, supervise, and monitor solid waste management
                             investments

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change stated that project inputs/activities such as analyzing
                             options to mainstream Carbon Finance in regular finance operations, developing a Program of Activities
                             (PoA) under the SWM sector to incorporate individual landfill with mitigation potential, identifying SWM
                             activities with mitigation potential for inclusion under the PoA, training key staff within Caixa as well as
                             developing institutional norms within Caixa to support sound socioenvironmental practices were to result in
                             several outputs. These outputs were to include a business model within Caixa being created for
                             mainstreaming Carbon Finance operations, Carbon Finance operations being implemented and
                             operationalized within Caixa’s portfolio, and a social an environmental framework within Caixa for SWM
                             operations being developed. These outputs were to result in the outcome of scaling up the implementation of
                             Carbon Finance in the solid waste sector.

                             The project’s theory of change was sound and logical. The following results were achieved:

                             Outputs:

                                        Three Components of Project Activities (CPAs) were registered by the United Nations Framework
                                         Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), achieving the target of three CPAs.
                                        PoA was registered by UNFCCC achieving the target of doing so.
                                        Caixa prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework that set the guidelines for the
                                         development and implementation of Environmental and Social Management Plans for each landfill.
                                         This output did not have a target.

                             Outcomes:

                                        2,831,016 emission reductions were generated by the Caixa PoA, exceeding the target of 2.5 million
                                         emission reductions.
                                        The Itaoca and Candeias landfills generated 546,581 emission reductions, exceeding the target of
                                         500,000 emission reductions.




                                                                                                                                Page 4 of 11
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               BR Caixa Solid Waste Mgt (P124663)




                                  The Sao Goncalo landfill generated 637,002 emission reductions between 2019 and 2020, exceeding
                                   the original target of 143,000 emissions reductions and not achieving the target of 817,180 emission
                                   reductions.
                                  The Petrolina landfill generated 9,707 emission reductions, not achieving the target of 45,000
                                   emission reductions. According to the ICR (p. 36) the Patrolina landfill actually generated 14,966
                                   emission reductions between August and December 2020. However, given the high number, not all
                                   emission reductions could be verified by the designated operational entity (DOE).



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project was able to create a program within Caixa to identify, prepare, and partially finance emission
                            reduction activities under SWM projects. Also, the project was able to achieve the targets for emission
                            reductions generated by the Caixa PoA as well as by the Itaoca and Candeias landfills. However, the project
                            was not able to achieve the targets for the Sao Goncalo landfill and the Caruaru and Petrolina landfills.
                            Overall, the project’s efficacy is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency:

   No economic analysis was conducted at project appraisal. The ICR (p. 21-22) did not conduct a traditional
   economic analysis either but stated that the positive return on capital employed indicated that the project was
   efficient.

   Operational efficiency:

   During the initial phase of project implementation, the project encountered technical incidents that resulted in the
   landfills’ operations being down. Once these technical issues were addressed, the monitored volumes at
   Santa Rosa and Sao Goncalo exceeded the estimates for 2017. The project was efficient when it came to the
   delivery of ERPA -2 (Santa Rosa, Sao Goncalo, and Barra Mansa) as the contract Certified Emissions
   Reductions (CER) volume was delivered more than one year ahead of the term end of the ERPA. According to
   the ICR (para. 45), the Program of Activities (PoA) showed that it was an efficient approach for managing
   multiple sub-projects since it saved time to register project-by-project with UNFCCC due to a single baseline and

                                                                                                                            Page 5 of 11
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR Caixa Solid Waste Mgt (P124663)



monitoring methodology. Also, the project adopted a programmatic structure and Caixa acted as the program
entity to sign the ERPA with the Bank and the Coordinating/Management Entity of the (PoA), allowing to
manage multiple SWM projects and ensuring consistency and quality across landfills.

Given the lack of an economic analysis, the project’s overall efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objective was Substantial given the project’s alignment with the World Bank’s Brazil Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) (FY18-23). Efficacy was Substantial with moderate shortcomings and Efficiency
was Modest due to the lack of an economic analysis. The project’s overall outcome rating is thus Moderately
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment risk: According to the World Bank team (May 17, 2024) the current
administration displays significant renewed commitment to implementation of the national Solid Waste
Management policy, and specifically the contribution that emissions reducing investments in the sector can
contribute to Brazil’s Nationally Determined Contribution, as demonstrated by the targets included in their
2022 update. This risk is thus considered to be low to moderate.

Technical capacity risk: According to the ICR (para. 25) while the Caixa team implementing the project was
able to increase its knowledge in Carbon Finance, institutional capacity within Caixa diminished throughout
project implementation due to institutional changes and centralization of knowledge in a small number of

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 11
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR Caixa Solid Waste Mgt (P124663)



staff. As a result, Caixa faced challenges in providing support to landfill operators on technical issues such
as CDM supervision and verification processes. Furthermore, local specialists in regional offices closer to the
landfills were key for the Caixa team. However, during project implementation, they were let go, resulting in a
lack of support and oversight. Therefore, continuous lack of technical support at the regional level as well as
at Caixa might negatively affect the sustainability of development outcomes.

Financial risk: Currently, it is not clear if there will be future external financing in this area to allow for
scaling up project activities, which is key to the sustainability of development outcomes.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
   According to the World Bank team (May 17, 2024) the project design was built on lessons learned from
   previous SWM projects in the country as well as in Argentina, Colombia, and Mexico. These lessons
   included: i) as the economic costs of waste disposal are found less in the construction of disposal sites
   than in their maintenance, it is essential to have an appropriate cost recovery mechanism; and ii) carbon
   finance is important for providing an additional revenue stream and supports operating expenses of
   sanitary landfills.

   Also, during project preparation, the World Bank team supported Caixa in identifying a pipeline of
   potential sub-projects to be implemented, conducted an analysis to estimate the target for emission
   reductions as well as an evaluation to ensure that the sub-projects were to comply with the relevant clean
   development mechanism methodology. Furthermore, the World Bank team carried out a financial
   analysis that focused on the rentability of the investments that the landfill operators made into the
   emission reduction systems by looking at the unit price defined in the ERPAs and the expected emission
   reduction volumes calculated based on the CDM methodology used in the approved PoA Design
   Document.

   The project’s Results Framework was adequate (see section 9a for more details).



   Quality-at-Entry Rating
   Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (para. 68) the World Bank team conducted on average two supervision missions per
 year combined with the supervision of the Integrated Solid Waste and Carbon Finance Project
 (P106702). During the COVID-19 pandemic, supervision missions were conducted virtually. Supervision
 missions included appropriate expertise. When the Caixa requested additional technical assistance for the
 CDM processes, the World Bank team addressed this request and provided the Caixa and landfill
 operators with support in key areas such as CDM project proposal, validation, registration, and verification.


                                                                                                            Page 7 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Caixa Solid Waste Mgt (P124663)



 As a result of the World Bank’s support, the project was able to deliver additional CERs under the new
 ERPAs.

 The ICR (para. 70) stated that the project would have benefitted from the targets in the Results Framework
 being restructured when it became clear that Caruaru landfill was not being included in ERPA-4 (which was
 meant to include Caruaru and Petrolina landfills). Also, the target for the Sao Goncalo landfill was not
 revised even though it was likely that the landfill could not deliver the maximum contract volume.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s theory of change and how key activities and outputs were to lead to the intended outcome
 was sound and reflected in the Results Framework. While the PDO indicators and intermediate outcome
 indicators were adequate to capture the contribution of the project activities towards achieving the
 objective, the project would have benefitted from including indicators measuring capacity built within Caixa
 to “identify, prepare, and partially finance emission reduction activities under solid waste management
 projects”.

 Caixa was responsible for the project’s M&E activities by consolidating progress reports submitted by
 operators.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (para. 59) Caixa submitted adequate progress reports and additional information
  requested by the World Bank on a regular basis. However, during the second phase of the project, Caixa
  found it challenging to obtain progress reports from operators. Including specific requirements in the
  contracts for monthly reports by operators might have been beneficial to ensure timely reporting.

  The ICR (para. 59) stated that M&E reflected the terms of the ERPAs, and no additional data was
  collected and monitored in areas outside of the direct line to ERs.

  Two indicators were added when the two additional ERPAs were included in the project. However, the
  project would have benefitted from the targets in the Results Framework being restructured when it
  became clear that Caruaru landfill was not being included in ERPA-4.




                                                                                                   Page 8 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Caixa Solid Waste Mgt (P124663)




c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (para. 27) data collected by Caixa were used in quarterly progress reports which
  were submitted to the World Bank. This data allowed Caixa and the World Bank to assess
  implementation progress towards indicator targets, identify implementation bottlenecks, and address
  them adequately. According to the World Bank team (May 17, 2024) Caixa’s M&E functions are likely to
  be sustained as their leadership is seeking to mainstream and embed carbon finance in a more strategic
  and cross-sectoral manner.

  Given the shortcomings in design and implementation, the M&E quality is rated as Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project’s Environmental Screening Category was FI (Financial Intermediary), as Bank funds were to be
   channeled through Caixa as a financial intermediary.

   According to the World Bank team (May 17, 2024), the Carbon Finance project followed the IBRD loan to
   strengthen Caixa’s capacity to manage carbon credits. Although the original loan triggered five Bank
   Operational Policies OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP 4.04 (Natural Habitats), OP 4.09 (Pest
   Management), OP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources), and OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) as relevant
   for the project, a new safeguards approach was proposed and approved by SAP and management for the
   loan and Carbon Finance operation, based on OP 4.00 (Use of Country Systems in lieu of Bank
   safeguards). Caixa prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for both the
   loan and the Carbon Finance Project, which considered the safeguards triggered in the context of the
   country’s system.

   Caixa was selected as a pilot for the use of Borrower system as it was adopting the framework for its entire
   solid waste portfolio. The Safeguards Diagnostic Review for the proposed Integrated Solid Waste
   Management and Carbon Finance Program in Brazil was reviewed and cleared by the Quality Assurance
   and Compliance Unit (OPCQC). The Bank continued to monitor the implementation of the agreed
   Socioenvironmental Plans for each ERPA.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   According to the World Bank team (May 17, 2024) as per Operational Memo – Supervision of Carbon
   Finance Operations dated December 1, 2011, 3(b) the supervision of Carbon Finance transactions


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Caixa Solid Waste Mgt (P124663)



   excluded assessments relating to the application of the Bank’s fiduciary (procurement, financial
   management, and disbursement) policies.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 31-33) provided several lessons learned, which were adapted by IEG with some
modification of language:

      A programmatic approach implemented by a financial intermediary can be efficient for
       identifying and financing multiple Carbon Finance sub-projects at scale. In this project,
       Caixa acted as an effective financial intermediary between the CPF and the companies
       generating the CERs. Also, it was more efficient for the Bank to deal with a single partner to
       implement multiple ERPAS. Furthermore, many Brazilian municipalities did not have the
       legal structure or institutional capacity to promote private sector participation. Private sector
       entities would have faced significant risks to engage directly with municipalities without
       having support from a financial institution such as Caixa.
      Complementing Carbon Finance with other financing can allow for effective
       engagement with local stakeholders in the public and private sector. After this project
       Caixa and landfill operators continue to show interest in expanding Carbon Finance
       operations within the SWM sector in Caixa and to develop alternative ways for trading carbon
       credits generated beyond the Carbon Partnership Facility.
      Performance incentives or penalties might strengthen compliance with the deadlines
       of sales, purchase conditions and reporting and/or achieving targets in terms of
       CERs. In this project, while there were contractual obligations between Caixa and the CPF,

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 11
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BR Caixa Solid Waste Mgt (P124663)



         as well as between Caixa and the landfill operators, remedial measures for lack of
         compliance at the ERPA as well as at the sub-ERPA level could have been applied
         immediately to allow for better program management.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation and included useful lessons
learned. The ICR was internally consistent and sufficiently outcome driven. However, the ICR would have
benefitted from providing more details about the project design since specific requirements apply to a Carbon
Finance operation. Also, the ICR did not provide an economic analysis. Overall, the ICR is rated Substantial but
only marginally so.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 11 of 11
