     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Competitiveness and Recovery DPF (P175801)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0024088

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                             Operation Name
 P175801                                  Competitiveness and Recovery DPF

 Country                                  Practice Area (Lead)
 Colombia                                 Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-92890                               30-Jan-2023                                        500,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 23-Sep-2021                              30-Jan-2023

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                        500,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                         500,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                     500,000,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Antonio M. Ollero         Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

According to the Program Document (page 3), the program development objective of the
Colombia Competitiveness and Recovery Development Policy Loan was to encourage a high-productivity and
sustainable recovery from the COVID-19 crisis by improving regulation for private sector-led recovery,
promoting innovation and digital finance, and fostering entrepreneurship and internationalization.


                                                                                                Page 1 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Competitiveness and Recovery DPF (P175801)



Even though the overarching objective was to "encourage a high productivity and sustainable recovery from
the COVID-19 crisis", the DPF aimed to cumulatively address the structural constraints that hinder
productivity, which were further exacerbated by COVID-19 and thus put the economy on track for sustainable
recovery. Thus, the operation aimed to improve regulation for private sector-led recovery, promote innovation
and digital finance, and foster entrepreneurship and internationalization. For the purpose of this review, IEG
thus assesses the program objectives as:

1. To improve the regulation for private sector-led recovery
2. To promote innovation and digital finance
3. To foster entrepreneurship and internationalization


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The program had three pillars.

Improving Regulation for Private Sector-Led Recovery supported reforms to foster private sector activity
through better regulation, broadened access to green capital markets, and increased competition and
transparency in public procurement.

Promoting Innovation and Digital Finance supported reforms to boost investment in science, technology,
and innovation, including investments with an environmental sustainability focus, and to increase the use of
digital platforms to raise capital through crowdfunding and to effect payments.

Fostering Entrepreneurship and Internationalization supported reforms to promote enterprise creation and
growth and, at the same time, to stimulate international integration through trade facilitation.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Program Cost. The program was estimated to cost US$500 million at appraisal.

Financing. The program was financed by a US$500 million development policy loan from the IBRD to the
Republic of Colombia. The financing was fully disbursed.

Dates. The program was approved on September 23, 2021, become effective on October 28, 2021, and closed
as scheduled on January 23, 2023.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Following the Colombia COVID-19 Crisis Response Development Policy Financing, approved in June 2020 to
 support the health and social response to COVID-19, and the Colombia Resilient and Sustainable
 Infrastructure for Recovery Development Policy Financing, approved in September 2020 to sustain



                                                                                                   Page 2 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Competitiveness and Recovery DPF (P175801)



critical infrastructure services, this operation – the Colombia Competitiveness and Recovery Development
Policy Loan – was designed to focus on a private sector led economic recovery from the pandemic.

Binding Constraints to Development. The program objectives were relevant to the diagnostics highlighting
the binding constraints to growth, inclusion, and sustainability.

      The Colombia Systematic Country Diagnostic 2015 outlined the following key constraints, which were
       related to the program objectives: (a) total factor productivity growth in non-extractive activities was low
       because of limited exposure by enterprises to domestic and external competition; (b) support from the
       financial sector to individuals and small firms was inadequate; (c) the provision of productive skills was
       lacking; (d) trade openness was limited; and (e) disaster risk management and adaptation was
       inadequate in the face of worsening natural disasters and climate change.
      The Colombia Systematic Country Diagnostic Update 2022 - Together for a Better Future reiterated or
       restated the previous diagnostics and articulated additional key constraints to development: (a) market
       competition was weak and held back productivity and innovation; (b) infrastructure weaknesses were a
       further obstacle to productivity and growth; (c) digital access by households and firms was uneven; (d)
       the country faced formidable challenges in protecting biodiversity, adapting to climate change, and
       meeting ambitious national commitments for reducing greenhouse gas emissions.

Country Priorities. The program objectives were responsive to the country's development priorities,
articulated in strategy documents drafted to guide policy and programs for economic recovery from the crisis.

      The Política para la Reactivación y el Crecimiento Sostenible e Incluyente (Policy for Reactivation and
       Sustainable and Inclusive Growth) articulated five pillars to develop the capacities of households,
       enterprises, and the government for accelerated, resilient, and sustainable economic
       reactivation: Mitigation of Poverty and Economic Vulnerability; Mitigation of Human Capital Loss;
       Grtaer and More Sustainable Growth; Institutional Capacities and Citizen Trust; and Acceleration of
       Digital Enablers. The program objectives were consistent with many plan objectives,
       including: (a) increasing public and private investment in science, technology, and innovation; (b)
       increasing innovation and technology adoption by implementing applied research programs; (c)
       prioritizing resource use of the General Royalties Fund; (d) facilitating access to finance by promoting
       the development of factoring and crowdfunding; (e) expanding technical assistance programs for
       productive and digital transformation processes; and (f) promoting global integration by reducing costs
       and streamlining procedures for importing and exporting.

Bank Group Country Strategy. The program objectives were relevant to the Bank Group country strategy in
Colombia at appraisal and at closing.

      The Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Colombia for the Period FY16-21 (CPF FY16-
       21) committed Bank Group support for the country's development priorities organized around three
       "pillars": Fostering Balanced Territorial Development, Enhancing Social Inclusion and Mobility through
       Improved Service Delivery, and Supporting Fiscal Sustainability and Productivity. The program
       objectives were aligned with the third CPF pillar, specifically with the CPF Objective 6 - Improved
       Business Environment and Innovation to Boost Productivity and CPF Objective 7 - Deepened Financial
       Intermediation for Productive Purposes.
      The Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Colombia for the Period FY24-27 (CPF FY24-
       27) committed Bank Group support for the country's development priorities organized around three
       "high-level objectives": Promote Equitable Territorial Development and Social Inclusion, Advance the

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Competitiveness and Recovery DPF (P175801)



        Sustainable and Inclusive Transformation of the Economy, and Strengthen Resilience to Climate
        Change and Promote Low-Carbon Transitions. The program objectives were aligned with the first
        high-level outcome, specifically with Objective 3 - Enhance digital, electricity and transport connectivity;
        with the second high-level outcome, specifically with Objective 5 - Deepen financial intermediation and
        inclusion and Objective 6 - Improve productivity and innovation; and with the third high-level outcome,
        specifically with Objective 7 - Develop resilient and low carbon infrastructure and Objective 8 - Mobilize
        and deploy climate finance.

Bank Group Crisis Response and Recovery Strategy. The program objectives were aligned with the Bank
Group strategy, both in response to the crisis and in its aftermath.

       The World Bank Group COVID-19 Crisis Response Approach Paper - Saving Lives, Scaling-Up
        Impact, and Getting Back on Track (2020) promoted four pillars: Saving Lives; Protecting the Poor and
        Vulnerable; Supporting Business Growth and Job Creation; and Strengthening Policies, Institutions,
        and Investments for Rebuilding Better. The program objectives were relevant to the third pillar,
        specifically with the strategy "to maintain the private sector so that viable firms do not exit as a result of
        the pandemic," and to the fourth pillar, specifically with the strategy "to maintain a line of sight to long-
        term goals to regain the momentum on the twin goals of economic recovery and poverty reduction in
        recovery."
       The From COVID-19 Crisis Response to Resilient Recovery - Saving Lives and Livelihoods while
        Supporting Green, Resilient, and Inclusive Development (2021) promoted the Green, Resilient, and
        Inclusive (GRID) approach to a more sustainable recovery. The program objectives were aligned with
        the green element – "the investment in solutions that sustain natural capital, including the climate, to
        ensure that today's solutions are resilient and do not undermine tomorrow's growth."


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale




 Objective 1 - To encourage a high-productivity and sustainable recovery from the COVID-19 crisis
 by improving regulation for private sector-led recovery
 PA1 - The Republic of Colombia has taken measures aimed at reducing the cost of doing business by: (a)
 mandating the simplification, automatization and digitalization of administrative procedures and
 information obligations on businesses; and (b) institutionalizing the steps required for improving the
 quality and predictability of technical regulations that directly impact production and marketing costs, as
 evidenced, respectively, by Law No. 2052,
 published in the Official Gazette on August 25, 2020, and Decree No. 1468, published in the Official
 Gazette on November 12, 2020.
 PA2 - The SFC has adopted measures to ensure transparency and integrity of the market for
 green finance by developing the taxonomy of Green Bonds in securities issuances as well as instructions
 on the minimum information that the prospectus for issuance of these bonds should contemplate, as
 evidenced by SFC External Circular No. 028/2020 dated September 7, 2020, and published in the SFC's
 website.

                                                                                                        Page 4 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Competitiveness and Recovery DPF (P175801)



PA3 - The Republic of Colombia has taken measures to facilitate an increase in competition
and transparency in public procurement by mandating the National Agency of Public Contracting
(Colombia Compra Eficiente) to adopt mandatory standard bidding documents in the contractual activity
of all entities subject to the General Contracting Statute of the
Public Administration, as evidenced by Law No. 2022, published in the Official Gazette on July 22, 2020.
Objective 2 - To encourage a high-productivity and sustainable recovery from the COVID-19 crisis
by promoting innovation innovation and digital finance
PA4 - The Republic of Colombia has taken measures to promote investment in innovation by regulating
the use by MSMEs of tax credits for up to 50 percent for investment in research, technological
development, and innovation, as evidenced by Decree No. 1011, published in the Official Gazette on July
14, 2020.
PA5 - The Republic of Colombia has taken measures to promote investment in green innovation by
increasing the allocation of science, technology and innovation resources from the General Royalties
System for projects related to the environment and sustainable development or to non-conventional
renewable energies oriented to energy transition and reduction of carbon emissions, as evidenced by
Articles 9-11, 22(5), 50(b) and Chapters IV and V of Title IV of Law No. 2056, published in the Official
Gazette on September 30, 2020, and Decree No. 1821, published in the Official Gazette on December
31, 2020.
PA6 - The Republic of Colombia has enabled the development of digital finance by increasing the limits of
financing through crowdfunding platforms, as evidenced by Article 12 of Decree No. 1235, published in
the Official Gazette on September 14, 2020.
PA7 - The Republic of Colombia has improved the regulatory framework for digital transactions by
establishing requirements to increase the efficiency and transparency of the low-value payment system,
as evidenced by Decree No. 1692, published in the Official Gazette on December 18, 2020.
Objective 3 - To encourage a high-productivity and sustainable recovery from the COVID-19 crisis
by fostering entrepreneurship and internationalization
PA8 - The Republic of Colombia has enacted the Entrepreneurship Law to support high-
growth entrepreneurship by unifying public resources and programs to support the development of the
entrepreneurship ecosystem within iNNpulsa Colombia, formalizing the initiative for the creation of
centers for entrepreneurship and innovation (CEmprende), facilitating financial access for high-growth
enterprises, and mandating the introduction of complementary measures to strengthen entrepreneurs'
export capabilities and promote MSMEs and entrepreneurship development (particularly of innovative,
green and climate mitigating initiatives), as evidenced by Articles 1, 2, 5-7-9, 12, 13, 25, 30-38, 42-44, 46-
48, 50-52, 55, 57, 58 and 74-83 of Law No. 2069, published in the Official Gazette on December 31,
2020.
PA9 - The Republic of Colombia has approved a regulatory framework to further female entrepreneurship
by creating and consolidating the autonomous trust fund Fondo Mujer Emprende to provide differentiated
technical and financial support to women entrepreneurs and establishing incentives for the creation,
formalization and strengthening of MSMEs led by women, as evidenced by Legislative Decree No. 810,
published in the Official Gazette on June 4, 2020; Article 47 of Law No. 2069, published in the Official
Gazette on December 31, 2020; and Law No. 2125, published in the Official Gazette on August 4, 2021.
PA10 - The Republic of Colombia has adopted measures aimed at reducing the cost and time for firms to
trade and facilitate their integration in global value chains through the extension of the Authorized
Economic Operator Program (AEO) to operators of port installations, as evidenced by Resolution No. 48
dated May 15, 2020, published in the Official Gazette on November 4, 2020.



                                                                                                     Page 5 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Competitiveness and Recovery DPF (P175801)




Objective 1 - To encourage a high-productivity and sustainable recovery from the COVID-19 crisis by
improving regulation for private sector-led recovery

     Despite recent efforts by the Government to streamline and simplify business regulations and
      administrative procedures -- exemplified by the Estado Simple, Colombia Agil (Simple State, Agile
      Colombia) program, started in 2018 -- private economic activity remained hampered by regulation, with
      Colombia ranking 123rd of 141 countries on the "burden of government regulation," 110th on "domestic
      competition, and 57th on the "overall competitiveness index" at the time of appraisal (World Economic
      Forum, 2019, The Global Competitiveness Report 2019). The objective to improve regulation for private
      sector-led recovery supported prior actions to reduce the cost of doing business, broaden access to
      green finance (i.e., structured financial activities that ensure a better environmental outcome), and
      strengthen competition and transparency in public procurement.
     PA1 strove to reduce the cost of doing business, by streamlining and digitalizing administrative
      procedures and improving technical regulations that impacted production and marketing. Although
      Colombia had reduced the number of business regulations from 8,064 in 2017 to 5,513 in 2019, the
      regulatory framework remained burdensome overall --- non-substantial regulations (those of an
      administrative or procedural nature, and without "general effects") remained at 55 percent in 2019; some
      32 percent of all administrative procedures at the national level that were part of the Sistema Unico de
      Informacion de Tramites (Single Registry for Administrative Procedures) required physical interaction
      (as opposed to online processing), and 91 percent, at the sub-national level; and the country badly
      needed a "whole of government" system to improve business regulations (OECD, 2013, Regulatory
      Policy in Colombia). The first of two PA1 measures, Law 2052/2020, the Ley de Racionalizacion de
      Tramites (Administrative Simplification Law), required: (a) periodic reviews of regulations; (b) the
      automation, digitalization, and online conduct of administrative procedures; (c) the promotion of
      alternative compliance methods (simple notifications, automatic authorizations, and indefinite licenses);
      and (c) more transparency and access to information. The second measure, Decree No. 1468/2020,
      adopted "better regulatory practices" following European Union Guidelines (European Commission,
      2017, Better Regulation Guidelines): (a) forward regulatory planning; (b) ex-ante regulatory impact
      assessment and public consultation; and (c) ex-post impact evaluation. Administrative simplification
      would reduce the time and cost of complying with administrative procedures while ''better regulatory
      practices" would bring greater predictability, transparency, and trust to the regulatory process. The
      expected result from these regulatory innovations would be a lower regulatory burden on individuals and
      businesses, measured as higher savings from regulation compliance costs. The relevance of PA1 is
      rated satisfactory.
     PA2 sought to increase access to green finance, by establishing the regulatory framework for the
      issuance of green bonds. Green bond sales had surged to COP 2.36 trillion in 2016-2019 but still
      lacked an appropriate financial regulatory and supervisory framework that was well aligned with the
      country's climate change risk mitigation and adaptation goals. SFC External Circular 028/2020, issued
      by the Superintendencia Financiera de Colombia: (a) created a green taxonomy - a framework and
      system that determined whether an investment could be considered and designated as environmentally
      sustainable; and (b) defined the minimum information requirements that green bond prospectuses must
      disclose to the market, consistent with the Green Bond Principles (2021, 2022) developed by the
      International Capital Market Association, including the use of funds, project appraisal and selection, fund
      management, the publication of annual reports, the determination of impacts, and the use of external
      auditors. The issuance of the SFC circular and the accompanying Good Practice Guide for the
      Issuance of Green Bonds would make Colombia the first Latin American and Caribbean country to

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Competitiveness and Recovery DPF (P175801)



      establish a regulatory regime for green bonds, laying the foundation for further development of green
      finance, strengthening the integrity and transparency of the capital market, and supporting national
      climate change policy objectives. The expected result would be higher green bond issuance in the
      domestic market. The relevance of PA2 is rated satisfactory.
     PA3 aimed to raise competition and transparency in public procurement, by mandating the use of
      standard bidding documents (SBDs). In Colombia, where spending on public procurement
      was 30 percent of government expenditures and 10 percent of GDP in 2017 (OECD, 2020, Government
      at a Glance - Latin America and the Caribbean), public procurement lacked consistency and
      standardization across agencies and levels of government, resulting in weak competition (e.g., tenders
      were tailored to favor certain bidders in public transport works), poor transparency, and high costs to
      participants (Gade et al., Case Study 6 - Open Contracting Reforms in Colombia, in Bajpai and Myers,
      2020, Enhancing Government Effectiveness and Transparency). Law No. 2022/2020 required the
      Colombia Compra Efficiente (National Agency of Public Contracting), the governing body for public
      procurement, to mandate the use of standard bidding documents in contracting by all agencies subject
      to the General Contracting Statute of the Public Administration: (a) the SBDs would cover all aspects of
      the procurement process, including bidding procedures, bid security, validity of bids, standards and
      technical specifications, conditions of contract, and payment terms and methods; (b) the SBDs would
      apply to public works, design and engineering services, and supervision services and studies; (c) the
      Colombia Compra Efficiente would set the procedures and the schedule for the implementation of
      SBDs; and (d) it would train national and specially subnational agencies in the use of
      SBDs. By providing a standardized framework for the procurement of works, goods, and services,
      SBDs would help ensure fairness, efficiency, and transparency in the procurement process. The
      expected result would be a reduction in the regulatory burden, in the form of higher savings by bidders
      from compliance costs when SBDs were used. The relevance of PA3 is rated satisfactory.

Objective 2 - To encourage a high-productivity and sustainable recovery from the COVID-19 crisis by
promoting innovation innovation and digital finance

     Many indicators showed Colombia lagging in investment in those scientific and technological assets
      considered important in driving productivity differences across firms globally (The Competitiveness
      Research Network, 2020, Firm Productivity Report - May 2020). Investment in research and
      development was 0.28 percent of GDP in 2019 (versus 0.62 percent of GDP in the Latin American and
      Caribbean region); gross government expenditures on research and development was 0.28 percent of
      Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 2019 (versus 2.38 percent among the member countries of the
      Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development); mobile broadband subscriptions were 52
      per 1,000 population (100th among 141 countries); and more than 80 percent of businesses did not
      have the equipment to make or receive digital payments, hindering e-commerce. The objective to
      promote innovation and digital finance supported prior actions to enable investment in innovation, in
      general, and in green innovation, in particular, and especially by MSMEs; to expand sources of finance
      for MSMEs; and to encourage the use of digital payments.
     PA4 aimed to promote investment in innovation, by enabling MSMEs to better leverage available tax
      benefits for investment. Colombia has had a three-decade history of extending tax benefits to
      encourage investment, with the most recent Law No. 1995/2019 extending tax credits for up to 50
      percent of the amount invested by MSMEs in research, technology, and innovation projects or for
      salaries of employees who were doctorate degree holders. Decree No. 1011/2020 sets the procedures
      by which these tax credits could be used flexibly by the MSMEs to: (a) offset national taxes (e.g., the
      value added tax); or (b) convert the tax credits into titulos de devolucion de impuestos (tax refund titles),
      which could be traded in the secondary market; or (c) pay taxes in the next fiscal year. Tax incentives

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 24
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Competitiveness and Recovery DPF (P175801)



  are effective to increase spending by enterprise on research and development, with smaller firms more
  responsive to these incentives than larger firms (Appelt et al., 2016, R&D Tax Incentives: Design,
  Incidence, and Impact, OECD Policy Paper 32). The added flexibility allowed by this prior action should
  motivate MSMEs to invest even more in science, technology, and innovation projects, and additionally
  help ease liquidity constraints at MSMEs during the pandemic. The expected result would be greater
  investment by MSMEs in science, technology, and innovation projects that were leveraged by the tax
  incentives. The relevance of PA4 is rated satisfactory.
 PA5 aimed to promote investment in green innovation, by increasing allocations from the Sistema
  General de Ragalias (General Royalties System) for environment and sustainable development projects
  and for non-conventional renewable energy projects. The low share of spending on research and
  development (in total government expenditures) had hampered the country's ability to generate
  environment-related innovations (0.39 per capita in 2016, compared to 21.2 for the OECD
  countries). The country's royalty regime -- the Sistema General de Ragalias, consisting of income
  earned from the exploitation of non-renewable energy sources (some 2 percent of GDP) -- was an
  important source of funding for science and technology projects, with some 9.5 percent allocated to
  the Fondo de Ciencia, Tecnologia e Innovacion (Science, Technology, and Innovation Fund) since
  2012. Law 2056/2020 and Decree 1821/2020 refocused the Sistema General de Ragalias toward
  supporting private sector investment in climate-resilient and low-carbon projects: (a) the allocation to
  science, technology and innovation was increased to 10 percent -- an incremental COP 84,851 million
  (US$24 million) in 2021-2022; (b) the allocation would be computed before deductions (normally 5.5
  percent of the allocation); (c) at least 2 percent of the allocation is dedicated to research or investment
  in environment, sustainable development, and non-conventional renewable energy; and (d) resources
  will be allocated through public, open, and competitive calls for projects at the national level. The
  expected result would be an increase in the total value of private sector projects approved for Sistema
  General de Ragalias co-financing that were associated with environment, sustainable development, and
  renewable energy (energy transition and reduction of carbon emissions). The relevance of PA5 is rated
  satisfactory.
 PA6 aimed to provide additional sources of financing for MSMEs, by raising the financing limits on
  crowdfunding platforms. More than 60 percent of MSMEs did not have access to finance, including
  those that preferred non-formal sources and excluded themselves from the formal system due to
  complicated procedures, excessive costs, and lengthy credit decisions (Asociacion National de
  Instituciones Financieras, 2019, SME Survey). The Government had previously ramped up efforts to
  facilitate access to formal finance by MSMEs -- Decree 817/2020 allowed sociedades por acciones
  simplificados (simplified stock companies) to issue debt securities under a segunfo mercado (hybrid
  issuance) regime. Meanwhile, current regulations governing crowdfunding (i.e., the practice of funding a
  project or venture by raising money from a large number of people, typically via the internet) had a
  maximum issuance limit of COP 9,000 million. Decree No. 1235/2020 raised the crowdfunding
  maximum from COP 9,000 million to COP 50,000 million (the minimum issuance under the hybrid
  issuance regime), effectively bridging the gap for firms that fell between the two limits. The prior action
  would improve access to finance for MSMEs. The expected result would be an increase in the volume
  of financing obtained through crowdfunding platforms. The relevance of PA6 is rated satisfactory.
 PA7 aimed to foster digital finance, by improving the regulatory framework for low-value digital
  payments. Although the number of fintech startups involved in payments and remittances had grown
  one-and-a-half times since 2016 and 60 percent of payments gateways had the technology for digital
  payments, Colombia had one of the lowest numbers of businesses able to receive electronic payments
  in the Latin America and the Caribbean region. More than 96 percent of payments under US$50
  was still made in cash and more than 80 percent of businesses did not have the equipment to receive or
  make payments otherwise, impeded as well by barriers including the gravamem de los movimientos

                                                                                              Page 8 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Competitiveness and Recovery DPF (P175801)



      financieros (tax on financial movements) of COP 4 for every COP 1,000 transacted. Decree
      No. 1692/2020 provided a comprehensive framework for low-value digital payments, incorporating
      key principles: (a) inter-operability -- payments service providers cannot block payment orders or fund
      transfers by competing providers in the same system; (b) access -- mobile digital payment apps will be
      made widely available, including for Ingresio Solidario (Solidarity Income) cash transfers by the
      Government; and (c) security -- good governance practices. The expected result would be a higher
      percentage of adults who made payments or purchases online. The relevance of PA7 is rated
      satisfactory.

Objective 3 - To encourage a high-productivity and sustainable recovery from the COVID-19 crisis
by fostering entrepreneurship and internationalization

     Colombia faced significant impediments to entrepreneurship and internationalization, which would
      otherwise help propel productivity and growth. Entrepreneurial activity was elevated (31.1 percent of
      adults had started or ran a new business), but failed to generate sustainable business activities (only 5.5
      percent owned or managed established businesses) (Bosma et al., 2020, Global Entrepreneurship
      Monitor - 2019/2020 Global Report), dragged down by a high regulatory burden, the lack of
      entrepreneurial, innovation, and digital skills, and limited access to finance. Meanwhile, non-tariff
      barriers (covering 80 percent of tariff items in 2019), border issues (112 hours for border compliance
      versus 13 hours in the OECD countries), and limited participation in global value chains (a narrow focus
      on commodities) limited the potential gains from trade -- exports of goods and services remained
      practically unchanged at 38.1 percent of GDP in 2019 from 34.8 percent of GDP in 1990. The objective
      to foster entrepreneurship and internationalization supported prior actions to support "high growth"
      entrepreneurship, entrepreneurship by women, and international trade facilitation.
     PA8 aimed to support "high growth" entrepreneurship, by reforming the entrepreneurial ecosystem (i.e.,
      the network of relations that supports the creation and growth of new ventures). Government efforts to
      support entrepreneurship suffered from atomization and duplication – some 79 institutions offered 497
      policy instruments, and 247 of the policy instruments had budgets of less than COP 1,000 million. Law
      No. 2069/2020, the Entrepreneurship Law, restructured the entrepreneurial ecosystem: (a) all national
      agencies supporting entrepreneurship would transfer their functions to iNNpulsa Colombia, acting as the
      national agency implementing entrepreneurship, business innovation, and business development
      programs; (b) iNNpulsa Colombia would create centers for entrepreneurship, CEmprende, to provide
      business incubation and business acceleration services, access to business labs, and financing; (c) the
      Government would create programs to promote and support green businesses, especially in rural areas
      experiencing environmental degradation; (d) the Fondo Nacional Garantias (National Guarantee Fund)
      would expand its portfolio to cover equities, debt securities, and collective investment funds
      (crowdfunding); and (e) the Government would pursue other measures to promote entrepreneurship and
      MSMEs (which contribute 40 percent of GDP and 71 percent of formal employment). By
      strengthening the institutional framework for public support of entrepreneurship around iNNpulsa
      Colombia, supporting the development of entrepreneurial skills, and expanding financing schemes,
      the Entrepreneurship Law would help strengthen business ventures, boosting their sales, employment,
      and productivity. The expected result would be a rise in the number of "dynamic enterprises"
      (enterprises that increased their sales or employment by at least nine percent per year or their
      profitability by at least five percent per year) from among those supported by iNNpulsa Colombia's
      acceleration programs. The relevance of PA8 is rated satisfactory.
     PA9 aimed to advance female entrepreneurship. Women were less likely than men to own or lead
      businesses, had lower access to finance, assets, and skills (Bosma and Kelley, 2019, Global
      Entrepreneurship Monitor - 2018/2019 Global Report)), had limited participation in public procurement

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Competitiveness and Recovery DPF (P175801)



        (International Trade Centre, 2020, Value for Women and Open Contracting Partnership), faced legal
        and regulatory barriers and constraining cultural and social norms, and were disproportionately
        impacted by the pandemic (Cuesta and Pico, 2020, The Gendered Poverty Effects of the COVID-19
        Pandemic in Colombia). To promote female entrepreneurship, the Government had adopted a three-
        pillar strategy -- generate information on female entrepreneurs, promote access to business
        development services and to finance, and create customized support programs. Three measures
        implemented the strategy. Legislative Decree No. 810/2020 initially created the autonomous trust
        fund Fondo Mujer Emprende as an emergency instrument to address the larger negative impact of the
        pandemic on women. Law No. 2069/2020 integrated the Fondo Mujer Emprende into the formal
        structure of the enterprise support system, giving the fund a permanent mandate and enabling it to
        receive COP 20 billion from the Presupuesto General de la Nacion (national general budget) in
        2021. And Law No. 2125/2021 provided incentives for the creation, formalization, and strengthening of
        MSMEs led by women. These targeted support measures would promote female entrepreneurship, the
        expected result of which would be an increase in the number of women-led enterprises supported by co-
        financing and technical assistance programs extended by iNNpulsa Colombia and the Servicio Nacional
        de Aprendizaje (National Training Service). The relevance of PA9 is rated satisfactory.
       PA10 aimed to foster internationalization, by cutting international trade costs and facilitating integration
        into global value chains. Colombia ranked lower than average in Latin America and the Caribbean on
        the Doing Business trading across border indicator, which measured the time and cost (excluding tariffs)
        of documentary compliance, border compliance, and domestic transport in exporting or importing a
        shipment of goods. Yet, trade facilitation had become increasingly critical to exporters and importers
        that were plugged into global value chains (some 15 percent of all trading firms) (World Bank, 2020,
        Colombia Trade Engagement). The Government had previously launched several initiatives to address
        these constraints, including by expanding the use of prior-approval processing and release, balancing
        border controls with trade facilitation, and improving coordination between customs and other border
        control agencies. Resolution No.49/2020 extended one of these programs, the Authorized Economic
        Operator Program, to firms in the logistics and transport chains (e.g., port installations and port
        operators). Launched in 2011 and patterned after similar programs globally (World Customs
        Organization, 2020, Compendium of Authorized Economic Operator Programmes), Colombia's program
        authorized customs-to-business partnerships (involving some 229 firms since) to secure the supply
        chain and facilitate legitimate low-risk trade. The extension, consistent with the World Customs
        Organization's Framework of Standards to Secure and Facilitate Global Trade, would further reduce the
        time and cost to trade across borders. The expected result would be an increase in the value of trade
        that was covered by the Authorized Economic Operator Program and related to global value
        chains. The relevance of PA10 is rated satisfactory.

 The prior actions were appropriate for realizing the intended objectives. All the ten prior actions were rated as
 satisfactory. Overall, the relevance of design is rated as satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Competitiveness and Recovery DPF (P175801)




Rationale

Objective 1 - To improve regulation for private sector-led recovery

      RI1 - A rise in savings from compliance costs would signify a reduction in the regulatory burden
       faced by enterprises. The Departamento Administrativo de la Funcion Publica (Public
       Administration Department) used a method similar to the Standard Cost Model (of regulatory
       monetary burdens) to develop the measure used for this operation -- compliance cost savings
       arise from: (a) reducing the time to complete an administrative procedure; (b) eliminating the need
       to be physically present to deliver documents or to pay fees; (c) eliminating the costs for the
       transport or shipment of documents; (d) reducing fees; and (e) eliminating all other costs related to
       compliance. The relevance of RI1 is rated satisfactory.
      RI2 - The number of green bond issuances that complied with the Green Bond taxonomy and
       the Good Practice Guide for the Issuance of Green Bonds was intended to measure the impact of
       adopting a clear regulatory and supervisory framework for issuing green bonds. Rather than the
       number of green bonds issued, the value of green bonds sold would have been a superior
       measure, particularly when viewed in the context of the amount of green finance required to fund
       the country's climate action initiatives. The relevance of RI2 is rated moderately satisfactory.
      RI3 - The average number of bids per public bidding process in all the sectors where standard
       documents were mandatory was adequate to measure the result of introducing the use of standard
       bidding documents in public procurement. An increase in the average number of bids would
       reflect greater competition in government procurement. The relevance of RI3 is
       rated satisfactory.

Objective 2 - To promote innovation innovation and digital finance

      RI4 - The yearly investment by MSMEs in science, technology, and innovation projects that
       leveraged on tax incentives was adequate to measure the impact of easing the rules by which
       investors could use these tax benefits earned for investment in science, technology, and
       innovation projects. With studies attesting to the efficacy of tax benefits in motivating investments
       in innovation, particularly by MSMEs, a rise in MSME investment in innovation projects leveraged
       by tax incentives would reflect progress with the effort to promote innovation. The relevance of
       RI4 is rated satisfactory.
      RI5 - The total value of projects presented by the private sector that are approved for Sistema
       General de Ragalia co-financing and are associated with environmental, sustainable development
       and renewable energy projects oriented to energy transition and reduction of carbon emissions
       was adequate to measure the result of reorienting the Sistema General de Ragalia toward green
       financing. An increase in the value of such projects would reflect progress with the objective to
       promote innovation. The relevance of RI5 is rated satisfactory.
      RI6 - The volume of financing through crowdfunding platforms was adequate to measure the result
       of raising the ceiling on the amount that could be raised through crowdfunding. A rise in the
       crowdfunding volume would indicate some headway with the objective of promoting digital
       finance. The relevance of RI6 is rated satisfactory.
      RI7 - Original - The percentage of adults who make payments or purchases online was designed
       to measure the impact of improving the regulatory and supervisory framework for digital
       payments. After the publication of the baseline number in December 2020, the Ministry of Finance

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Competitiveness and Recovery DPF (P175801)



      and Public Credit stopped measuring this indicator, leaving the project without any data to
      measure the achievement of the target at closing. Consequently, the relevance of RI7 - Original is
      rated unsatisfactory. The Bank proposed two alternative measures at ICR preparation. RI7 -
      Alternative 1 -- the share of people aged 15 and above that made or received digital payments --
      would be drawn from the Bank's Global Findex Database. RI7 - Alternative 2 -- the percentage of
      people over 18 years of age who made purchases through the Internet -- would be drawn from the
      Encuesta de Tecnologías de la Información y las Comunicaciones en Hogares (Survey of
      Information and Communications Technology in Homes). The relevance of RI7 - Alternative 1 and
      the relevance of RI7 - Alternative 2 are moderately satisfactory.

Objective 3 - To foster entrepreneurship and internationalization

     RI8 - The number of dynamic enterprises participating in acceleration programs offered by
      iNNpulsa Colombia would measure the impact of three reform measures, including the
      consolidation of public programs and resources supporting entrepreneurship within iNNpulsa
      Colombia, the creation of CEmprendes (centers of entrepreneurship and innovation), and the
      expansion of the portfolio of the Fondo Nacional Garantias which provided credit guarantees to
      enterprises. "Dynamic enterprises" were those that increased their sales or employment by at
      least nine percent per year or their profitability by at least five percent per year, according to the
      Plan Nacional de Desarollo 2018-2022 (National Development Plan 2018-2022). A higher
      participation rate by these enterprises in the iNNpulsa Colombia acceleration program -- which
      partnered with private investors to provide seed capital to innovative startups -- would reflect the
      efficacy of the reform measures. The relevance of RI8 is rated satisfactory.
     RI9 - The number of women-led enterprises supported through technical assistance and/or co-
      financing programs offered by iNNpulsa Colombia and the Servicio Nacional de Aprendizaje would
      measure the result of adopting a regulatory framework to support female entrepreneurship,
      integrating the Fondo Mujer Emprende into the formal structure of the enterprise support system,
      and providing incentives for women-led MSMEs. Like RI8, a higher participation rate by the
      women-led enterprises in the iNNpulsa Colombia and the Servicio Nacional de Aprendizaje
      technical assistance and co-financing programs would reflect the efficacy of the reform
      measures. The relevance of RI9 is rated satisfactory.
     RI10 - The global value chain-related trade value covered by the Authorized Economic
      Operator Program aimed to measure the result of extending the Authorized Economic
      Operator Program to port installations. According to the ICR (page 11), the indicator was
      computed as the ratio of the trade value of Authorized Economic Operator Program-certified firms
      that both exported and imported to the total trade value of all firms that both exported and
      imported. While the the indicator would undeniably reflect the impact of extending the Authorized
      Economic Operator Program, it is unclear that the indicator measured global value chain-related
      trade as well, in the manner that global value chains are understood -- as the international
      fragmentation of production, where the different stages of the production process are located
      across different countries (World Bank, 2020, World Development Report 2020 - Trading for
      Development in the Age of Global Value Chains). It would appear from the definition that indicator
      measured Authorized Economic Operator-certified trade, but not necessarily global value chain-
      related only. The relevance of RI10 is rated moderately satisfactory.


Results Indicator Associated Relevance         Baseline Target Actual Value      Actual       Achievement
                  Prior Action Rating                                            Change in    Rating

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Competitiveness and Recovery DPF (P175801)



                                                                        Results
                                                                        Indicator
                                                                        Relative to
                                                                        Targeted
                                                                        Change, in
                                                                        Percent
Objective 1 - To improve regulation for private sector-led recovery
RI1 - Reduction in PA1       Satisfactory 0          179,468 188,478    105           High
regulatory burden                           (2020) (2022) (Dec 2022)
measured as total
savings in
compliance costs,
in COP million
RI2 - Number of PA2          Moderately     0        4        1         25            Negligible
green bond                   Satisfactory (2019) (2022) (Dec 2022)
issuances that
comply with the
Green Bond
taxonomy and
guidelines
RI3 - Average       PA3      Satisfactory 3          7.5      19        253           High
number of bids                              (2019) (2022) (Dec 2022)
per public bidding
process in all the
sectors where
standard
documents are
mandatory
Objective 2 - To promote innovation innovation and digital finance
RI4 - Yearly        PA4      Satisfactory 168,000 285,000 477,000       167           High
investment by                               (2020) (2022) (Dec 2022)
MSMEs in STI
projects
leveraging on tax
incentives, in COP
million
RI5 - Total value PA5        Satisfactory 4,845      21, 232 30,343     142           High
of projects                                 (2019) (2022) (2021-22)
presented by the
private sector that
are approved for
SGR co-financing
and are
associated with
environmental,
sustainable
development and

                                                                                          Page 13 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Competitiveness and Recovery DPF (P175801)



renewable energy
projects oriented
to energy
transition and
reduction of
carbon emissions,
in COP million
RI6 - Volume of PA6            Satisfactory 8,000    40,000 73,733       184          High
financing through                             (2020) (2022) (Dec 2023)
crowdfunding
platforms, in COP
million
RI7 - Original -    PA7        Unsatisfactory 20     40      n.a.        ..           Negligible
 Percentage of                                (2020) (2022) (Measurement
adults who make                                              stopped by
payments or                                                  Government)
purchases online
RI7 - Alternative 1 PA7        Moderately     37.33  74.6* 52.11         70           Modest
-Share of people               Satisfactory (2017)           (2021)
aged 15 and
above that made
or received digital
payments
(Source: WB
Global Findex
Database)
RI7 - Alternative 2 PA7        Moderately     21.6   43.2* 24.9          58           Modest
-Percentage of                 Satisfactory (2020)           (2021)
people over 18
years of age who
made purchases
through the
Internet (Source:
ENTIC Hogares)
Objective 3 - To foster entrepreneurship and internationalization
RI8 - Number of PA8            Satisfactory 508      3,000 3,030         101          High
dynamic                                       (2020) (2022) (Dec 2022)
enterprises
participating in
acceleration
programs offered
by iNNpulsa
RI9 - Number of PA9            Satisfactory 2,230    10,178 10,683       105          High
women-led                                     (2020) (2022) (Dec 2022)
enterprises
supported through
technical

                                                                                          Page 14 of 24
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Competitiveness and Recovery DPF (P175801)



               assistance and/or
               co-financing
               programs offered
               by iNNpulsa and
               SENA
               RI10 - The GVC- PA10            Moderately     12        14     40.5            289          Substantial
               related trade value             Satisfactory   (2019)    (2022) (Dec 2022)
               covered by the
               AEO Program, in
               percent

               * While the ICR (pages 28-29) proposes RI7 - Alternative 1 and RI7 - Alternative 2 as alternate results
               indicators to RI7 - Original (the measurement of which was discontinued by the Government after
               December 2020), it does not offer numerical targets for these alternate measures. This ICR Review
               assumes that the targets would be twice the baseline values (i.e., the same target-to-baseline ratio
               specified for the original indicator, RI7 - Original).

               The results framework was mostly appropriate with clear, feasible, and measurable indicators. Some
               indicators had moderate shortcomings, as noted above. Overall, the relevance of results indicators is
               rated as satisfactory.



   Rating

   Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To improve regulation for private sector-led recovery

                Rationale
                Theory of Change. The overarching objective was to "encourage a high productivity and sustainable
                recovery from the COVID-19 crisis". The DPF aimed to cumulatively address the structural constraints that
                hinder productivity which were exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic and thus put the economy on track
                for sustainable recovery. The operation aimed to (i) improve regulation for private sector-led recovery; (ii)
                promote innovation and digital finance; and (iii) foster entrepreneurship and internationalization.

                A simplification and digitalization of business regulatory processes and government administrative procedures
                would reduce the regulatory compliance costs faced by enterprises, easing the costs of doing business and
                facilitating business activity in the ramp-up toward economic reactivation. The recovery effort would also be
                boosted by developing green finance, which could be facilitated by clarifying the regulatory and
                supervisory framework for issuing green bonds, thereby imparting integrity and transparency onto the green
                finance capital market. Additionally, reforming public procurement practices by universally adopting standard
                bidding documents would strengthen competition among works contractors, goods suppliers, and service

                                                                                                                 Page 15 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Competitiveness and Recovery DPF (P175801)



providers and improve transparency in government procurement. Stronger competition, greater
transparency, and improved regulation should spur a more vigorous private sector response to the national
economic recovery effort.

Outcomes. In the baseline, regulatory compliance costs were burdensome, Colombia had yet to issue a
green bond, and standard bidding documents were barely used in public procurement.

Following the enactment of Law No. 2052/2020, which simplified and digitalized administrative procedures
and improved the predictability of technical regulations affecting production and marketing, the total savings in
compliance costs reached Colombian peso (COP) 188,478 million by closing, exceeding the target of COP
176,048 million. The savings consisted of: (a) COP 127,321 million (68 percent of the total savings), from
the reduction in processing time; (b) COP 25,739 million (14 percent), from the reduction in
transportation costs (reduction in travel); and (c) COP 14,241 million (8 percent), from the elimination of travel
time.

With SFC External Circular No. 028/2020, which established the regulatory framework for the sale of green
bonds, the number of green bond issuances that complied with the Green Bond taxonomy and the Good
Practice Guide for the Issuance of Green Bonds reached one by closing, from none in the baseline, only
partially achieving the target of four. Four bonds were submitted, but only one was issued, reflecting, in part,
a poor macroeconomic environment, heightened political uncertainty, and tightened financial conditions in
2019-2022 (when debt sales, and by only two corporates, declined 85 percent to COP 292 billion, or US$70
million). The ICR reports that early 2023 may have seen a turnaround, with eight green emissions
authorized, and with securities issuers submitting thematic emission proposals to the Superintendencia
Financiera de Colombia for approval.

After Law No. 2022/2020 required the use of standard bidding documents, the average number of bids per
public bidding in all the sectors where standard bidding documents were mandatory increased from three in
the baseline to 19 by closing, exceeding the target of 7.5. More than 7,400 procurement processes were
reviewed, some 59 percent of which were conducted through public tender. There was an average of 19
bidders at the closing stage, when the agencies applied the contractual instrument "Standard
Documents." The ICR adds that continuing diligence monitoring by the Colombia Compra Eficiente
indicated that 600 tender processes were reviewed in fiscal year 2023, of which 289 required the use of
standard bidding documents; for these cases, the average number of bidders was 7.5.

The targets were exceeded except for the issuance of green bonds. The achievement of the objective is
rated as moderately satisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To promote innovation and digital finance

Rationale

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Competitiveness and Recovery DPF (P175801)



Theory of Change. With enterprises lagging in investment in science, technology, and innovation, four
measures aimed to spur investment in innovation, in general, and green innovation, in particular, as well as in
digital finance, both on the funding and the payments sides. A liberalization of the terms by which tax
incentives earned from innovation projects could be used by investors and a reorientation by the Government
of the Sistema General de Ragalias toward climate-resilient and low-carbon projects would raise investment
in science, technology, and innovation, including by MSMEs. Separately, a liberalization of the ceiling on
crowdfunding and the adoption of a clear regulatory framework for digital payments would raise the volume of
financing obtained and payments made through digital channels.

Outcomes. In the baseline, investment by MSMEs in science, technology, and innovation projects that
leveraged on tax incentives stood at COP 168,000 million, the value of science, technology, and innovation
projects in climate resilience that were co-financed by the Sistema General de Ragalia, at COP 4,845 million,
the amount of financing that were raised through crowdfunding, at COP 8,000 million, and the percentage of
people aged 15 and above who made or received digital payments, at 37.3 percent.

With Decree No. 1011/2020 injecting greater flexibility into the use of tax incentives for science, technology,
and innovation investment, the yearly investment by MSMEs in science, technology, and innovation projects
that leveraged on tax incentives rose from in COP 168,000 million in the baseline to COP 477,000 million by
closing, exceeding the target of COP 285,000 million. The share of MSMEs participating in the tax benefits
program (tax deductions, tax discounts, and tax credits) rose from 15 percent (195 of 1,500 firms) in the
baseline to 23 percent (477 of 2,100 firms) by closing, underlining the importance of tax credits as a means of
promoting investment by MSMEs in innovation. An impact evaluation of the tax benefits program found that
77 percent of participating firms recorded productivity improvements from innovation activities, according to
the ICR, citing the findings of the consulting firm Encuesta Econometria Consultores y Technopolis Group.

With Law No. 2056/2020 and Decree No. 821/2020 refocusing the Sistema General de
Ragalias toward investment in climate-resilient and low-carbon projects, the total value of science,
technology, and innovation projects that were submitted by the private sector, approved for co-financing by
the Sistema General de Regalías, associated with environmental, sustainable development and renewable
energy projects, and oriented toward energy transition and reduction of carbon emissions, rose from COP
4,845 million in the baseline to COP 30,343 million by closing, exceeding the target of COP 21,232
million. The ICR provided the following details: (a) six projects were approved, three under the innovation
category and three under the research and experimental development category; (b) five projects focused on
agriculture and rural development and one on environmental and sustainable development; (c) three projects
were executed by universities; (d) the six projects were located in five regions (four in the least developed
regions). The ICR adds that co-financing by the Sistema General de Regalías supplied 25 percent of the
financing of joint digital and climate innovations and 10 percent of green transition innovations.

After Decree No. 1235/2020 increased the limits allowed on crowdfunding, the volume of financing
mobilized through crowdfunding platforms rose from in COP 8,000 million in the baseline to COP 73,733
million by closing, exceeding the target of COP 40,000 million, The ICR reported that, among crowdfunding
platforms, the online crowdfunding platform for MSMEs a2censo had emerged as a leading alternative
financing vehicle for MSMEs -- with 180 campaigns, COP 80,483 million funded, 11,555 investors, 60,177
investments, a 28 percent conversion rate (the rate at which a campaign converts visitors into backers), and a
63 percent reinvestment rate over 2019-2023 -- providing additional evidence (i.e., additional to RI6) that
innovative financing mechanisms have emerged to facilitate access to finance.



                                                                                                 Page 17 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Competitiveness and Recovery DPF (P175801)



According to alternative measures, the passage of Decree No. 1692/2020, which aimed to improve the
regulatory framework for low-value digital payments, boosted the use of digital payments, achieving implied
targets albeit partially. There was no data at closing to measure the percentage of adults who
made payments or purchases online, the baseline value of which was 20 percent and, the target, 40
percent. Since the publication of the baseline data in December 2020, the Ministry of Finance and Public
Credit had ceased to collect and report this data. The percentage of people aged 15 and above who made or
received digital payments -- the first alternative measure -- increased from 37.3 percent in 2017 to 52.1
percent in 2021. There was no target set for this alternative measure. However, if the intent was to double
the baseline value (as in RI - Original), then the target would be 74.6 percent -- in which case, the
achievement of RI7 - Alternative 1 would be rated as modest. The percentage of people over 18 years of age
who made purchases through the Internet -- the second alternative measure, drawn from the Encuesta de
Tecnologías de la Información y las Comunicaciones en Hogares (Survey of Information and
Communications Technology in Homes) -- increased from 21.6 percent in 2020 to 24.9 percent in
2021. There was no target set for this alternative measure either. However, if the intent was to double the
baseline value (as in RI - Original), then the target would be 43.2 percent -- in which case, the achievement of
RI7 - Alternative 2 would be rated modest as well.

Most of the targets were exceeded. For digital payments, the original results indicator for which was no
longer measurable at closing, the alternate measures suggest a modest achievement. The achievement of
the objective is rated as satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To foster entrepreneurship and internationalization

Rationale
Theory of Change. A restructuring of the entrepreneurial ecosystem -- the consolidation of public programs
and resources within iNNpulsa Colombia, the creation of CEmprendes (centers of entrepreneurship and
innovation), and the expansion of the portfolio of Fondo Nacional Garantias -- would help foster
entrepreneurship. Similarly, the creation of a framework for female entrepreneurship -- the integration of
the Fondo Mujer Emprende trust fund, the provision of differentiated support to women entrepreneurs, and
the extension of incentives for MSMEs led by women -- would help advance the enterprise development
objective, focusing on a gender dimension as well. Separately, the expansion of the Authorized Economic
Operator Program to port installations would help overcome impediments to internationalization posed by
inadequacies with logistics and transport, and issues with border control.

Outcomes. Participation by enterprises in the iNNpulsa Colombia acceleration program was limited in the
baseline, as was the participation of women-led enterprises in the iNNpulsa Colombia and the Servicio
Nacional de Aprendezaje co-financing and technical assistance programs. Meanwhile, the value of trade
related to global value chains was meager in the baseline, relative to potential.



                                                                                                 Page 18 of 24
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Competitiveness and Recovery DPF (P175801)



                      With the passage of Law No. 2069/2020, which aimed to restructure the entrepreneurial ecosystem, the
                      number of dynamic enterprises (enterprises that increased their sales or employment by at least 9 percent
                      per year or their profitability by at least 5 percent per year) participating in acceleration programs offered by
                      iNNpulsa rose from 598 in the baseline to 3,030 by closing, exceeding the target of 3,000. The ICR supplied
                      additional details -- the accelerated ventures (a) generated over COP 1.6 trillion of sales, (b) produced 17,293
                      jobs at entry and 21,966 at closing, and (c) contributed 4,673 additional jobs (1.5 new jobs per company).

                      Following Legislative Decree No. 810/2020, Law No. 2069/2020, and Law No. 2125/2021, which collectively
                      sought to advance women entrepreneurship, the number of women-led enterprises supported through
                      technical assistance and/or co-financing programs offered by iNNpulsa and the Servicio Nacional de
                      Aprendezaje (National Technical and Vocational Training Service) rose from 2,230 in the baseline to 10,683
                      by closing, exceeding the target of 10,178.

                      With the extension, under Resolution No. 49/2020, of the Authorized Economic Operator Program to logistics
                      and transport firms, the value of trade related to global value chains and covered by the Authorized Economic
                      Operator Program rose from 12 percent in the baseline to 40.5 percent by closing, exceeding the target of 14
                      percent. However, the way the indicator was defined and calculated was imperfect, as it pertained to trade
                      that was Authorized Economic Operator-certified but not necessarily global value chain-related only. Hence,
                      the rating for the achievement of the target must be downgraded.

                      All the targets were exceeded, except that a moderate shortcoming with the third indicator downgrades the
                      associated achievement rating. The achievement of the objective is rated as satisfactory.



                      Rating

                      Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The degree of achievement of the objective to improve regulation for private sector-led recovery is rated
moderately satisfactory. The degree of achievement of the objective to promote innovation and digital finance is
rated satisfactory. The degree of achievement of the objective to foster entrepreneurship and internationalization
is rated satisfactory. The overall achievement of the objectives is rated satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Satisfactory


      6. Outcome


                                                                                                                        Page 19 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Competitiveness and Recovery DPF (P175801)




Rationale

The relevance of the prior actions in achieving the program development objectives is rated satisfactory. The
relevance of the results indicators in measuring and signaling that the prior actions have achieved or are
achieving the objectives is rated satisfactory. The outcome of the operation is rated satisfactory.


a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

The program outcomes will likely be sustained in the near to medium term, supported by government
development efforts, private sector investment, and international development assistance.

      The Plan Nacional de Desarollo, 2022-2026 (National Development Plan, 2022-2026), with an
       emphasis, in the economic front, on "productive transformation, internationalization, and climate
       action," reinforces and advances many of the reforms supported by this operation, including:
       establishing fair, equitable, and inclusive carbon markets (related to PA2); directing resources toward
       strategic investments in science, technology, and innovation (related to PA4); exploring alternative
       financing instruments for reindustrialization (related to PA6); boosting the national digital industry
       (related to PA7); and striving for carbon neutrality and climate resiliency (related to PA8).
      The Nuevo Compromiso por el Fututo de Colombia (New Commitments to the Future of Colombia),
       an investment plan with the private sector, pledges COP 163 trillion (around 16 percent of GDP) in
       investment over 2021-2030 in key areas, including those supported by this operation -- COP 19.6
       billion (some 12 percent of the package) in "green and clean growth."
      Bank operations, approved since the closing of this program, provide continuing support to the
       country in related areas: (a) the Green and Resilient Development Policy Operation, approved in
       2022, aims to accelerate climate action by advancing the low-carbon energy transition, promoting
       sustainable land use, and building resilience and adaptation to climate change; (b) the Green and
       Resilient Development Policy Operation II, approved in 2024, adds a fourth pillar to accelerating
       climate action -- expanding climate finance; and (c) the Equitable and Green Path Development
       Policy Financing, approved in 2023, aims to promote more equitable and green fiscal policies,
       productive and social inclusion for vulnerable groups, and inclusive and green private sector
       development.
      Downside external risks to the country's near-term economic prospects -- which may raise
       development outcome sustainability issues -- are mitigated by a new two-year arrangement approved
       in April 2024 by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) under the Flexible Credit Line (FCL) for SDR
       6.1335 billion (US$8.1 billion) and designed for crisis prevention. Colombia had maintained access to
       the FCL instrument since 2009, and this -- the country’s tenth FCL arrangement -- is treated as a
       precautionary measure that should boost market confidence and provide insurance against downside
       risks by extending a large upfront access with no ex-post conditionality, according to the IMF.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

                                                                                                  Page 20 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Competitiveness and Recovery DPF (P175801)




a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


Analytic Underpinning. The program and prior actions were informed by analytical work produced by the
Bank, the Government, and other institutions (see Section 3.A - Relevance of Objectives, and Section 3.B -
Relevance of Prior Actions). Apart from those cited in the preceding sections, numerous other studies and
reports informed the program design (Program Document, Table 4 - Prior Actions and Analytical
Underpinnings, pages 49-54).

Collaboration with Development Partners. The Bank consulted and collaborated with other
development partners in the preparation of this program. The International Monetary Fund and the Bank
reviewed the macroeconomic setting for the program. The International Finance Corporation and the Bank
collaborated on the design of prior actions related to the business environment (PA1), green finance (PA5),
digitalization for fundraising (PA6) and for payments (PA7), MSME finance (PA8 and PA9).

Operational Risks and Mitigation Measures. The Bank considered the political and governance risk to
be substantial. Measures to foster competition in public procurement, tap crowdfunding, promote digital
financial services, and facilitate exports would intensify competition in the economy, but also challenge
incumbents and vested interests in key industries. The Bank considered the strong political ownership of
the program to be a mitigating factor, exemplified by the vigorous activities of three Government task
forces -- on employment, on internationalization, and on capital markets -- to advance reform
measures. Winners from the reforms -- small firms, innovators, new exporters -- would also act as a
countervailing force. The Bank also appraised macroeconomic risk to be substantial. Designed in early
2021 as a recovery program from the economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, the operation faced the
risk that the pandemic could worsen and exacerbate the economic crisis. Joint work by the Bank, the
Government, and other development partners to secure fiscal buffers and support private enterprises
would help mitigate the macroeconomic risk. The Bank approved a US$700 million loan in June 2020 for
the COVID-19 Crisis Development Policy Financing to maintain liquidity and access to finance for firms,
apart from providing income support to poor and vulnerable households and assisting the health
system. The International Finance Corporation opened credit lines to help existing clients access short-
term financing through trade guarantees and risk-sharing facilities. Meanwhile, the Multilateral Investment
Guarantee Agency designed a fast-track response package focused on credit enhancement, capital
optimization programs, as well as the procurement of medical supplies and services. The Agency also
approved a US$385 million guarantee to the state-owned Banco de Desarrollo Empresarial de Colombia to
support loans to businesses for working capital.

The Bank performance at design is rated satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory



                                                                                                  Page 21 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Competitiveness and Recovery DPF (P175801)



b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Supervision. The Bank maintained an active policy dialogue with the Departamento Nacional de
Planeacion (National Planning Department) about the reforms supported by this operation. The Bank produced
policy notes on innovation-led entrepreneurship, the financial sector, and internationalization. It delivered
advisory services and analytics related to productivity, recovery by firms from the crisis, and climate action by
private parties. It also provided technical assistance to iNNpulsa on the use of public procurement to promote
female entrepreneurship, and to the Superintendenci Financiera de Colombia and the Ministerio de Hacienda y
Crédito Público (Ministry of Finance and Public Credit) on the development of carbon markets and the
expansion of the Green Taxonomy to include biodiversity, adaptation, and water resources.

Monitoring. The Bank coordinated with the Departamento Nacional de Planeacion to set the monitoring and
reporting plan for this operation. Records of all technical discussions during preparation proved useful in
reviewing the substance of the prior actions, the definition of the results indicators, and achievement of the
program targets. However, the process could have been more efficient if monitoring had been more
systematic, according to the ICR. Specifically, the Bank acknowledged that fielding supervision missions early
during implementation would have facilitated monitoring and reporting. The shortcoming is not significant.

The Bank performance during implementation is rated satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

The Bank's performance at design is rated satisfactory. The Bank's performance during implementation is
rated moderately satisfactory. Overall, the Bank's performance is rated moderately satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The ICR did not present any assessment of the actual social and poverty impacts of this operation, but only
reiterated the expected effects cited at appraisal (ICR, page 31, and Program Document, pages 58-60).


                                                                                                   Page 22 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Competitiveness and Recovery DPF (P175801)




b. Environmental

The ICR did not present any assessment of the actual environmental effects of this operation, but only reiterated
the expected effects cited at appraisal (ICR, pages 31-32, and Program Document, pages 60-61).



c. Gender



d. Other

---

10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR is consistent with OPCS guidelines on ICRs for development financing operations and includes highly
informative discussions of the relevance of the prior actions and the relevance of the results indicators. The
efficacy assessment is outcome-oriented and based on the degree of achievement of the results targets. The
comments and notes in the Results Framework Table (Annex 1) are helpful. The ICR presents ample evidence
to support its assessment of the Bank’s performance at design. The ICR draws lessons that would be valuable
to development policy operations that support reform opportunities in the aftermath of a crisis.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
 Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreement/Comments
 Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory

 Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory
 Relevance of Results
                                ---                   Satisfactory
 Indicators
 Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial



                                                                                                  Page 23 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Competitiveness and Recovery DPF (P175801)



12. Lessons

Two lessons are drawn from the ICR, with some adaptation.

Addressing the economic impact of a shock can offer opportunities to advance vital policy reforms. In
this operation, the economic recovery strategy from the adverse economic and social effects of the COVID-19
pandemic focused on the pivotal role of the private sector in driving reactivation and enhancing productivity, a
basic tenet long recognized by a succession of strategy documents including the Plan Nacional de Desarollo
2016-2020 (National Development Plan 2016-2020) and the Política para la Reactivación y el Crecimiento
Sostenible e Incluyente (Policy for Reactivation and Sustainable and Inclusive Growth) . The reactivation
objective motivated multifaceted efforts to: establish formal and competitive enterprises -- by simplifying the
business regulatory environment; facilitate the productive transformation of firms -- by fostering investment in
science, technology, and innovation; streamline interactions with the public sector -- by instituting competitive
and transparent public procurement practices; harness the benefits of international trade -- by upgrading
logistics and liberalizing border controls; and, attract investments towards productivity enhancement -- by
supporting digitalization and green innovation. These private sector development reforms were vital to help
Colombia manage the lingering effects of the crisis and, more importantly, to set the foundation for a stronger
development path in the near to medium term.

A continuing and consistent Bank analytical services and technical assistance program lays the
foundation for a credible country structural reform program. Many of the reform measures supported by
this operation -- notably, regulatory reform, entrepreneurship, and internationalization -- were underpinned by a
long-running program of analytical and advisory services and technical assistance extended by the Bank Group
to Colombia over several years before the crisis. The engagements benefitted this operation in several ways:
they produced a credible set of reform proposals that were informed by expert analytical work; they helped
engage key stakeholders and mobilize political support for the reform measures; and they helped guide policy
dialogue between the Bank and other development partners, on one hand, and the Government and key
stakeholders, on the other, about the country's medium-term development path. Moving forward, a recent
advisory and analytical service engagement, Leveraging Private Sector Contribution to Climate Action in
Colombia, has produced a set of diagnostics and policy recommendations to drive the transition to a low carbon
economy, transform transition risks into opportunities, and create incentives for firms to innovate. As in the past,
this analytical service engagement will guide future climate action measures, a theme also highlighted by this
operation.




13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                     Page 24 of 24
