     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guatemala DRM DPL with CAT DDO II (P159710)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0024053

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                            Operation Name
 P159710                                 Guatemala DRM DPL with CAT DDO II

 Country                                 Practice Area (Lead)
 Guatemala                               Urban, Resilience and Land



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-89620                              31-Mar-2023                                        200,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 24-May-2019                             31-Mar-2023

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                        200,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                         200,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                     200,000,000.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan               Stephen Hutton              Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD
 Krishnamani



2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Program Development Objective (PDO) of this Development Policy Loan (DPL) as stated in the Program
Document (PA, page 4) is:




                                                                                               Page 1 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Guatemala DRM DPL with CAT DDO II (P159710)



" To help strengthen Guatemala's legal, institutional and financial framework to manage the impact of
adverse natural events and climate risk ".

For the purpose of this Implementation Completion and Results Report Review (ICRR), the PDOs are taken
to be:

PDO 1. To help strengthen Guatemala's legal and institutional framework to manage the impact of adverse
natural events and climate risk.

PDO 2. To help strengthen Guatemala's financial framework to manage the impact of adverse natural events
and climate risk.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The PDO was to be achieved through reforms in two pillars/policy areas (PD, page 4):

Pillar A: Strengthening the legal and institutional framework for Disaster Risk Management (DRM) and
Climate Change Adaptation (CCA).

Pillar B: Incorporating disaster risk into the management of public finances for fiscal resilience.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Financing. This DPO, with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (CAT DDO)) was financed by an IBRD
loan of US$200.00 million. The loan was fully disbursed.

Dates. This operation was approved on May 24, 2019 and became effective a year later April 16, 2020 (The
team clarified that the delay in effectiveness were due to factors such as the complex political environment with
substantial political and governance risks, weak institutional capacity and difficulties in reaching agreements
between the executive and legislative branches of government. The operation closed as scheduled on March 31,
2023.

Drawdown of Cat DDO instrument.

On 21 April 2020 (just five days after the project became effective), the Government decided to withdraw the
entire loan to address the financial shock related to the evolving COVID -19 pandemic. Although at the time of
requesting the withdrawal, government liquidity needs relating to the pandemic were yet unknown, the Bank
considered this request as justified given the preliminary estimates. When this operation closed on March 31,
2021, the confirmed cases of COVID - 19 and deaths reported for Guatemala were 1,244,812 and 20,187
respectively.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Guatemala DRM DPL with CAT DDO II (P159710)



Country context. Severe natural hazard events such as earthquakes, volcanic eruptions and flooding
present major obstacles to economic growth in Guatemala. According to the Global Climate Risk Index
(2018), Guatemala ranked 11th in the world among countries affected by climate-related events. Recent major
natural disasters included eruption of the Pacaya volcano and the tropical storm Agatha (2010) which raised
the fiscal deficit by 0.5 percentage points of GDP. In the wake of these disasters, the Government had to
interrupt its ongoing delivery of public services and development programs to finance immediate recovery
needs.

Sector context. The existing DRM Act of 1996 limited the scope for disaster risk reduction(DRR) measures.
While the law prohibited investments in disaster-risk prone areas, it did not specify that DRR investments
could be made, thereby precluding investments in areas deemed to be "high risk". The law had no provisions
for declaring health emergencies and lacked a disaster recovery framework. National and subnational
institutions neither had access to risk information nor institutional capacities for designing DRR measures and
Guatemala was the only Central American country which had not updated its DRM framework since 1998. The
existing environmental management institutions did not address incorporate disaster risk management in their
work, missing opportunities for applying nature-based solutions to disaster risk reduction Likewise, the
Government did not have a comprehensive financial strategy for addressing DRM measures. Given that
disaster recovery needs interrupt service delivery and development programs, it was important for the
Government to access immediate liquidity for addressing natural disasters that could not be funded with
internal reserves.

Government strategy. Guatemala's National Development Plan (K'atun) identified important synergies
between DRM and CCA. Following Guatemala's accession to the Paris Agreement on Climate Change in April
2016, the Government established a National Action Plan on Climate Change for adopting practices to
improve adaptation capacities and established the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (MARN) as
the authority to pursue the Government's agenda in this area.

World Bank (WB) strategy. The Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD, 2016), identified the country's
vulnerability to natural hazards as a key challenge to Guatemala's efforts to accelerate economic growth. The
SCD identified high exposure to natural hazards as a challenge, since disasters can divert resources meant for
social and infrastructure spending toward disaster response. At appraisal, the PDO was fully aligned with the
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2017-2020. The CPF recognized DRM and climate change as key
priorities. The "Fostering Inclusion and Resilience" pillar of the CPF identified vulnerability to natural hazards
as a key development constraint for Guatemala and advocated the need for building capacity to respond to
disasters and climate change as a core CPF objective.

The PDO is highly relevant to the WB's current CPF for 2024 - 2027. The CPF reiterated the need for
increasing resilience to natural disasters and climate change. The CPF's second higher level objective
specifically articulated the need for "improving capacity for the management of natural risk and natural capital
under a changing climate" .

Previous Bank performance. The Bank had previously supported the Government's DRM program through a
Cat DDO operation following the 2010 eruption of the Pacaya Volcano and Tropical Storm Agatha. That
operation provided the Government with liquidity. The Bank's policy dialogue relating to that Cat DDO
contributed to building awareness and mainstreaming DRM/CCA considerations in Government's decision-
making process.




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Guatemala DRM DPL with CAT DDO II (P159710)



Appropriateness of the lending instrument. The Bank deemed a second Cat-DDO operation as appropriate
for these reasons; First, as a quick source of funding, the Cat-DDO would provide emergency financing and
this would help in avoiding diversion of budget resources from other development programs following a natural
disaster. Second, as a DPL instrument, the operation could help in advancing policy reforms that would in the
longer term enhance structured financing for disaster prevention and post-disaster reconstruction. Third,
Guatemala's macroeconomic outlook was deemed adequate for supporting a DPL operation. and four, Article
IV consultation of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) that took place in 2018 commended Guatemala for
maintaining a solid record of macroeconomic stability and resilience.

Level of ambition of this operation. As the second Bank-financed CAT DDO, the operation aimed at second
generation of reforms, incorporating lessons from the El Fuego volcano eruption: (i) The operation supported
the Government to complete a fiscal impact analysis of natural disasters and a Disaster Risk Financing
Strategy (DRFS) initiated under the first CAT DDO; (ii) The first operation encouraged the government to
develop additional financial instruments tailored to the country needs. In response, this operation supported
establishment of thematic budget classifiers and incorporating an analysis of disaster and climate risks in the
annual General Budget report; and (iii) This operation aimed to develop a legal DRM framework, identified by
the first operation as an important step towards a comprehensive DRM. Policy dialogue of this operation was
complemented with targeted technical assistance (TA) through three Analytical and Advisory Services
(ASA): (i) Strengthening DRM and Resilience of Central American Municipalities; (ii) Central America Disaster
Risk Financing Engagement; and (iii) The Volcan de Fuego Resilient Recovery. The overall level of ambition
was appropriate, given the relevance of the PDO to the Government strategy and the current Bank strategy for
Guatemala.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Pillar A: Strengthening the legal and institutional framework for DRM and CCA. Reforms in this pillar
supported the Government's efforts to update its legal framework and institutional structure for DRM. There
were three prior actions (PAs) (PD, pages 18 - 21).

PA # A 1. The Government submitted to congress a bill of law to strengthen the existing legal DRM framework,
establish a national system for DRM and define instruments to enhance risk knowledge and reduction, disaster
preparedness and response, and resilient recovery.

The new DRM law presented to Congress in January 2019 aimed to rectify some deficiencies of the existing
law. The new law focused on a proactive approach to disaster risk reduction in line with international best
practices. The law established responsibilities at the national and local level to facilitate DRR (such as
promoting disaster-resilient investments in educational infrastructure). The scope of this PA was confined to
submitting the bill to Parliament. The prior action did not imply commitment to the law's approval as it was not
within the purview of the Executive under Guatemala's Government structure.

The analytical underpinnings of this prior action were based on international good practice on DRM, as well as
county-specific reports from the World Bank and the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
(GFDRR) on Guatemala's risk profile, drivers of risk (including inadequate application of building standards and
lack of risk sensitive municipal planning) and regulatory mechanisms needed for making schools safer..


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Guatemala DRM DPL with CAT DDO II (P159710)



This prior action of submission of bill to parliament, although not sufficient, is necessary for strengthening the
legislative framework for DRM and CCA. The relevance of this prior action is Satisfactory.

PA # A 2. The Government adopted a DRM roadmap including contingency plans and information
dissemination activities to strengthen risk management and resilience for volcanic hazards.

The June 2018 El Fuego volcano disaster exposed weaknesses in managing volcanic risks in Guatemala.
These included, inadequate application of scientific knowledge and monitoring of volcanic activities, insufficient
participation of communities exposed to volcanic risks, weak organizational and logistics preparedness and
land use planning in volcanic areas. Following the 2018 eruption, the World Bank and GFDRR supported an
analytical study in 2018 that identified opportunities for strengthening volcanic Resilience in Guatemala.

This prior action aimed to enhance the institutional capacities for managing volcanic risks through: (i)
strengthening the capacity of the National Institute of Seismology, Meteorology and Hydrology (INSIVMEH) for
disseminating hazard information related to volcano activity; and (ii) requiring the National Coordination for
Disaster Risk Reduction (CONRED) to adopt an updated National Humanitarian Assistance Manual for
coordinating humanitarian assistance activities.

This prior action was imperfectly aligned with the identified shortcomings from the World Bank study. Although
the DRM roadmap included some relevant activities in central government, the prior action did not specifically
address some identified gaps (weak participation of communities exposed to volcanic risks, weak organizational
and logistics preparedness and land use planning in volcanic areas). Therefore, this prior action is rated as
Moderately Satisfactory.

PA # A 3. The Government strengthened the DRM institutional framework in the environmental sector by
creating the Department of Integral Environmental Risk Management within the Ministry of Environment and
Natural Resources (MARN) as the entity responsible for integrating environment and DRM concerns in
programs.

This prior action aimed to integrate disaster risk management into environmental protection and introduce
concepts such as nature-based solutions (NBS) for sustainable ecosystem management (NBS refer to actions
that protect, sustainably manage and restore natural or modified ecosystems) The analytical underpinnings of
this prior action were based on international good practice, including a World Bank global study that presented
examples of bank projects implementing nature-based solutions for DRM.

This prior action would likely help in enhancing coordination and synergies between DRM and environmental
management and adopting nature-based solutions for sustainable ecosystem management. Therefore, this
prior action is Satisfactory.

Pillar B: Incorporating disaster risk into the management of public finances for fiscal
resilience. Reforms in this pillar focused on policy actions aimed at promoting fiscal resilience and budget
allocation for DRM. There were three PAs (PD, 21 - 25).

PA # B1. The Government approved a Disaster Risk Financing Strategy (DRFS) to promote diversification of
disaster-related financial instruments to respond to disasters.

Guatemala in the past used stopgap risk retention instruments to manage emergencies, such as through an
emergency fund, contingency loan and budget allocation mechanisms. This prior action aimed at give an active
role to the Ministry of Public Finance (MINFIN) to mandate acquiring risk transfer instruments to build fiscal

                                                                                                      Page 5 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Guatemala DRM DPL with CAT DDO II (P159710)



 resilience. The analytical underpinnings of this prior action came from the Organization of Economic
 Cooperation and Development (OECD, 2017 and 2018) studies that recommended a DRFS to respond to
 disasters.

 This prior action will likely help in enhancing the government capacity to finance disaster responses while
 protecting its fiscal balance. This PA was directly related to the PDO and is rated as satisfactory.

 PA # B2. The Government created the position of Fiscal Transparency and Procurement Vice Minister within
 the Ministry of Public Finance (MIFIN) and clarified the functions of MINFIN; and approved an integrated
 analysis of fiscal risks to strengthen management of fiscal risks and enhance the transparency of public
 spending. The analytical underpinnings of this prior action were based on the International Monetary Fund
 (IMF) reports which showed that fiscal analyses can help policy makers simulate the effects of shocks in their
 forecasts and their implications for government solvency, liquidity and solvency.

 While a useful intermediate step, creating a single institutional position is not itself likely to cause a significant
 policy change without significant subsequent actions. Therefore, this prior action is rated as Moderately
 satisfactory.

 PA # B3.The Government aimed to enhance efficiency of public spending, planning and budget allocation
 processes related to DRM and CCA activities by clarifying the responsibilities of the thematic budget classifiers'
 governing bodies and updating the scope of instruments throughout the budget cycle. (The team clarified that a
 thematic budget classifier is a categorization system used by government entities to track expenditures related
 to specific themes or areas of focus. In this case, the thematic budgetary classifier # Nine, was introduced by
 the Ministry of Finance (MINFIN) to monitor public spending on disaster risk reduction actives). The analytical
 basis for this prior action were based on the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA)
 Handbook.

 This prior action can help in enhancing planning, monitoring and transparency of DRM and CCA expenditures
 and were directly related to the PDO. The relevance of this prior action is satisfactory.

 The causal links between most of the prior actions under the pillars, the intended program results and
 the long-term outcomes were clear. However, some indicators were upstream activities and although
 necessary, not sufficient for realizing the long-term outcomes. The prior actions were linked to the
 Government's DRM program and to the operation's PDO. There is an explicit, comprehensive and convincing
 results chain linking the PAs to the achievement of the PDO, grounded in credible analytical work and
 incorporating lessons learned from similar operations. This review concludes that the PAs makes a significant
 contribution to achieving the PDO. Therefore, the overall relevance of design is rated as Satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

                                                                                                          Page 6 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guatemala DRM DPL with CAT DDO II (P159710)



Pillar A: Strengthening the legal and institutional framework for DRM and CCA. There were six
results indicators (RIs) for the three prior actions under pillar A (PD, page 4).

RI # 1 .This indicator monitored the percentage of municipalities that included DRR activities in their local
development plans when the operation closed.

RI # 2. This indicator monitored the percentage of municipalities that updated the local DRM committees
in line with the new DRM framework.

RI # 3. This indicator monitored the number of educational facilities that complied with the technical
criteria adopted by the Ministry of Education (MINEDUC) about safe location and seismic-resistant
infrastructure.

Monitoring the percentage of municipalities that updated the local DRM committees and monitoring the
number of educational facilities that complied with the technical criteria adopted by the MINEDUC,
provide useful evidence on the operationalization of the prior actions by local governments and the
indicators could be verified. However, the indicator on the percentage of municipalities that included DRR
in their plans had some weaknesses. as it did not provide a measure of intensity. It was unclear if
municipalities undertook substantial DRR activities or very minor ones. Also, the targets for RI # 1 to 3
were not very ambitious, based on the dramatic overperformance (see table below) Overall, these
indicators are rated as moderately satisfactory.

RI # 4. The National Institute of Seismology, Volcanology, Meteorology and Hydrology (INSIVUMEH) was
restructured by 2020 and mandated to provide hazard information relating to volcano activity.

 RI # 5. The Executive Secretariat of the National Coordinator for Disaster Reduction (CONRED) adopted
the updated the National Humanitarian Assistance Manual in 2021 to coordinate humanitarian
assistance.

At the baseline, there were no arrangements either for disseminating information relating to volcano
activity or for coordinating humanitarian assistance. Restructuring INSIVUMEH to provide such
information and updating the National Humanitarian Assistance Manual for coordinating humanitarian
assistance were valid in indicating that the prior action are likely to be effective in achieving the PDO of
strengthening the institutional framework for DRR.

One shortcoming was that the indicator tracked an institutional change that happened early in the life of
the operation. Given that the operation remained active for three years after this change, the operation
could have measured the delivery of contingency plans and information disseminations for volcanic
hazards, rather than just mandating of this. As such, there indicators are moderately satisfactory.

RI # 6. This indicator monitored the number of local communities that completed and disseminated
environmental risk evaluations.

Monitoring the adoption of environmental risk evaluations by municipalities provides some evidence on on
operationalization of the prior action. However, it is unclear if environmental risk evaluations proposed
nature-based solutions for sustainable ecosystem management. Therefore, this indicator is moderately
satisfactory.



                                                                                                      Page 7 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guatemala DRM DPL with CAT DDO II (P159710)



Pillar B. Incorporating disaster risk into the management of public finances for fiscal
resilience. There were seven results indicators (RIs) for the three prior actions under pillar B (PD, page
4).

RI # 7. This indicator monitored the number of new financial instruments that are currently being used in
line with the DRFS.

Monitoring the number of new financial instruments in use directly measures the effectiveness of the prior
action in contributing to the PDO of strengthening Guatemala's financial framework to manage the
impacts of adverse natural and climate risks. This indicator could be verified. This indicator is satisfactory.

RI # 8. This indicator monitored the response time for providing emergency relief after declaration of an
emergency.

Monitoring the response time in providing emergency relief after declaration of emergency only partially
measures the effectiveness of the prior action, given that emergency relief may depend not only on the
speed of emergency financing but also on physical disaster response capacity. Although at the base line,
the response time was 14 days, the target was also set at 14 days. This indicator was not very ambitious.
Therefore, this indicator is moderately unsatisfactory.

RI # 9. The Ministry of Public Finance (MINFIN) adopted the operational manual for implementing the
DRFS.

At the baseline, there was no operational manual for implementing the DRFS. Adoption of the operational
manual for implementing the DRFS by MINFIN is likely to be effective for achieving the PDO of
strengthening Guatemala's financial framework to manage the impact of natural disasters. This indicator
could be verified. Therefore, this indicator is satisfactory.

RI # 10. This indicator monitored the number of new emergency procurement tools and mechanisms that
were put in place for addressing natural disasters.

At the baseline, there were no emergency procurement tools and mechanisms for dealing with adverse
natural events. This indicator could be verified. Therefore, this indicator is rated as satisfactory.

RI # 11. This indicator monitored the number of fiscal risk budget reports elaborated by the Directorate of
Fiscal transparency that considered natural hazards and climate risks.

Monitoring the number of fiscal risk budget reports which included natural and climate risks directly
indicates the effectiveness of the prior action in contributing to the PDO. This indicator could be
monitored. Therefore, this indicator is rated as satisfactory.

RI # 12. This indicator monitored the number of government institutions that were implementing thematic
classifiers in DRM and CCA (in line with the new conceptual guide and implementation manual).

Monitoring the number of government institutions that were implementing thematic classifiers in DRM and
CCS is a robust indicator that would indicate that the prior action is likely to be effective with the PDO of
strengthening the financial framework for responding to natural disaster or climate-related shocks. This
indicator could be verified. Therefore, this indicator is rated as satisfactory.


                                                                                                      Page 8 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Guatemala DRM DPL with CAT DDO II (P159710)



RI # 13, The Government established an annually funded a permanent National DRM Fund as stipulated
in the DRFS.

At the baseline there was no permanent National DRM fund for implementing the DRFS. Through
operationalizing such a fund, the Government signaled its intention to pursue a proactive DRFS (as
opposed to treating natural disasters as adverse exogenous shocks). The indicator could be verified.
Therefore, this indicator is satisfactory.

The results indicators for the most part, were generally appropriate for capturing the effectiveness of the
prior actions in realizing the PDOs. Therefore, the overall relevance of results indicators is rated as
satisfactory.

Table: Results framework indicating PAs, targets, results and the status of achievement of results.

                                                                                  Actual
                                                               Target
                                                  Baseline                     change in
                                                                        Actual                 RI
                      Associated Relevance of (including                          target
          RIs                                                (Including                    relevance
                         PAs          RIs         units and                    relative to
                                                              units and Value                rating
                                                   dates)                       targeted
                                                               dates)
                                                                                 change
   PDO 1. To help strengthen Guatemala’s legal and institutional framework to manage the impact of
                                  natural events and climate risk
   RI 1. % age of
 municipalities that
                                                  Baseline:    Target:
   included DRR                   Moderately                                      Target
                       PA # A1                     (2019):     (2023):   85%                  High
  activities in their             Satisfactory                                  exceeded
                                                    3.5%         29%
    development
         plans
      RI 2. % of
                                                                Target
 municipalities with              Moderately      Baseline:                       Target
                       PA # A1                                 (2023):   69%                  High
    updated local                 Satisfactory   (2019): 0%                     exceeded
                                                                 15%
 DRM committees.
       RI 3. # of
     constructed
  educational that
                                  Moderately      Baseline:     Target            Target
   were complied       PA# A1                                           3,497                 High.
                                  Satisfactory (2019): 100 (2023): 220          exceeded
 with the technical
criteria adopted by
   the MINEDUC
       RI 4. The
     restructured
                                                                                           Substantial
    INSIVUMEH                                     Baseline:     Target            Target
                       PA # A2    Satisfactory                           Yes
  provided hazard                                (2019): No (2023): Yes          realized
information related
 to volcano activity
       RI 5. The       PA # A2    Moderately      Baseline:     Target   Yes      Target
      Executive                   Satisfactory   (2019): No (2023): Yes          realized


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Guatemala DRM DPL with CAT DDO II (P159710)



 Secretariat of SE-                                                                     Substantial
       CONRED
     coordinated
    humanitarian
 assistance as per
     the updated
       National
    Humanitarian
      Assistance
        Manual
    RI 6. # of local
 communities with
                                                 Baseline    Target:            Target
    disseminated     PA # A3    Moderately                              25              Substantial
                                                 (2019): 0 (2023): 25          realized
environmental risk
     evaluations                Satisfactory
PDO 2. To help strengthen Guatemala’s financial framework to manage the impact of adverse natural
                                    events and climate risk
    RI 7. # of new
       financial
                                                 Baseline    Target:            Target
     instruments     PA # B1    Satisfactory                             2              Substantial
                                                 (2019): 0 (2023): 2           realized
established in line
      with DRFS
       RI 8. The
 response time for
       providing                                 Baseline    Target
                                Moderately                                      Target
 emergency funds     PA # B1                    (2019): 14 (2023): 14 14 days           Substantial
                               Unsatisfactory                                  realized
       after the                                   days       days
    declaration of
      emergency
   RI # 9. MINFIN
      adopts the
                                                 Baseline    Target             Target
operations manual    PA # B1    Satisfactory                            Yes             Substantial
                                                (2019): No (2023): Yes         realized
  for implementing
         DRFS
     RI # 10. The
   number of new
      emergency
procurement tools
                                                 Baseline    Target             Target
  and mechanisms     PA# B2     Satisfactory                             3              Substantial
                                                 (2019): 0 (2023): 2          exceeded
 that were in place
   for dealing with
   adverse natural
        events
RI # 11. # of fiscal PA # B2    Satisfactory     Baseline    Target     12      Target Substantial
risk budget reports                              (2019): 2 (2023): 4          exceeded
 elaborated by the
    Directorate of

                                                                                         Page 10 of 18
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Guatemala DRM DPL with CAT DDO II (P159710)



                        Fiscal
               Transparency that
               considered natural
                   hazards and
                   climate risks
                   RI # 12. # of
                   government
                    institutions
                                                                    Baseline      Target            Target not
                  implementing        PA B3         Satisfactory                               1                    Modest
                                                                    (2019): 0    (2023): 2           realized
                      thematic
               classifiers in DRM
                     and CCA.
                   RI # 13. An
                annually funded
                    permanent
                                                                    Baseline    Target              Target not
                 National DRM         PA B3         Satisfactory                              No                    Modest
                                                                   (2019): No (2023): Yes            realized
                     Fund was
               operational in line
                 with the DRFS

   Rating

   Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                PDO 1. To help strengthen Guatemala's legal and institutional framework to manage the impact of adverse
                natural events and climate risk.

                PAs A1 to A3.                                       RIs 1 - 6.

                Rationale
                Theory of Change. Policy reforms in this area aimed to strengthen the legal and institutional framework for
                managing the impacts of natural events and climate risk. Reforms such as as requiring municipalities to adopt
                DRM in development plans, establishing local DRM Committees, integrating DRM in the environmental
                sector, requiring the INSIVUMEH to disseminate hazard information, adoption of the updated National
                Humanitarian Manual by CONRED for coordinating humanitarian assistance, were likely to help in
                strengthening the institutional framework for adopting DRM and CCA measures. Submission of an updated
                Disaster Risk Management (DRM) bill by the Executive Branch although necessary, is not a sufficient
                condition for strengthening the legal framework. The outcomes were monitorable. The intended outcomes
                were predicated on these assumptions: One, the Government is fully committed to strengthening the DRM
                program to build the country's overall resilience against the impacts of natural hazards and climate change;
                and (ii) The Bank and the Government maintain an effective dialogue during implementation.



                                                                                                                 Page 11 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Guatemala DRM DPL with CAT DDO II (P159710)



Outcomes.

      The updated national DRM roadmap was adopted by the National Council for Disaster Risk Reduction
         on December 12, 2018, and the Volcanic Hazard roadmap on December 10, 2018. The percentage of
         municipalities that included disaster risk reduction activities in local development plans increased from
         3.50% to 85%, surpassing the target of 29%. The percentage of municipalities that updated their local
         DRM Committees in line with the national DRM roadmap increased to 69%, surpassing the target of
         15%.
        The number of educational facilities that complied with the technical criteria adopted by the Ministry of
         Education increased from 100 to 3,497, exceeding the target of 220.
        The INSIVUVMEH was restructured to provide enhanced hazard information related to volcanic
         activity.
        The Executive Secretariat of the National Coordinator for Disaster Reduction adopted the updated
         National Humanitarian Assistance Manual for coordinating humanitarian assistance.
        25 local communities completed and disseminated environmental risk evaluations, as per the target.
        Although the draft of the law to strengthen the legal framework for DRM was submitted by the
         Executive Branch, the bill was not yet approved by Congress when the operation closed. The team
         clarified that the bill has not been approved to date. The Bank's CPF for 2024 - 2027 recognized that
         an integrated disaster risk management strategy is necessary to address vulnerabilities and focus on
         prevention proactively. Therefore, the pending approval of the DRM into law creates a significant gap
         between the regulatory and institutional frameworks for DRM.

Efficacy of this objective is rated as moderately satisfactory. Although the operation contributed to
strengthening the institutional framework, the extent to which it contributed to strengthening the legal
framework is unclear, pending approval of the bill submitted to the congress.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO 2. To help strengthen Guatemala's financial framework to manage the impact of adverse natural events
and climate risk.

PAs B1-B3.                                    RIs 7- 13.

Rationale
Theory of Change. Policy reforms in this area aimed to strengthen the financial framework for managing the
impacts of natural events and climate risk. Reforms such as adoption of a DRF strategy by MINFIN to
promote diversification of disaster-related financial instruments, creation of the position of Fiscal
Transparency and Procurement Minister within MINFIN to and enhancing the thematic budget classifiers'
governing bodies, were likely to help in strengthening the financial framework for managing the impacts of
adverse natural events and climate risk. The outcomes were monitorable. The intended outcomes were


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 18
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Guatemala DRM DPL with CAT DDO II (P159710)



                      predicated on these assumptions: One, the Government adopts and implements the DRF strategy; and (ii)
                      Through TA the World Bank and the Government maintain an effective dialogue during implementation.

                      Outcomes.

                            Two new financial instruments were established as part of the DRFS as targeted: Cat DDO 11 and
                               parametric insurance for excess rainfall from the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Facility Segregated
                               Portfolio Company (CCRIF SPC). In addition, the government negotiated a contingent credit line of up
                               to US$400 million with the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB)., The ICR (page 14) noted that the
                               Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Food (MAGA) was also piloting agricultural insurance to provide
                               economic coverage for small producers affected by intense rainfall or prolonged draught.
                              The response time for providing emergency funds after the declaration of emergency was 14 days
                               was the same as at the baseline. In 2021, following the impact of Tropical Storm Eta, Guatemala
                               declared a state of emergency and the CCRIF payout was received within 14 days after the event.
                               However, in the case of this operation, following the Government's request for responding to the
                               COVID-19 pandemic, the loan proceeds were made available to the Government in less than a week.
                              MINFIN adopted the operational manual for implementing the DRFS as targeted.
                              Three new emergency emergency procurement and mechanisms were in place for dealing with
                               adverse natural events when the operation closed, exceeding the target of two.
                              Twelve fiscal risk budget reports were elaborated by the Directorate of Fiscal Transparency that
                               considered natural hazards and climate risks, exceeding the target of four.
                              One government institution (Executive Secretariat of the National Coordinator for Disaster Reduction
                               (SECONRED) implemented thematic classifiers in DRM, short of the target of two.
                              An annually funded National DRM Fund was not operational when the operation closed, due to
                               pending Congress approval.

                      Given that there were moderate shortcomings in the achievement of some indicators, efficacy of this PDO is
                      rated as moderately satisfactory.



                      Rating

                      Moderately Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Overall efficacy is rated as moderately satisfactory. While the operation strengthened the institutional framework
for DRM and CCA, the extent to which it helped in strengthening the legislative framework was modest. Likewise,
while the operation did help in strengthening Guatemala's financial framework to manage the impact of adverse
natural events and climate risk, two of the key outcomes were not met.




                                                                                                                      Page 13 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Guatemala DRM DPL with CAT DDO II (P159710)




Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory


6. Outcome

Rationale

The PDO was highly relevant to the Government strategy and the current Bank strategy for Guatemala. There is
an explicit, comprehensive and convincing results chain linking the prior actions to the achievement of the PDO,
grounded in credible analytical work at the country level. Therefore, the overall outcome is rated as moderately
satisfactory.While the operation did succeed in strengthening the institutional and financial framework, the
extent to which the operation succeeded in strengthening the legal framework for DRM was limited.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government Commitment. There is risk to development outcome, given that the proposed law on DRM
framework and operationalization of the Permanent DRM fund is still pending approval by Congress. The
ICR (para 44) notes that the National Coordination for Disaster Reduction (CONRED) lacks the authority and
capacity to sanction sectors and municipalities that do not comply with the regulations. Further, the ICR (para
47) notes that the implementation of the budget classifier remains inconsistent across government
institutions.

Governance risk. There is risk to sustainability of development outcomes, given the issue of low
governance in municipalities. This coupled with a lack of technical capacity, poses significant challenges to
the implementation of DRM initiatives.


 8. Assessment of Bank Performance

 a. Bank Performance – Design

 Rationale


The Bank prepared this operation based on robust analytical underpinnings such as the Bank's SCD. The
analytical basis for the prior actions were sound. The Bank prepared this CAT-DDO based on lessons from
previous Bank-financed CAT- DDO operation in Guatemala and experiences from Bank-financed CAT-
DDO operations in Colombia, El Salvador and Philippines. Lessons incorporated at design included: (i)
defining the monitoring and implementation arrangements with the Government early on: (ii) reaching


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Guatemala DRM DPL with CAT DDO II (P159710)



agreement on the financial, legal and technical aspects of activating the revolving mechanism; and (iii)
complementing financing with technical assistance (PD, para 38). The indicators were linked to the Prior
Actions and the policy reforms supported by the operation. The data sources for monitoring progress were
clearly specified. However, some of the indicators were not always clear or ambitious measures of
progress.

The Bank prepared this operation with an extensive consultation process (including with government
agencies, the private sector, academia and civil society) and in close collaboration with IADB, the United
Nations Development Program (UNDP) and the German Reconstruction Credit Institute (KfW).

The Bank identified several risks at appraisal, including High risk for enactment of the new law, political
and governance risks, substantial risks with the weak institutional capacity and fiduciary risks. The Bank
incorporated several mitigation measures. With these measures, the overall risk was rated as substantial
(PD, page 35). In relation to the potential impact of the non-approval of the DRM Law during the validity
period of the Cat-DDO, the Bank team conducted a thorough analysis to highlight the potential
consequences and propose alternative policies to address the objective for the Permanent National Fund.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The Bank conducted semi-annual missions to assess progress towards expected results and to monitor
progress. The Bank maintained a close dialogue with the Government and relevant stakeholders during
implementation. The Ministry of Public Finance, in collaboration with the Bank and with support from a Multi-
Donor Trust Fund organized a discussion on DRFM, with a focus on the Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown
Option.

Bank performance during implementation is rated as satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Overall Bank performance is rated as satisfactory.


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guatemala DRM DPL with CAT DDO II (P159710)




Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

A Poverty and Social Impact Analysis conducted in October 2018 and revised in January 2019, confirmed a
positive indirect impact on poverty and social development indicators.



b. Environmental

Through a prior action of this operation, the Government established the Comprehensive Environmental Risk
Management within the MARN. This department produced and distributed 25 local environmental risk
assessments by 2021 and provided community training to safeguard strategic ecosystems and associated
livelihoods.



c. Gender

There were no gender dimensions to this operation.



d. Other

Not applicable.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR is well written. The theory of change provided in the text clearly shows the causal links between the
reform areas and the intended outcomes. The ICR provides adequate evidence for assessing the operation's
performance. The ICR candidly acknowledges the issues with one prior action in the country context. The ICR
draws useful lessons from the experience of implementing this project.




                                                                                                 Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guatemala DRM DPL with CAT DDO II (P159710)




a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreement/Comments
                                                                                While the operation did succeed
                                                                                in strengthening the institutional
                                                                                and financial framework, the
                                                                                extent to which the operation
                                                                                succeeded in strengthening the
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   legal framework for DRM was
                                                                                limited. The ICRR rating of
                                                                                moderately satisfactory is
                                                                                consistent with the rating for
                                                                                outcome provided in ICR (page
                                                                                16).
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                ---                   Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lesson from the experience of implementing this operation, with some
adaptation of language.

The World Bank's administrative process of classifying a Cat DDO as closed once the contingent credit
line is disbursed, can hamper the ability of the Bank to continue supervising progress on the policy
reform agenda. The ICR notes that once a cat DDO is fully disbursed, the Bank, for administrative purposes,
reclassifies the operation as closed, even if the entire withdrawal happens early during the expected three-year
implementation phase, as happened in this operation. The entire loan was disbursed soon after the project
became effective in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. This created challenges to the Bank team's efforts to
continue supervising progress.

The IEG would disagree with the ICR's lessons on results indicators and instead draws the following lesson.

When legislation is necessary for achieving outcomes, having an indicator that monitors the enactment
of the law provides useful evidence on effectiveness. Non-adoption of the law as in this operation shows
that the prior action was not yet able to achieve its intended outcome. Hence the indicator achieved its purpose
of monitoring progress of the supported reform.



                                                                                                   Page 17 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guatemala DRM DPL with CAT DDO II (P159710)



13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                  Page 18 of 18
