     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM-Health System Performance Project (P156679)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023843

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P156679                                    CM-Health System Performance Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Cameroon                                   Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-57900,IDA-62250,IDA-D3000,TF-          31-May-2021                                         105,241,025.58
 A2177

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 03-May-2016                                31-Dec-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          127,000,000.00                                     27,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           133,000,000.00                                     27,000,000.00

 Actual                                       105,241,025.58                                     14,606,386.44




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Maria De Las Mercedes       Salim J. Habayeb             Susan Ann Caceres               IEGHC (Unit 2)
 Vellez




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financial Agreement (dated September 14th, 2016), the project’s development objective
   (PDO) was “to increase utilization and improve the quality of health services with a particular focus on
   reproductive, maternal, child and adolescent health and nutrition services”.

   The Additional Financing (AF) in May 2018 reformulated the PDO “to: (i) increase utilization and improve the
   quality of health services with a particular focus on reproductive, maternal, child and adolescent health, and

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM-Health System Performance Project (P156679)



   nutritional services for the population of Cameroon, including refugees and refugee host communities, and (ii)
   in the event of an Eligible Emergency, to provide immediate and effective response to said Eligible
   Emergency”.

   The project’s AF during the first project restructuring widened the scope of the project’s development
   objectives by i) adding an emergency response component, and ii) explicitly including refugees and host
   communities in the PDO statement, which were originally part of the project’s direct beneficiaries (see PAD
   p.6). As a result, the project introduced additional indicators to the Results Framework to measure the new
   parts of the PDO. In addition, the project’s closing date was extended to December 2022, and the indicators’
   targets were revised upwards for existing indicators to capture the additional 18 months of implementation.
   The project became more ambitious, encompassing refugee services, including an emergency response
   objective, and increasing indicators targets. Therefore, according to IEG guidelines, no split rating is needed.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Originally the project had two components.

   Component 1: Strengthening of Health Service Delivery (planned US$89 million IDA, US$20 million
   Global Financing Facility (GFF); actual US$82.5 million). This component had three sub-components:

   1.1: Payment of performance: supporting the implementation of the ongoing Performance-Based
   Financing (PBF) mechanism across the original 44 health districts financed by the previous operation, and
   the incremental rollout of the PBF to national coverage across all the ten regions (North-West, South-West,
   East, Littoral, Centre, West, South, Far North, North and Adamawa).

   PBF payments were to be provided: (i) to health facilities quarterly conditional on the quantity and quality of
   Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn, Child, and Adolescent Health (RMNCAH) services delivered via in-clinic
   activities and/or via health-outreach activities, and verified (ex-ante and ex-post), and (ii) to community
   health workers for providing selected basic preventive, promotional, referral and curative health services,
   including Integrated Management of Childhood Illness (IMCI). This sub-component also aimed at
   introducing fee waivers for selected essential services as a mechanism for vulnerable households to
   increase the uptake of health services.

   1.2: Support to the implementation and supervision of PBF: supporting Contract Development and
   Verification Agencies (CDVA) covering each region, using either the Regional Fund for Health Promotion or
   NGOs, through training and capacity-building activities related to best practices and implementation

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  CM-Health System Performance Project (P156679)



approaches in PBF using a “snowball training” approach or “training of trainers” program at the central level,
regional, district and health facility levels. This sub-component provided support for technical assistance in
rolling out PBF to regional and tertiary-level hospitals in the Country, which are financed by public budget
and internal revenue generation.

1.3: Additional support for improving access to a key package of RMNCAH and nutrition services:
supporting non-PBF activities identified as priorities without current funding commitments within the GFF
Investment Case, which includes critical inputs to reinforce the availability and quality of nutrition services.



Component 2: Institutional Strengthening for Improved Health System Performance (planned US$11
million IDA and US$7 million GFF; actual US$8.4 million). This component had three sub-components:

2.1: Strengthening institutional capacities for improved health system stewardship, including
monitoring and evaluation (M&E): supporting the Ministry of Public Health (MoPH) through analytical
work and policy dialogue on i) Enhancing pharmaceutical sector regulation ii) Implementing judicial reforms
for decentralized decision-making and autonomy of health service providers and regulators iii) Reforming
health workforce regulations to enhance service availability and quality, especially in rural areas iv) Creating
a comprehensive community health strategy focused on practical results v) Engaging private and faith-
based health sectors through strategic contracts. This sub-component will also support the development
and implementation of the country’s national health financing strategy entailing a public expenditure review
for the health sector, two rounds of national health accounts, and a study on public financial management
(conducted jointly with WHO), other key studies, and trainings and workshops related to the design of the
strategy. It included other investments related to improving reliable data systems for the PBF project
through the District Health Information Software 2 (DHIS2) platforms and the national portal, as well as two
rounds of Service Delivery Indicator Surveys (SDIs). Finally, this sub-component encompassed the ex-post
verification activities to be conducted by an independent third party and the External Evaluation Agency
(EEA) that the MoPH would contract to check the veracity of the information provided by the health facilities.
The EEA’s roles will include ex-post fact verification of service volumes and quality delivered by health
facilities contracted with the CDVA and for which PBF payments have been made.

2.2: Reinforcement of civil registration and vital statistics systems: supporting the building of the
national civil registration and vital statistics systems, through the National Office of Civil Registration. CRVS
systems would also be indirectly supported through activities included in other subcomponents such as
those related to the expansion of DHIS2 systems and general support to PBF indicators linked to civil
registration such as birth registration.

2.3: Program coordination: covering the operating costs of the PBF national technical unit (Celulle
Technique Nationale or National Technical Unit - CTN) for activities related to the project and the PBF
program, including internal performance contracts with other MoPH departments.



The AF in May 2018 included the addition of two components:

Component 3: Strengthening emergency, sexual and reproductive health services, and water,
sanitation, and hygiene, and nutrition service delivery for refugees and host communities in the


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CM-Health System Performance Project (P156679)



  Northern regions and East (planned US$0 million, first restructuring allocation US$10 million IDA18
  RSW; actual US$0 million).

  3.1 PBF payments: financing PBF payments for carrying out activities to a) encourage development of
  norms, guidelines and training modules on i) emergency health services and life-saving sexual and
  reproductive services, including management of rape and GBV; ii) nutrition, deworming, water sanitation
  and hygiene at schools, health facilities, community level including refugee camps; iii) mental health and
  psychosocial support programs for refugees, internally displaced people and communities hosting refugees;
  iv) biomedical waste management; and b) strengthening institutional capacity building including i) provision
  of sensitivity training of frontline health professionals, and community health workers (CHW), and
  community-based organizations (including refugee population, community hosting refugees, and civil
  registration officers), ii) training to health professionals on basic and emergency obstetric and newborn care,
  and iii) training to health professionals and CHW on the management of GBV, mental health, nutrition,
  neglected tropical diseases, biomedical waste management and water sanitation and hygiene.

  3.2 Program on water, sanitation, and hygiene: carrying out a program of water, sanitation, and hygiene,
  including support for a) analytical work, and b) strengthening health communication toward good sanitation
  and hygiene behaviors among refugees and host community populations (Financing Agreement for AF
  December 2018).

  Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response Component (planned US$0 million; first
  restructuring allocation US$0 million; actual US$6 million). This sub-component was introduced at the
  first restructuring providing the project with a critical funding package to respond to emergency crises,
  including financing for the rehabilitation of health facilities, purchase of medical equipment, other
  commodities and supplies needed to increase the Government of Cameroon’s (GoC) response capacity.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  The project was approved in May 2016, became effective in December 2016, and the expected closing date
  was in May 2021. Total project costs were estimated at US$127 million at appraisal to be financed by an
  IDA credit (US$100 million) and a GFF grant (US$27 million). There was no borrower contribution to project
  costs.

  The project was restructured three times:

  The first restructuring in May 2018 involved an Additional Financing (AF) through an IDA credit (US$6
  million) and an IDA18 Refugee Sub-Window Grant (RSW) (US$30 million) requested by the GoC in
  response to the worsening security crisis. The restructuring involved: i) the allocation of additional resources
  to Component 1 for PBF payments in refugee-affected areas (US$6 million IDA18 credit and US$15 million
  IDA18 RSW); ii) the allocation of additional resources under Component 2 to reinforce selected activities in
  refugee-affected areas (US$5 million IDA18 RSW); iii) the addition of Component 3 which was provided an
  allocation of US$10 million from IDA18 RSW; and iv) the addition of Component 4 with a zero-dollar
  allocation as a Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC); v) the extension of project’s closing
  date from May 2021 to December 2022. Due to delays in complying with legal covenants, the AF took 13
  months to become effective eventually in June 2019.




                                                                                                    Page 4 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM-Health System Performance Project (P156679)



   The second restructuring approved on August 13, 2020, followed the activation of the CERC during the
   COVID-19 pandemic and included i) the extension of the project’s GFF grant closing date to December
   2022 to be aligned with the AF; ii) the reallocation of US$6 million from the IDA18 Credit added during the
   previous AF to support the country’s national response plan to the pandemic; and (iii) the revision of Results
   Framework.

   The third and final restructuring in December 2022 canceled the full undisbursed amount of the IDA18 RSW
   for SDR 20.8 million (see quality of supervision and efficiency sections for further details).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project’s objectives were relevant to the country’s needs. The country’s context at the time of approval
was characterized by:

i) a deterioration of the Human Development Index (HDI) and suboptimal progress on health outcomes
(e.g., reduction in under-5 mortality from 138 per 1,000 live births to 88 between 1990-2015 were short of
the target of 46 set under the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), maternal mortality ratio had
increased from 728 in 1990 to 782 per 1,000 live births in 2011, malnutrition remained a widespread
challenge with 32 percent of children stunted);

ii) regional disparities in access to health services and health outcomes (e.g., institutional delivery
rates in the North and Far North at 29 percent and 35 percent, respectively, were particularly lower than
those observed in Douala (99 percent) or West and Northwest region (96 percent), high stunting rates
predominantly affected the three Northern regions and the East);

iii) low and inefficient public health expenditures (e.g., public health expenditures represented 8.5
percent of total government expenditures in 2013 and had been stagnant since 2000, households bore the
large share of health expenditure (52.2 percent) almost exclusively through out-of-pocket expenditures);
and

iv) low quality of health services (e.g., in terms of human resources, Cameroon was far from the WHO
standards with approximately 11 qualified healthcare personnel per 10,000 inhabitants, experiencing high
levels of absenteeism and poor technical quality of personnel, the pharmaceutical sector and the public
central medical store suffered from serious governance issues and poor planning capabilities, which
compromised quality of supplies, cash flow issues and frequent stock-outs).

The revised PDO also reflected the heightened refugee crisis and emergencies in Cameroon. The growing
humanitarian crisis exacerbated the existing health challenges and the revised project objectives
continued to be relevant. The deterioration of the security situation in Northern Cameroon since 2014
resulted in displacements, and food insecurity and had a negative impact on health outcomes. It was
estimated that 2.4 million people in the Far North region were food insecure and 250,000 persons suffered
from malnutrition. The activation of the CERC responded to the COVID-19 pandemic.



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CM-Health System Performance Project (P156679)



               In terms of country priorities, the GoC had identified the expansion of the PBF model as a key strategy for
               health system strengthening towards national universal health coverage goals, higher quality of health
               services, and reduced out-of-pocket expenditure. Supporting PBF was one of the priority strategies of the
               World Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy for Cameroon 2010-2014, the 2015 Systematic Country
               Diagnostic, and the Country Partnership Framework FY17-FY21. In addition, the project objectives were
               relevant to Cameroon’s Strategic Plan for the National Multisectoral Program for Combating Maternal,
               Newborn & Child Mortality in Cameroon (2014-2020), the Strategic Plan for Reproductive, Maternal,
               Neonatal and Infant Health (2014-2020), the National Strategic Plan for Adolescent and Youth Health in
               Cameroon (2015-2019), and the Health System Strategy (2016-2027) toward the vision of Cameroon being
               a country with universal access to quality health services by 2030. The revised PDO continued to be
               relevant and was coherent with National and World Bank priorities and the increased vulnerability and
               poverty of certain populations of regions of the country.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase utilization of health services with a particular focus on reproductive, maternal, child and
                             adolescent health, and nutritional services for the population of Cameroon, including refugees and refugee
                             host communities.

                             Rationale
                             PBF was a key strategy to strengthen health service delivery and increase access to essential reproductive
                             and nutrition services by the population. From the supply side, performance-based payments to health
                             facilities were central for incentivizing both the quantity of services delivered and the quality of health
                             services.

                             From the project’s activities depicted in the theory of change, it was reasonably expected that PBF payments
                             to health facilities and community health workers combined with efforts toward reforming health workforce
                             regulations to enhance service availability, strengthening health data stewardship, and improving contract
                             management capacity would lead to the increased supply of quality services. Previous empirical evidence
                             shows that paying for results can contribute to improving service utilization. A rigorous impact evaluation
                             covering the PBF program from 2012 to 2015 highlights the positive impacts of the PBF on some service
                             utilization indicators, namely child and maternal vaccinations, and the use of modern family planning (De
                             Walque et al., 2021).

                             On the demand side, it was plausible to expect that the introduction of fee waivers for selected essential
                             services would reduce financial barriers to access and increase the uptake of health services. In addition,
                             community-based approaches for preventive, promotional, and referral services would reasonably lead to

                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CM-Health System Performance Project (P156679)



improved access to reproductive health and nutrition services. Interventions under the GFF investment case,
such as social communication and behavioral campaigns in health and nutrition; and the pilot of Kangaroo
mother care would also contribute to reducing socio-cultural barriers and improve utilization and health
outcomes.

Outputs

      The project contributed to the successful expansion of the PBF program, increasing coverage from
       25% of the national population in 2016 to 100% by the project's closure, thereby surpassing the 95%
       coverage target. A total of 4,009 health facilities were gradually enrolled in the PBF model across 194
       health districts.

Intermediate Outcomes

      The corporate results indicator, measuring the number of people who received essential health
       nutrition and population (HNP) services, reached a total of 7.77 million (including 4.28 million
       women), surpassing both the original target of 5,520,987, and the revised target of 6,020,987 people.
       Despite the indicator description not specifying the geographical coverage, the ICR assumes it is
       limited to the beneficiaries of the four most vulnerable regions (Adamawa, North, Far North, and East).
       The increased delivery of services from the beginning of the project remains uncertain, as the baseline
       value set at appraisal was zero, even though the PBF had already been functioning in some of these
       regions since 2012. According to Table 4 in PAD p.50, the percentage population covered by the PBF
       in 2015 was 35% in Adamawa, 29% in the North, 42% in the Far North, and 98% in the East.
       Additional evidence provided by ICR (p.16) from the PBF portal, which was not accounted for in the
       results framework, shows that the provision of HNP services in the six remaining regions (i.e., Center,
       Littoral, North-West, West, South, South-West) increased from 423,000 in 2018 to 5.10 million people
       at project closure.
      Referrals to the health facilities by community health workers also proved successful, reaching
       1,480,159 patients against original and revised targets of 243,890 and 1,403,217 patients,
       respectively. However, this indicator does not specify whether it covers all or just the four more
       vulnerable regions.
      In terms of affordability, the number of consultations provided to the poor and vulnerable free of
       charge partially met the target, reaching 1,224,221 people. However, this achievement falls below
       both the original target (1,302,057 people, achieving 94%) and the revised target (1,502,057 people,
       achieving 81%).

Outcomes

The project’s achievements in terms of reproductive health services were positive:

      The new indicators added in 2020 to capture the reproductive health dimension show that the number
       of acceptors of modern contraception in the three Northern regions (Adamawa, North, Far North)
       and the East reached 1,307,472 women of reproductive age, surpassing the target of 1,292,020.
       Furthermore, acceptors of modern contraception among adolescents reached 103,337 adolescents,
       against a target of 100,865. The ICR’s estimated modern contraceptive prevalence rate in 2021 shows
       modest increases for Adamaoua, North and Far North (i.e., from 9% in 2018 to 10% in 2021 in
       Adamaoua; from 12% to 15% in Nord; from 4% to 8% in Far Nord; and from 11% to 25% in East).

                                                                                                 Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CM-Health System Performance Project (P156679)




      The number of pregnant women receiving at least 4 antenatal care visits in the three Northern
       regions (Adamawa, North, Far North) and the East increased to 840,517, surpassing the target of
       814,656. It is worth noting that this indicator was originally measured in percentages, expressing
       coverage rates, but was modified in the 2020 restructuring. The ICR does not offer estimated
       coverage rates, unlike other utilization indicators.
      The number of deliveries attended by skilled health personnel in the three Northern regions and
       the East reached 868,025, surpassing the target of 713,379 attended deliveries. The ICR’s estimated
       skilled birth attendance rate in 2021 for these four regions is 49.75%, which is about 90 percent of the
       original project target (55 percent). Estimates show, however, large disparities amongst the four
       regions: Adamaoua 59%, North 44%, Far North 36%, and East 60%). Increases in skilled birth
       attendance rates compared to MIC survey data in 2014 (provided by the PAP p.3, and ICR p.6) seem
       substantial considering that the northern regions also have the fewest assisted deliveries (North 35%
       of births, Far North 29% of births). Additional evidence provided by ICR (p.16) from the PBF portal,
       which was not accounted for in the results framework, shows that assisted birth deliveries in the six
       remaining regions also increased from 95,000 in 2018 to 920,000 at the project closure.
      The number of children immunized (aged 1 to 11 months old that received the third dose of the
       Pentavalent vaccine) in the three Northern regions and the East reached 1,393,670, surpassing the
       target of 737,048. ICR’s estimates show that immunization rates increased from a baseline of 68% to
       78.5% in 2021 slightly below the original target of 80% stated at the PAD. These estimates are
       relatively consistent with the official statistics for Cameroon for 2021 (81 percent). There were,
       however, large disparities across the four regions: vaccination rates were 79% in Adamaoua, 66% in
       Nord, 73% in Far North, and 96% in the East region. Additional data from ICR also shows that over
       740,000 children were immunized in the six remaining regions at the end of the project, against an
       initial 102,000 children in 2018.

The project’s achievements in terms of nutrition-related results were mixed:

      Overall, the number of women and children who have received basic nutrition services in the
       four vulnerable regions reached 5,509,371, surpassing the target of 4,570,560.
      The number of children and pregnant women dewormed reached 2,113,253, about 60%
       achievement from the target of 3,520,000.
      The number of children under 24 months being weighed for growth monitoring in the three
       Northern regions (Adamawa, North, Far North) and the East reached 2,342,533 children, exceeding
       the original target of 1,608,480, but falling below the revised target of 3,689,641.
      The number of children aged 6-59 months who received Vitamin A (in the last six months)
       increased to 3,708,867, surpassing both original (474,286) and revised targets (3,128,788 children).
       The ICR’s estimated coverage rates show that within nutrition services for children, Vitamin A
       coverage in 2021 continued to be low in the Northern regions: by the end of the project, coverage was
       21% in Adamaoua, 32% in Nord, 22% in Far Nord, and 61% in East regions. Without baseline rates or
       additional data points, it is not possible to determine appropriate increments for Vitamin A coverage
       rates.

The project’s achievements in increasing the utilization of healthcare services by refugee communities
were negligible:

      The target for the number of refugees who have received healthcare (curative and preventative)
       at health facilities in the three northern (Adamawa, North, Far North) and the East was not met. No

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CM-Health System Performance Project (P156679)



       data was reported and no activities were carried out toward the improvement of healthcare services by
       refugees and hosted communities. This is because about 85 percent of the financing from the AF (the
       full amount for the RSW financing) for activities targeting refugees and hosted communities was
       canceled. The remaining funds (US$6 million from the IDA credit) were utilized under Component 1
       and contributed to covering the overrun of verification costs under Sub-Component 2.1. The GoC
       request for fund cancellations in December 2022 was not followed by a change in the PDO.
      As mentioned in the M&E section below, the indicators for utilization reported under the project had a
       focus on the four more disadvantaged regions (i.e., Adamaoua, North, Far North and East), although
       the project rollout the PBF model nationwide. Furthermore, increments from baseline cannot be
       established in most cases since baselines were set to zero even though the PBF has been
       implemented since 2012 in some health districts across regions. ICR’s efforts to overcome the
       project’s M&E shortcomings are commendable. However, estimated coverage rates cannot be
       compared in most cases with target values or increments from baselines, as they represent single
       data points at the end of the project.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the quality of health services with a particular focus on reproductive, maternal, child and
adolescent health, and nutritional services.

Rationale
As mentioned before, PBF to health facilities was central to incentivizing the quality of health services
delivered. Implementing performance-based payments requires defining clear and measurable quality
metrics. The design of the quality checklist provided the foundation for measuring results related to the
rational prescribing of generic drugs, essential drug management, and availability of tracer drugs, among
others, with increased weights given to process measures. By tying payment directly to quality metrics,
service providers are incentivized to continuously improve their processes, skills, and resources.

Unlike service utilization indicators, project indicators measuring the quality of services had a national
coverage to account for the expansion of the PBF model throughout the project.

Outputs

      The percentage of facilities with 100 percent tracer drugs (available in targeted health facilities on
       the day of the visit) increased from 20% in 2016 to 59%, surpassing the target of 40%.

Intermediate Outcomes

      The percentage of reported maternal deaths audited in PBF districts increased to 53.9%,
       surpassing the target of 25%.



                                                                                                     Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CM-Health System Performance Project (P156679)



Outcomes

      The average score of the quality-of-care checklist across regions increased from 30% at baseline
       to 76.84%, surpassing the target of 50% at the end of the project.

Nevertheless, this ICRR highlights three shortcomings regarding the evidence provided:

Lack of meaningful targets: As detailed in the M&E section below, the project set a baseline value of 30%
for the quality score. However, this baseline aligns closely with the average scores recorded in 2012 (33%),
and the anticipated target for 2021, set at 50%, falls below the average recorded in 2015 (65%). This
discrepancy raises questions about the ambition of the target-setting process.

Insufficient details on Quality Checklist: Neither the PAD nor the ICR offers the specific measures
included in the quality checklist, nor do they provide insights into the weighting applied during the score
calculations. The IEG’s 2018 Health Services evaluation recommended a shift towards incorporating more
process or outcome quality indicators instead of solely relying on structural quality indicators, which typically
measure outputs. The absence of clarity underscores the insufficiency of evidence for conducting a thorough
assessment of the enhancement in service quality, and hence this objective is rated substantial instead of
high. ICR p.18 also acknowledges that there was limited attention paid to unpacking results, such as the
quality-of-care scores, in supervision documentation such as aide-mémoires and ISRs, which predominantly
focused on fiduciary and project management issues.

Insufficient evidence on completion of activities for Component 2: According to the project’s Theory of
Change efforts toward reforming health workforce regulations to enhance service availability, strengthening
health data stewardship, and improving contract management capacity would contribute to increasing the
quality of services. However, neither the Results Framework nor the ICR provided evidence on the progress
of such activities funded by Component 2.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
In the event of an Eligible Emergency, to provide immediate and effective response to said Eligible
Emergency.

Rationale
The addition of the CERC as Component 4 gave the project more flexibility to respond to unforeseen crises.
The COVID-19 crisis in 2020 triggered the need to activate the CERC and support the country’s limited
capacity to respond to and deal with the effects of the pandemic.

The first batch of medical equipment which included ventilators, thermoflash, defibrillators, COVID-19 testing
kits, and protective equipment was delivered to the GoC in April and May 2020 through a UNDP procurement



                                                                                                   Page 10 of 22
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                CM-Health System Performance Project (P156679)



                            funded by the World Bank and the Global Fund. Additional batches would be ordered and delivered in the
                            following weeks (Restructuring paper NO.: RES42463).

                            The CTN carried out a supervision mission in December 2022 before project closure confirming the
                            distribution of health equipment to health facilities in 10 regions of Cameroon. Material included respiratory
                            equipment, sterilization equipment, and personal protective equipment.

                            Output

                                  A total of 11 COVID-19-designated healthcare facilities had the required equipment for the
                                    treatment of critical patients as per the approved national protocol, meeting the target, and
                                    contributing to a swift response to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in terms of
                                    treatment aspects of the response.

                            In addition, the consultations as part of the visit confirmed that the training of trainers of field personnel in the
                            use of respiratory equipment managed by UNDP that was meant to take place had been delivered.

                            At the same time, it is understood that the quick provision of equipment to 11 health facilities to treat COVID-
                            19 patients cannot, on its own, reflect the full achievement of an effective response to the pandemic.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The first objective to increase utilization of maternal and child health services was modestly achieved, due to
                            shortcomings in indicators’ geographic and population coverages and negligible achievements for refugee
                            communities. The second objective of increasing the quality of services was substantially achieved taking into
                            account the shortcomings in the target-setting process, insufficient details on the quality score measure, and
                            insufficient evidence toward efforts undertaken by Component 2. The third objective to provide an immediate
                            and effective response in case of an Eligible Emergency was substantially achieved. The aggregation of
                            achievements under the three objectives is consistent with a substantial rating for overall efficacy.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency


                                                                                                                                   Page 11 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CM-Health System Performance Project (P156679)



The economic and financial analysis provided in both the PAD and the ICR focused on incremental cost-
effectiveness ratios and cost per disability-adjusted life year (DALY) saved, concentrating solely on interventions
funded through Component 1 of the project, which constituted 86% and 85% of total project funding at appraisal
and closing, respectively.

During the appraisal phase, the cost-effectiveness analysis drew upon results from a 2016 impact evaluation
assessing the impact of the PBF pilot (financed by a preceding project) on the quality and utilization of services.
Cost calculations for RMNCAH services included in the package funded by PBF were based on operational and
payment data from 2015 across treatment facilities in four regions: North-West, South-West, East, and Littoral.
Projections for these indicators were derived from the baseline figures, observed trends during the PBF pilot,
and the project's four-year duration. At appraisal, the estimated incremental cost-effectiveness ratio was US$10
per beneficiary, with a slightly higher figure of US$15.5 for female beneficiaries. These estimates were
consistent with comparable maternal and neonatal health initiatives in developing countries, where cost-
effectiveness ratios ranged from US$1 to US$223 per beneficiary.

Additionally, the set of interventions for RMNCAH included in the PBF package was deemed highly cost-
effective, with cost per DALY saved ranging between US$82 to US$142, as supported by various studies across
countries.

However, the efficiency analysis at the appraisal stage exhibited inconsistencies in parameters compared to
baseline and target beneficiary figures as highlighted by the ICR. This discrepancy was likely due to the
preliminary nature of efficiency analysis, often conducted before the finalization of the PAD, leading to the
oversight in capturing adjustments in the results framework. Notably, assumptions on the total number of
beneficiaries (990,606 people) were underestimated considering the different population sub-groups targeted for
each intervention (ICR p.51). The ICR's subsequent estimations of the incremental cost-effectiveness ratio at
project appraisal revealed lower costs per beneficiary (US$7.90 for all beneficiaries and US$11.80 for female
beneficiaries) compared to the PAD. At project closing, the efficiency improved, with the incremental cost-
effectiveness ratio dropping to US$5 per person for all beneficiaries, marking a 37% decrease from the baseline
estimate.

However, the project faced operational and implementation inefficiencies, ranging from significant to major, and
evident in several areas, indicating that project efficiency was barely realized:

(i)The project took nearly 8 months to become effective after its approval. The first disbursement occurred in
January 2017, nearly 9 months after its approval, which resulted in a downgrade in implementation progress just
5 months after project approval. The delay in effectiveness was due to the time taken to satisfy the project's
effectiveness conditions, and the inability to cope with an ambitious pace of PBF expansion, aggravated by the
introduction of a new institutional setup that transferred the project management responsibilities from a
dedicated PIU to the CTN.

(ii)Despite an available envelope of US$133 million, the project disbursed only US$105.5 million, and in the last
18 months, disbursements significantly decreased, indicating an underutilization of resources. In particular, the
project failed to utilize a US$30 million grant allocated for assisting vulnerable refugees in at-risk regions,
primarily due to (a) insufficient technical readiness on the part of CTN to implement the AF within the existing
PBF program, (b) governance and fiduciary concerns surrounding the PBF, which hindered the World Bank's
approval for disbursements via CTN and the PBF mechanism, and (c) the absence of backing from the MoPH to




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CM-Health System Performance Project (P156679)



reconsider implementation arrangements, transitioning from CTN to specialized NGOs, compounded by
ambiguity regarding the role of the UN Refugee Agency (UNHCR).

(iii) A significant portion of the project's budget, amounting to US$30 million or one-third of total expenditure, was
allocated to verifying payments disbursed to health facilities. This verification cost exceeded initial budget
projections by 66.8%. While the GoC contributed minimally to these verification costs through the project, their
substantial direct payments to health facilities were verified using project-supported resources. When factoring
in both project and GoC PBF payments, verification costs represented 20% of PBF expenses. Despite
comparable instances in other Sub-Saharan African countries, the high verification costs in Cameroon were
deemed excessive, considering the context's fiduciary and governance standards.

(iv) An audit of verification agencies conducted between July and September 2023 revealed inefficiencies and a
lack of transparency in their work, significantly impacting project efficiency. While there has been no official
response from the CDVAs, the audit report uncovered a significant amount of ineligible expenditure related to
supervision mission costs, salaries exceeding established salary grids agreed upon for agents, as well as
irregular procurement processes and incomplete financial management documentation, such as annual financial
statements.

(v)Moreover, the findings from the impact evaluation on the pilot of the PBF model showed that outcome
differences between the PBF (treatment group) and the increased financing group (control group where no PBF
verification mechanisms were included) were not statistically significant (De Walque et al., 2021). This suggests
that verification mechanisms do not provide added value but rather increased costs, thereby reducing the cost-
effectiveness of the PBF model with verification mechanisms.




Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives is rated high, as the objectives were responsive to maternal and child health
priorities and were consistent with country and Bank strategies. Overall Efficacy is rated substantial, as the

                                                                                                       Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CM-Health System Performance Project (P156679)



aggregated objectives were almost fully achieved. Efficiency is rated negligible given considerable shortcomings
in the efficiency of implementation, despite the cost-effectiveness estimates of the package of interventions
funded by the PBF. The overall outcome is rated Unsatisfactory, indicative of major shortcomings in the
project’s overall preparation, implementation, and/or achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

While the PBF model experienced a short-term setback following the project's conclusion, with the country
reverting to an input-based approach for health facility and service financing, the ICR affirms the GoC’s
enduring commitment to the PBF approach. The CTN has been retained, with ongoing efforts to redefine the
model, including enhancing institutional arrangements at the regional level, bolstering the CTN, transitioning
to quarterly verification of health facilities and bi-annual assessment of community satisfaction, and instituting
direct payments to Associations Locales (ASLOs) by the CTN.

In terms of financial sustainability, throughout the project's implementation phase spanning 2017 to 2022,
PBF costs accounted for an average of 13 percent of domestic government spending on health. Considering
projections for GDP growth, population expansion, and the trajectory of domestic government spending on
health, sustaining the PBF will necessitate the GoC's commitment to allocating at least 10 percent of its
annual domestic government health expenditure over the next four years (ICR p. 28).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Government commitment and momentum: The MoPH identified the PBF approach as a central
  strategy for the health system. The project was developed with strong political support and during a
  period of significant momentum within the Cameroon health sector.

  However, insufficient internalization of the lessons learned from the previous operation resulted
  in an overambitious project design. While the project’s design built up on the positive experience of
  the PBF model from the previous operation, including as well other regional experiences with
  performance-based approaches in Sub-Saharan Africa, the preparation of the project seemed to overlook
  important factors that affected the previous operation:

  Adding complexity through the institutionalization of the PBF model. A dedicated project
  implementation unit (PIU) was identified as a key factor of the success of the previous operation. This
  project proposed new arrangements to institutionalize the PBF model and facilitate its expansion. These
  were reflected primarily in the transfer of project management responsibilities from a dedicated PIU to the
  CTN. The creation of a new CTN entailed (i) the expansion of the CTN’s mission to implement both the
  previous operation and this project; (ii) the setup of a project technical committee within the Health Sector

                                                                                                      Page 14 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM-Health System Performance Project (P156679)



  Strategy Steering Committee; (iii) the expansion of responsibilities for the procurement tender committee
  at the Ministry of Public Contracts to cover this project as well; (iv) the transfer of appropriate fiduciary
  experts from the original PIU to the CTN); and the need to establish new CDVAs instead of using PBF-
  specialized international NGOs for the management of the payments and verification of services. The
  introduction of this new institutional setup led to delays in disbursement conditions, as evidenced by an 8-
  month delay until effectiveness and a downgrade in implementation progress just 5 months after project
  approval.

  Overambitious scaling up. The paced scale-up was also a key factor of success in previous
  operation. The strong focus on the massive expansion of the PBF coverage from 25 percent of the
  population in 2016 to a target of 95 percent in 5 years underestimated the effort required to establish the
  PBF systems. The pace of scale-up that the project proposed had in retrospect been too ambitious and
  did not enable the country to keep up with the necessary reforms to make it a success.

  Insufficient mitigation measures for similar identified risks. The new financial management and
  procurement responsibilities attributed to the new CTN called for specific actions to mitigate fiduciary
  risks that had also been identified in the previous operation. These challenges included the accumulation
  of debts, the lack of routine contract management at the project level, and the encounter of over
  US$200,000 in ineligible expenditures in the earlier PBF project (SWAP), all meticulously documented in
  the ICR, which rated the Financial Management aspect as Moderately Unsatisfactory. Fiduciary
  assessments and action plans during project preparation in high-risk settings should include more
  nuanced and realistic mitigation measures. As acknowledged by the ICR, no concrete actions or
  measures to specifically address the enhanced fiduciary challenges were recommended in the PAD in
  the light of previous experience.

  The activities to support the GFF Investment Case created additional complexity to what was
  already an ambitious expansion of the PBF project. The project committed (primarily under
  Subcomponent 1.3 for US$20 million) to supporting a wide range of areas of intervention under the GFF
  investment case that was being developed and which were mainly to be led by the National Multisector
  Program To Combat Maternal Newborn and Child Mortality (PLMI). The project design did not clarify
  whether these activities would be performance-based vs. inputs-based financed hindering the approval of
  activities proposed by the PLMI.

  A missed opportunity to leverage the functionality of the PBF portal for M&E design. According to
  the ICR, the project relied on data reported through the web-based PBF portal which included key
  indicators and project results. The Project did have a considerable amount of data that was accessible
  through the PBF portal and was consolidated for reporting against the project’s Results. Considering the
  previous experience in PBF and the functionality of the PBF web-based platform, the project’s M&E
  framework could have been better designed (see M&E section).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CM-Health System Performance Project (P156679)



Supervision of the project was well documented through regular aide memoires and ISRs. The aide
memoires provided a very detailed description of the challenges and concrete recommendations for project
performance to improve. The Bank team was thorough in their follow-up of agreed actions and in setting
clear milestones for the improvements of ratings.

The Bank team invested significant efforts in leveraging the RSW grant resources from 2019 until its
closure in 2022. Regrettably, these efforts did not yield any tangible results. In 2020, collaborative
endeavors between the World Bank, the CTN, and the UN Refugee Agency (UNHCR) aimed to incorporate
UNHCR into the existing MOU for technical assistance (TA) between UNHCR and MoPH. However, the
lack of clarity regarding actual deliverables hindered progress. Similarly, efforts were made to directly
contract NGOs for implementation by the CTN. Although a call for proposals was initiated and proposals
were duly reviewed and accepted by the Bank team, the MoPH did not find this approach acceptable. The
onset of the COVID-19 crisis in 2020 likely diverted attention from utilizing these funds, as the focus shifted
toward activating the CERC and bolstering the country’s limited capacity to manage the pandemic's
repercussions. Ultimately, with less than six months remaining for implementation, a viable mechanism for
utilizing the RSW funds remained elusive.

The institutionalization of the PBF revealed significant technical and leadership shortcomings within the
new CTN, particularly a lack of expertise in PBF for a considerable portion of the project's duration.
According to the ICR, the Bank could have taken a more proactive approach in addressing these capacity
gaps, such as providing technical assistance (TA), offering greater guidance from the Bank team, or
initiating a thorough restructuring as early as 2019. Although the World Bank team acknowledged the
necessity for project restructuring, these actions were often delayed or not implemented at all. Notably, the
final request for project restructuring was submitted in December 2022, despite discussions dating back to
a mission in March 2021 (ICR, p.26). Measures concerning staff management and performance, as agreed
upon during missions and documented in the project's aide memoires, remained largely unaddressed.
Furthermore, the significant expenditure on verification and the performance of verification agencies should
have been scrutinized earlier. An audit of verification agencies was conducted between July and
September 2023.

Furthermore, significant gaps were identified in the monitoring and reporting of Results Frameworks
throughout the implementation phase. Despite the presence of a functional PBF platform, there were
prolonged periods during which no data was reported. Notably, the project failed to report on PDO
indicators from November 2019 to June 2022 (ICR p.26). This lapse can be attributed in part to issues
inadequately addressed in earlier restructuring efforts, such as: (i) the delineation of specific data points
from DHIS2 and the PBF portal; and (ii) the ambiguity surrounding the coverage of certain indicators (e.g.,
whether they applied to four regions or nationwide), which was eventually clarified during the
comprehensive review of the Results Framework in March 2021.

The quality of supervision was further compromised by frequent team changes. The transitions in late
2018, including the shift to a new Task Team Leader (TTL), seemed to have occurred with limited
handover processes. This coincided with changes within the CTN and the departure of the PBF expert,
resulting in a significant loss of expertise in PBF both within the World Bank team and the CTN, which
persisted until the project's conclusion. Moreover, a final TTL transition just five months before project
closure significantly impacted the project's final phase. The new TTL had to lead the final supervision
mission, manage a cancellation process, and ensure the financial closure of this intricate operation.




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM-Health System Performance Project (P156679)



 Furthermore, these transitions were compounded by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which diverted
 attention away from addressing the recommendations made during a mission in late 2019 aimed at
 enhancing project performance. These recommendations, issued by the new TTL, including the imperative
 for restructuring, were sidelined due to the pandemic's exigencies. Both the Bank team and the GoC
 experienced bandwidth constraints due to the demands of processing various COVID-19 operations, such
 as the COVID-19 project approved in May 2020 and effective in September 2021, as well as its AF
 approved in December 2021, and slated for implementation in July 2023.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 At appraisal, the M&E design appeared to be strong on the basis of past experience with the PBF system.
 Objectives were clearly stated and the original results framework contained 7 PDO indicators and 11
 intermediate results indicators (IRIs) in the areas of PBF coverage, affordability, utilization of reproductive
 health and nutrition services, and quality of health services, and most of them were expressed in
 percentages reflecting coverage rates. All indicators had baseline values, description, data collection
 frequency, data sources (mostly from the PBF portal), and responsible unit for data collection.

 However, the following shortcomings impacted the quality of M&E at design:

 (i) In most cases, baselines were set to zero even though the PBF has been implemented since 2012 in
 some health districts across regions.

 (ii) Many indicators reflected achievements of the four vulnerable regions only, although the project rolled
 out the PBF model nationwide.

 (iii) Data on the quality of scores from previous years reported in the PAD shed some doubts about the
 meaningfulness of baselines and target values. According to the PAD (p.42 and figure 3), the average
 quality of care scores for primary healthcare centers increased from an average score of 33% in the third
 quarter of 2012 to an average of 65% in 2015. Therefore, the baseline value of 30% was consistent with
 average scores in 2012 but the expected target in 2021 of 50% was below the average of 2015. In addition,
 the main indicator measuring the quality of services was based on a checklist administered at the facility
 every quarter. Despite having the PBF system running since 2011, the quality checklist was yet to be
 designed for each level of the service package at project appraisal. According to the PAD (p. 14), the
 quality checklist aimed at introducing measures related to rational prescribing of generic drugs, essential
 drug management and availability of tracer drugs, but there was no clear information on what quality
 measures were indeed taken into account in such a checklist.



                                                                                                      Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM-Health System Performance Project (P156679)



 (iv) In addition, the Results Framework was not designed to track progress on activities supported by
 Component 2. According to the project’s Theory of Change, efforts toward reforming health workforce
 regulations to enhance service availability, strengthening health data stewardship, and improving contract
 management capacity would contribute to increasing the quality of services.



b. M&E Implementation
  The relatively large number of PDO indicators was narrowed down during subsequent restructurings.
  Despite adding two indicators to measure utilization by refugees in alignment with the expansion of the
  PDO, some indicators were dropped due to a lack of national survey data to track it regularly; others were
  re-created by the Corporate Results Indicator that included a subset of four indicators related to: (i)
  institutional deliveries; (ii) immunization; (iv) provision of nutrition services; (v) female beneficiaries, and
  most were turned into outputs by measuring the number of people using services instead of coverage
  rates.

  Therefore, there was a missed opportunity to exploit the functionality of the PBF portal by the CTN, as
  acknowledged by the ICR. The lack of clarity regarding the definition of data points from the PBF portal
  for some indicators in the Results Framework hindered the project’s ability to report during ISRs, which
  reflected negatively on the project’s M&E rating for prolonged periods of time, although ratings were
  improved in 2021 after an in-depth review of portal data. In addition, some of the data quality assurance
  processes envisaged in the PBF manual such as the counter-verification of results were not consistently
  implemented throughout the project’s cycle.

  The PAD envisioned that once the HSSIP funds (from the previous operation) had been fully disbursed,
  the original 44 districts would receive financing from this project, and their results would subsequently be
  integrated into the Results Framework of this project, disaggregating results achieved in the newly
  targeted districts from the 44 districts originally covered by the HSSIP. However, this scenario did not
  unfold as anticipated. The indicators for utilization reported under the project primarily focused on the four
  more disadvantaged regions (Adamaoua, North, Far North, and East), despite the nationwide rollout of
  the PBF model by the project.



c. M&E Utilization
  As acknowledged by the ICR, the project could have made better use of the project data to showcase
  achievements and tell the project’s story during its implementation. There was limited attention to data
  monitoring and use toward improving the performance of indicators that lagged behind. This was for
  instance the case of the IRI related to emergency services, for which data were available outside of the
  PBF platform but never reported.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues


                                                                                                       Page 18 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CM-Health System Performance Project (P156679)



a. Safeguards
  The project was classified under Environmental Category B, as it triggered Environmental Assessment
  OP/BP 4.01 given the potential negative environmental impacts related to the handling of medical waste in
  health facilities. As a consequence, a Hygiene and Sanitation Plan was developed. Despite the hiring of a
  qualified environmental specialist by the CTN, reporting on compliance was generally substandard and
  prone to delays according to the ICR (p.24). Assessing whether all planned environmental safeguard
  activities were fully carried out by project closure proved challenging based on the available reporting
  documents.

  Concerning social safeguards, the Indigenous Peoples Policy OP/BP 4.10 was activated during project
  preparation, leading to the development and implementation of an Indigenous Peoples Action Plan by the
  MoPH. The ICR highlights that safeguards-related endeavors in the East region aimed to disseminate
  information to target groups, encompassing the implementation of community risk engagement strategies,
  particularly pertinent in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. Furthermore, a grievance redress
  mechanism system was established as of November 2020. However, its functionality appeared sporadic,
  and a significant number of complaints towards the project's conclusion were linked to delays in payments
  to implementing partners. Regrettably, initiatives concerning Gender-Based Violence (GBV) prevention
  were not carried out due to reliance on funding from the RSW18 grant, which was not executed.
  Additionally, the recruitment process for a GBV expert was protracted and ultimately incomplete.

  As recorded in the Operations Portal the overall Safeguards Rating was moderately satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  The project's Financial Management (FM) was consistently deemed moderately unsatisfactory or
  unsatisfactory throughout its lifecycle. Persistent delays in financial monitoring, providing up-to-date
  accounting and financial information, and absent audit reports contributed to recurring issues such as
  arrears in PBF transfers to health facilities and overdue payments to verification agencies. Additionally, the
  project struggled to effectively manage and utilize the RSW18 window funds. The use of these funds would
  have required readiness and capacity enhancements in FM systems to facilitate additional PBF payments
  to selected facilities.

  A comprehensive review of financial management conducted in the project's final year identified
  weaknesses in operationalizing annual work plans and budgets, managing designated accounts, and
  disseminating and implementing the Project Operations Manual. The review also highlighted organizational
  deficiencies, including inadequacies in justifying expenditure for PBF transfers, payments to verification
  agencies, identifying over US$1.5 million in ineligible expenditures, and significant advances to project
  personnel lacking proper documentation.

  Procurement management was also deemed inadequate during the project with an unsatisfactory rating.
  Poor procurement practices, including deviations from procurement methods, lengthy delays in contract
  award processes, incomplete information, and inadequate tracking of procurement exchanges, were
  observed throughout the project.




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM-Health System Performance Project (P156679)



   Substandard performance management further exacerbated issues, particularly in contract management
   with verification agencies, leading to substantial payment delays. The project exceeded allocations for
   verification and accrued significant debts with these agencies (amounting to US$5.3 million six months
   before the project ended).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR reported no unintended impacts.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                     Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                     Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Unsatisfactory          Unsatisfactory
                                 Moderately              Moderately
Bank Performance
                                 Unsatisfactory          Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                  Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                     Modest


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 28) offered several lessons and recommendations, including the following lessons,
partially re-stated by IEG:

Despite positive momentum, scaling up too quickly can limit the ability to adopt previous
learning and build from experience. The project seized momentum and government commitment
to prioritizing the PBF model. However, the pace of scaling up the project proved to be overly
ambitious, given capacity constraints and the lack of PBF experience of the new national
implementation unit. A more sequential approach would have also helped to fully internalize the
lessons from the previous operations: the conclusions of the ICR and the impact evaluation of the
PBF model of the previous operation were not shared until well into the implementation of this
project, limiting the adoption of recommendations made.

Alternative approaches for PBF verification mechanisms, such as using representative
samples, can offer a more cost-effective solution, especially in resource-limited contexts.
Verification mechanisms may entail trade-offs between effectiveness and efficiency when including
all health facilities. While it potentially contributed to improved health services utilization and quality,
findings from a recent impact evaluation suggest its effectiveness may not be significant. De Walque
et al. 2021 showed that outcome differences between the PBF (treatment group) and the increased

                                                                                                        Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CM-Health System Performance Project (P156679)



financing group (control group where no PBF verification mechanisms were included) were not
statistically significant using data from the PBF pilot phase. The project incurred significant overrun
costs for verification, with a large portion of the budget allocated to this process. Moreover, an audit
of verification agencies revealed inefficiencies and a lack of transparency, further questioning the
value of such verification mechanism. Instead of implementing costly verification arrangements for
all health facilities, the project could have opted for a more targeted approach, that strategically
allocates resources to achieve effective oversight while minimizing costs.

Maintaining continuity within project teams and implementing sound handover arrangements
are critical to ensure effective project implementation and supervision. Implementation
suffered from frequent team changes, notably TTLs from the Bank side and also the departure of the
PBF expert in the CTN, resulting in a significant loss of expertise and continuity in PBF both within
the World Bank team and the CTN, which seemed to have occurred with limited handover
processes, and persisted until the project's conclusion.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a clear and consistent narrative, effectively documenting the project's implementation
experience and challenges. Moreover, it addressed deficiencies in the results framework by calculating
coverage rates for selected service utilization indicators.

However, the report had several shortcomings, including:

i) Failure to describe the activities included in additional components 3 and 4 introduced by the AF;

ii) Inconsistent data regarding restructuring dates and end values of results framework indicators throughout the
document;

iii) Lack of evidence demonstrating progress on activities within component 2 focused on institutional
strengthening, which is expected to contribute to increasing service quality;

iv) Insufficient details on measures included in the quality checklist and their weighting for score calculation.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                       Page 21 of 22
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
CM-Health System Performance Project (P156679)




                                                                              Page 22 of 22
