     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EE in Public Facilities -PRESEMEH (P149872)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0024078

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P149872                                   EE in Public Facilities -PRESEMEH

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Mexico                                    Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-85940,IBRD-88440                     31-Oct-2021                                         51,864,601.61

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 08-Mar-2016                               28-Oct-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          100,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                         46,074,601.61                                             0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Chikako Miwa               Christopher David            Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Nelson




 P160778_TBL
 Project ID                                Project Name
 P160778                                   AF for EE in Public Facilities -PRESEMEH ( P160778 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A7062                                                                                         5790000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EE in Public Facilities -PRESEMEH (P149872)



 30-Mar-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                      0.00                                    5,790,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                       0.00                                    5,790,000.00

 Actual                                                   0.00                                    5,790,000.00




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the project was “to promote the efficient use of energy in the
   Borrower's municipalities by carrying out energy efficiency investments in Selected Municipal Sectors
   and contribute to strengthening the enabling environment” (Loan Agreement dated July 29, 2016,
   Schedule 1, page 7). The PDO statement in the PAD (para 17) was identical to that in the Loan Agreement.
   The Borrower was the United Mexican States (Loan Agreement dated July 29, 2016, page 1).

   In 2018, the PDO was revised to read as: “(i) to promote the efficient use of energy in the Borrower's
   municipalities and other Eligible Public Facilities by carrying out energy efficiency investments in
   selected public sectors; and (ii) to contribute to strengthening the enabling environment” (First
   Amendment to the Loan Agreement dated May 22, 2018, Schedule 1, page 6).

   This ICR Review (ICRR) assesses the following original and revised objectives.

   Objective 1. To promote the efficient use of energy in the Borrower's municipalities by carrying out energy
   efficiency investments in Selected Municipal Sectors.

   Objective 1 Revision 1. To promote the efficient use of energy in the Borrower’s municipalities and other
   Eligible Public Facilities by carrying out energy efficiency investments in selected public sectors.

   Objective 1 Revision 2. The objective statement remained the same as Objective 1 Revision 1, but the Theory
   of Change of the objective and the indicators were revised.

   Objective 1 Revision 3. The objective statement remained the same as Objective 1 Revision 1, but the
   indicators were revised from Objective 1 Revision 2.

   Objective 2. To contribute to strengthening the enabling environment.

   Objective 2 Revision 1. The objective statement remained the same as Objective 2, but the indicators were
   revised.




                                                                                                   Page 2 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EE in Public Facilities -PRESEMEH (P149872)



   Objective 2 Revision 2. The objective statement remained the same as Objective 2, but the Theory of Change
   of the objective and the indicators were revised from Objective 2 Revision 1.

   Objective 2 Revision 3. Same as Objective 2 Revision 2.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  30-Mar-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The cost estimates of project components were based on the PAD (table 1, page 8) and the ICR (table 4.1,
   page 45). The actuals at closing in 2023 were based on the ICR (table 4.1, page 45). The appraisal
   estimates and the actual costs for the components excluded front-end fees.

   Component 1: Policy Development and Institutional Strengthening (Original Estimate (2016): US$7
   million, Revised Estimate (2020): US$2.12 million, Actual: US$2.55 million)

   This component aimed at strengthening the enabling environment for energy efficiency (EE) by financing
   the following activities:

         i. conducting municipal energy efficiency diagnostics to assess energy use and identify energy saving
             in priority areas; and providing capacity-building activities on EE at the municipal and national level;
         ii. conducting of sector-wide capacity-building activities; and
        iii. implementing the project as set forth in the project operational manual (POM).

   The 2020 restructuring changed the sector-wide capacity-building activities from developing a framework to
   scale up EE investments in municipalities to developing three regulatory information tools to support the
   implementation of the national EE strategy.

   Component 2: Municipal Energy Efficiency Investments (Original Estimate (2016): US$148.75 million,
   First Revised Estimate (2018):US$133.82 million, Second Revised Estimate (2020): US$55.19 million,
   Actual: US$53.30 million)

   This component aimed at increasing EE investments in municipalities (i.e., street lighting, water and
   wastewater facilities, and municipal buildings) by financing the following activities:




                                                                                                         Page 3 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    EE in Public Facilities -PRESEMEH (P149872)



       i. implementing municipal energy efficiency subprojects through procuring and installing EE
          appliances (e.g., street lighting fixtures, streetlight management and control systems, water pumps
          and motors, and air conditioning and photovoltaic systems in public buildings); and
      ii. preparing feasibility studies, including detailed energy audits and designs, and bidding documents,
          for the subprojects.

     iii. The 2020 restructuring dropped activities related to municipal buildings, while expanding the target
         municipalities to cover smaller municipalities in addition to the large ones (ICR, table 4.2, page 45).

  The 2021 restructuring dropped activities related to water and wastewater management facilities (ICR, table
  4.2, page 45).

  Component 3: Public Facility Energy Efficiency Investments (Original Estimate (2018): US$70.7 million,
  Revised Estimate (2020): US$9.39 million, Actual: US$9.79 million)

  The 2018 restructuring added this component to the project with additional financing. This component
  aimed at strengthening the enabling environment for EE in public facilities (i.e., schools and hospitals) by
  financing the following activities:

       i. conducting capacity-building activities for EE at eligible public facilities; supporting the development
          of policy and of monitoring, reporting, and verification procedures; and providing targeted energy
          and science education mainly for girls.
      ii. implementing public facility energy efficiency subprojects through procuring and installing EE
          appliances; and preparing feasibility studies, structural safety assessment, and bidding documents
          for the subprojects.

  The 2020 restructuring dropped activities related to schools.

  The 2021 restructuring expanded the target hospitals to cover state-administered health facilities in addition
  to the health facilities under the Mexican Social Security Institute (IMSS: Instituto Mexicano del Seguro
  Social) (ICR, table 4.2, page 45).

  Component 4: Municipal Energy Efficiency Contingency Facility (Original Estimate (2018): US$5.79
  million, Actual: US$5.79 million)

  The 2018 restructuring added this component to the project with additional financing. This component
  financed the capitalization of the Municipal Energy Efficiency Contingency Facility to partially cover the risk
  of default by eligible entities under their respective Energy Service Agreements.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: At appraisal, the project was estimated to be US$156.00 million (PAD, table 1, page 8).
  During implementation, the project cost estimate was increased to US$217.98 million in 2018, and
  subsequently decreased to US$73.15 million in 2020 (ICR, table 4.1, page 45). At project closing, the actual
  cost was US$ 72.10 million (ICR, table 4.1, page 45). The difference of US$1.05 million between the final



                                                                                                      Page 4 of 25
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  EE in Public Facilities -PRESEMEH (P149872)



estimate and the actual cost was mainly caused by cancellations of sub-project investments due to delays
in the procurement and administrative processes (ICR, footnote 65, page 45).

Financing: At appraisal, the project was planned to be financed through loans totaling US$100.00 million
from the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD). In 2018, the total financing
increased to US$155.79 million with an additional financing of US$50.00 million from IBRD to conduct
energy efficiency investments in schools and hospitals and a grant of US$5.79 million from the Global
Environmental Fund (GEF) (ICR, table 4.1, page 45). In 2020, the total financing was decreased to
US$55.79 million due to cancellation of IBRD loan of US$100.00 million (ICR, table 4.1, page 45). At project
closing, the project disbursed a total of US$51.84 million, consisting of US$46.05 million from the IBRD loan
(including the front-end fee of US$0.375 million) and US$5.79 million from the GEF grant (ICR, table 4.1 on
page 45 and annex 3 on page 44). The undisbursed amount was cancelled (Meeting with the Task Team
Leader (TTL) and the ICR author on May 31, 2024, hereafter, Task Team meeting).

Borrower Contribution: At appraisal, the borrowers’ contribution was estimated to be US$56.00 million
(PAD Data Sheet). At project closing, the borrowers’ contribution was US$20.26 million (ICR, table 4.1,
page 45).

Dates and Restructurings: The project was approved on March 8, 2016, and became effective on
September 23, 2016. The Mid-Term Review was reported on October 7, 2019. The project closed on
October 28, 2023, which was 24 months after the original closing date of October 31, 2021.

The project was restructured four times.

      First restructuring (March 30, 2018): The project received an additional financing of US$55.79
       million to implement new components 3 and 4, as described in sections 2.d. and e. In line with the
       additional financing, the project was restructured by: (i) revising the PDO to include other Eligible
       Public Facilities as participants of sub-projects (ICR, paras 11 and 21); (ii) revising the results
       framework through adding new indicators, increasing targets, and upgrading the indicator on
       projected lifetime greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reductions from an Intermediate Results
       indicator to a PDO indicator (ICR, paras 12 and 13); and (iii) assigning the Energy Savings Trust
       Fund (FIDE: Fideicomiso para el Ahorro de Energía Eléctrica) as the implementing agency for
       components 3 and 4 (ICR, para 19). The Project was renamed from Municipal Energy Efficiency
       Project (PRESEM: Proyecto de Eficiencia y Sustentabilidad Energética Municipal) to Energy
       Efficiency in Public Facilities Project (PRESEMEH) (Project Paper dated March 8, 2018).
      Second restructuring (December 18, 2020): The restructuring involved a partial loan cancellation
       of US$100 million, due to (i) the COVID-19 pandemic that resulted in reallocation of the government
       resources to the health emergency response; and (ii) the 2018 national elections which brought in a
       new government with new priorities to address inequality and poverty through strengthened public
       institutions, as described in section 3. The restructuring affected the Theory of Change of (ToC) the
       PDO as the project shifted its focus from reducing energy consumptions in municipalities to reducing
       energy gaps in poorer municipalities by enhancing EE. The restructuring resulted in downsizing
       components 1, 2, and 3, dropping the EE interventions in schools and municipal buildings, and
       changing the target of the enabling environment from that for private entities to the government
       (ICR, para 26). Subsequently, the PDO indicators on energy savings, GHG reductions, and ESAs
       reduced targets, and the PDO indicator on the framework to scale up municipal energy efficiency
       (EE) changed its statement to measure the “number of regulatory tools designed to support the
       implementation of the national EE strategy” (ICR, para 26).

                                                                                                Page 5 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EE in Public Facilities -PRESEMEH (P149872)



         Third restructuring (October 14, 2021): The restructuring extended the project closing date for 18
          months to accommodate for implementation delays caused by (i) a prolonged transition followed by
          the national elections in 2018; (ii) the 2020/2021 restrictions on investments in hospitals and on the
          EE equipment market due to the COVID-19 pandemic; and (iii) municipal elections across the
          country in June 2021 (ICR, para 27). Additionally, the implementing responsibility of component 1
          was transferred from the Secretary of Energy (SENER: Secretaría de Energía) to FIDE under
          SENER’s supervision; because, the new government approved an austerity decree in 2020 which
          limited SENER’s ability to perform several project activities including procurement (ICR, paras 19
          and 65).
         Fourth restructuring (January 26, 2023): The restructuring extended the project closing date for six
          months to complete project activities.

   Split Ratings: IEG concurs with the ICR (footnote 47, page 20) that split ratings are deemed necessary due
   to the substantial changes in the PDO, the project’s ToC, and the project scope during restructurings.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context: At the time of project preparation, Mexico had been conducting structural
reforms in the energy, telecommunications, and financial sectors and implementing a supporting
competition policy (PAD, para 3). In line with the reform, Mexico passed the energy reform legislation
(2013-2014), which aimed at increasing productivity, competition, and overall efficiency in the energy sector
(PAD, para 6). The reform opened domestic energy markets to private sector participation, especially for
exploration and production of hydrocarbons and electricity generation, to increase energy production and
enhance energy security (PAD, para 6). The reform also sought to support the reduction of energy
consumption through energy savings and efficiency initiatives. The National Energy Strategy (ENE:
Estrategia Nacional de Energía, 2014-2028) included energy efficiency (EE) as a transformational priority
area for reducing the country’s vulnerability by decreasing electricity demand, thereby helping lower
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in all sectors and government levels, including local governments (PAD,
para 6). During project implementation which was followed by the 2018 election, the country and sector
context drastically changed due to the change in political administration and the establishment of new
government priorities. The priorities of the new government, which was described in the National
Development Plan 2019-2024, included: addressing inequality, improving the well-being of the population
(especially the poor), strengthening the role of the public sector in the economy, including the role of the
country’s large energy state-owned enterprises, and improving public finances (with austerity measures,
elimination of corruption, reduced indebtedness, and fiscal discipline) (ICR, para 25 and footnote 16, page
11).

Relevance to Government Strategies: At appraisal, the original PDO was aligned with the energy reform
legislation and the ENE, as well as Mexico’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution submitted to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (March, 2015) and the National Climate Change
Strategy (ESNC: Estrategia Nacional de Cambio Climático) that defined a range of actions to achieve these
goals, including a renewed focus on efficient energy use and the transition into the development of
sustainable cities (PAD, paras 3, 4, and 6). At project closing, the revised PDO was in line with


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 25
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      EE in Public Facilities -PRESEMEH (P149872)



               Mexico’s National Program for the Sustainable Use of Energy, derived from the National Development Plan
               (2019-2024), and for Mexico’s climate strategy (ICR, para 30).

               Relevance to the World Bank Assistance Strategies: At appraisal, the original PDO was aligned with
               Pillar I (Unleashing productivity) and Outcome 9 (Strengthened institutional framework to manage urban
               development and reduced GHG emissions) under Pillar IV (Promoting Green and Inclusive Growth) in the
               Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) (FY14-FY19) (CPS, annex 1.A, page 42). At project closing, the
               revised PDO was in line with Objective 6 (Provide more inclusive and sustainable infrastructure services)
               and Objective 7 (Support the government in reaching its climate change goals) under Focus Area C
               (Enabling sustainable infrastructure and climate action) in the Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
               (FY20-FY25) (CPF, annex 1, pages 39-41).

               The World Bank’s Previous Experience in the Sector: The World Bank had experience in the
               development of analytical tools and operational work in EE at the national and municipal levels in Mexico.
               The World Bank supported a study on Low-Carbon Development for Mexico (MEDEC: México: studio sobre
               ladisminución de emisiones de carbono, 2010), which contributed to developing several World Bank
               financed operations addressing EE, such as the MEDEC Low-Carbon Development Policy Lending Loan
               (P121800, FY2011) and the Efficient Lighting and Appliances Project (P106424 and P120654, FY2011).
               Moreover, the World Bank collaborated with Mexico’s participation in the Partnership for Market Readiness
               which aimed to develop Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action Plans on urban EE and refrigerator
               efficiency (PAD, para 14).

               Overall, the project’s original and revised objectives were aligned with the strategies of the government and
               the World Bank’s assistance at appraisal and project closing, respectively. The project adapted to the
               change in government priorities and the COVID-19 pandemic by modifying the PDO statement and the
               project design to maintain the relevance of the PDO, particularly the first objective (i.e., to promote the
               efficient use of energy at the municipal level). On the other hand, the PDO formulation was general and
               vague about the definition of the enabling environment in the second objective (i.e., to contribute to
               strengthening the enabling environment). For instance, the second objective shifted its focus from the
               mobilization of private investment to the strengthening of the public utility due to the change in political
               administration; however, such notable change was not reflected in the PDO statement. Thus, the overall
               relevance of the objectives is rated substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To promote the efficient use of energy in the Borrower's municipalities by carrying out energy efficiency
                             investments in Selected Municipal Sectors [Original Objective]

                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EE in Public Facilities -PRESEMEH (P149872)




Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC): At appraisal, the definition of a ToC was not a requirement (ICR, para 75). The
ICR (figure 1, page 7) presented a reconstructed ToC of the project based on the original and revised project
designs. The ToC aggregated project activities and outputs by components, resulting in an unclear results
chain leading towards outcomes and articulating how the ratings have been reached. Based on the project
documents, this ICRR reconstructs the ToC of Objective 1 as follows.

The ToC postulated that activities such as signing Energy Services Agreements (ESAs) with municipalities to
implement subprojects for EE in municipalities and public facilities, conducting detailed energy audits,
developing subproject designs and bidding documentation, procuring and installing EE appliances would
result in outputs such as target facilities equipped with EE appliances. The outputs were postulated to
contribute to the outcome that EE appliances in facilities operated and maintained and the projected lifetime
energy savings increased. In the long-term, the outcomes were postulated to contribute to the long-term
outcome of the electricity demand and energy consumption decreased.

Critical assumptions included: (i) municipalities commit to the repayment of a portion of the EE investments;
(ii) Mexico commits to the implementation of EE programs and strategies; (iii) the Secretary of Energy
(SENER: Secretaría de Energía) and the Energy Savings Trust Fund (FIDE: Fideicomiso para el Ahorro de
Energía Eléctrica) have ability to implement operations funded by the World Bank; (iv) public institutions
commit to implement the operation; (v) government policy changes will not affect the critical assumptions. In
addition, another potential critical assumption could have been: (vi) achievement of results of strengthening
the enabling environment for EE investments (Objective 2) precede or parallel with progress towards
achievement of this objective.

The ToC was mostly sound with simple and clear causal relationships among activities, outputs, and
outcomes. On the other hand, the critical assumptions (v) and (vi) were not fulfilled, negatively affecting the
achievement of the objective.

Outputs:

      189,682 tones/year of projected lifetime GHG emission reductions were reported, not meeting the
         original target of 463,405 tones/year.
        47 subprojects were designed (i.e., 47 energy audits were conducted), exceeding the original target
         of 28. This target was exceeded due to the high number of energy audits conducted for hospitals with
         an aim to prepare enough pipeline subprojects in case any EE interventions in hospitals were
         cancelled by potential restrictions derived from the COVID-19 pandemic (ICR, annex 1, page 36).
        20 streetlight interventions were financed by the project, exceeding the original target of 9.
        No water and wastewater intervention was financed by the project, not meeting the original target of
         8.
        No municipal building intervention was financed by the project, not meeting the original target of 6.

Outcomes:

      427,147 megawatt hours (MWh) of projected lifetime energy savings were reported, not meeting the
         original target of 1,020,714 MWh (42 percent of the target).



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EE in Public Facilities -PRESEMEH (P149872)




      36 Energy Services Agreements (ESAs) were signed, exceeding the original target of 23 (157
       percent of the target). Although this indicator was designed as a PDO indicator, it measured
       the number of agreements signed with municipalities to implement a subproject and participate in the
       revolving fund mechanism (PAD, annex 1, page 18 and ICR, para 75), which was an intermediate
       result at best.

The outcome target on the projected lifetime energy savings was modestly achieved. Additionally, considering
the moderate achievement of outputs regarding EE interventions in municipalities financed by the project, it
was unclear to what extent these subprojects contributed to the energy savings. Thus the overall
achievement of Objective 1 is rated modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To promote the efficient use of energy in the Borrower’s municipalities and other Eligible Public Facilities by
carrying out energy efficiency investments in selected public sectors [Objective after the 2018 Restructuring]

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC): The ToC remained the same as the one for Objective 1, except that the ToC
included public facilities (i.e., schools and hospitals) as additional targets for EE interventions covered under
Component 3 (Public Facility Energy Efficiency Investments) that was added during the 2018 restructuring.

Outputs:

      As outlined above, the numbers of subprojects designed and streetlight interventions financed
       exceeded the first revised target of 44 and 16, respectively. On the other hand, the number of
       municipal building intervention financed did not meet the first revised target of 8.
      Two public facility interventions were financed by the project, not meeting the original target set at
       the 2018 restructuring of 8. This indicator was added to measure results of the new Component 3.
       According to the Project Paper dated March 6, 2018 (page 29), this indicator was supposed to
       measure how many subprojects (stand-alone or bundled) in public schools and hospitals were
       financed by the project. On the other hand, at project closing, the indicator measured how many
       institutions participated in the project, which was two institutions: the Mexican Social Security Institute
       (IMSS: Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social) and the State of Tabasco (ICR, annex 1, page 37). In
       line with the original indicator definition, the project financed EE interventions in 17 hospitals,
       according to the Borrower’s report (ICR, annex 6, table 6.1, page 53).

Outcomes:

      As outlined above, the projected lifetime energy savings did not meet the first revised target of
       1,735,000 MWh (25 percent of the target); the number of ESAs signed almost met the first revised
       target of 40 (90 percent of the target); and the projected lifetime GHG emission reductions did not


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EE in Public Facilities -PRESEMEH (P149872)



       meet the first revised target of 810,000 tones/year (23 percent of the target). During the 2018
       restructuring, this indicator on GHG emission reductions was upgraded from an Intermediate Results
       indicator to a PDO indicator with the increased target.

The projected results on the energy savings and GHG emission reductions over the lifetime of EE appliances
were negligible compared to the upwardly revised outcome targets. Overall, the achievement of Objective 1
Revision 1 is rated negligible.



Revised Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
The objective statement remained the same as Objective 1 Revision 1, but the Theory of Change of the
objective and the indicators were revised. [Objective after the 2020 Restructuring]

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC): Based on the project documents, this ICRR reconstructs the ToC of Objective 1
Revision 2 as follows.

The ToC of the objective was revised due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the shifts in the government’s
priorities, as described in sections 2.e. and 3. The target facilities for EE interventions under subprojects were
changed as follows: (i) municipal buildings were dropped; (ii) schools were dropped; and (iii) smaller
municipalities became eligible, in addition to the large municipalities already eligible, based on the revised
eligibility criteria that included poverty, security, and/or climate zones criteria (ICR, para 21 and table 4.2,
annex 4, page 45). The original and revised outputs were postulated to contribute to the outcomes such as
the projected energy savings and GHG emissions decreased and the deficits in energy services in
municipalities reduced.

Critical assumptions are the same as those for the ToC of Objective 1.

Outputs:

      The Intermediate Results indicator on the number of municipal building interventions was dropped
       because this type of subprojects was cancelled due to issues related to lengthy procedures to obtain
       permits to perform work in historic buildings (ICR, table 8.2, page 60).
      As outlined above, the number of public facility interventions financed exceeded the first revised
       target of 1.

Outcomes:

      As outlined above, the projected lifetime energy savings largely achieved the second revised target
       of 603,504 MWh (71 percent of the target). The EE interventions achieved the minimum requirement
       of at least 20 percent energy savings from the baseline scenario (ICR, para 43). The number of ESAs
       signed exceeded the second revised target of 21 (171 percent of the target). On the other hand, the

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EE in Public Facilities -PRESEMEH (P149872)



       projected lifetime GHG emission reductions did not meet the second revised target of 306,122
       tones/year (62 percent of the target).

In addition to the outcomes defined in the Results Framework, the project task team reported on the following
achieved outcome which did not have any formal target.

      The energy services (e.g., lighting) were expanded in terms of lighting coverage in the streets and
       hospitals that did not have energy services at the level of national norms (ICR, paras 43 and 44).

The downwardly revised outcome targets were largely achieved. The coverage and quality of lighting were
expanded in the streets and hospitals with energy gaps. Overall, the achievement of Objective 1 Revision 2 is
rated substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 3
Revised Objective
The objective statement remained the same as Objective 1 Revision 1 but indicators were revised from
Objective 1 Revision 2. [Objective after the 2021 Restructuring]

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC): The ToC remained the same as the one for Objective 1 Revision 2, except for the
water and wastewater facilities were dropped from the target facilities for EE interventions (ICR, table 4.2,
annex 4, page 45).

Outputs:

      The Intermediate Results indicator on the number of water and wastewater interventions was dropped
       because this type of subproject was cancelled due to challenges at entry conditions (ICR, table 8.2,
       page 60).

Outcomes:

      As outlined above, the projected lifetime energy savings and the projected lifetime GHG emission
       reductions exceeded the third revised target of 290,000 MWh (147 percent of the target) and the
       third revised target of 145,000 tones/year (131 percent of the target), respectively.

The further diminished outcome targets were exceeded. On the other hand, no additional evidence on the
achievement of outcomes was provided compared to the achievement of Objective 1 Revision 2. Overall, the
achievement of Objective 1 Revision 3 is rated high but with moderate shortcomings.



Revised Rating

                                                                                                Page 11 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EE in Public Facilities -PRESEMEH (P149872)



High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To contribute to strengthening the enabling environment [Original Objective]

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC): Based on the project documents, this ICRR reconstructs the ToC of Objective 2 as
follows.

The ToC of Objective 2 postulates strengthening the enabling environment for EE interventions in the
following three aspects: policy framework, financial sustainability, and capacity building on EE. On the policy
framework activities include developing procurement methodologies for performance-based contracting and
designing energy management systems (EnMS) to facilitate the incorporation of EE into municipal planning
consideration would result in outputs such as a development of the sector-wide framework to scale up
municipal EE. Outputs were to contribute to the outcome of the framework accepted by the Secretary of
Energy (SENER: Secretaría de Energía).

Regarding the financial sustainability aspect, the ToC includes activities such as operationalizing revolving
EE financing schemes based on ESAs would result in outputs such as a low default rate of municipalities to
repay their shares of loans. Regarding the aspect of capacity building on EE, the ToC suggests that
activities such as providing technical and administrative staff with training to operate and maintain the new
investments and raising awareness on the EE benefits would result in outputs such as institutional capacities
to operate and maintain EE investments strengthened. Those outputs were to contribute to the outcome that
the financial and operational mechanism piloted to support a market solution for national-scale deployment of
EE interventions. In the long-term, the outcomes were to contribute to the long-term outcome of the electricity
demand and energy consumption decreased.

Critical assumptions are the same as those for the ToC of Objective 1.

The ToC was largely sound. The statement of the objective was vague regarding what aspects of the
enabling environment the project aimed to strengthen, but the descriptions of the project activities in the
project documents provided supplemental information for the links among outputs and outcomes.

Outputs:

        Zero designs of energy management systems (EnMS) for street lighting, water and wastewater, and
         municipal buildings was completed, not meeting the original target of 3.
        Default rate of municipalities (i.e., average rate of non-payment over total outstanding loan balance)
         was 0 percent, exceeding the original target of 10 percent. At project closing, the target for the
         municipalities’ payment discipline (avoidance of default) was expected to result in a 100 percent
         payment discipline by municipalities and health facilities (ICR, para 41). Out of the US$16.8 million
         expected to be repaid by the beneficiaries via the ESAs, 37.8 percent was repaid, and the remaining
         62.2 percent was expected to be repaid within the next five years, as stipulated under the schedule of
         the respective ESAs (ICR, par 41).
        13 capacity-building and outreach activities were implemented, not meeting the original target of
         25.

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EE in Public Facilities -PRESEMEH (P149872)




      692 participants participated in consultation activities during project implementation, not meeting the
       original target of 1,000.
            o 16 percent of the participants in consultation activities during project implementation were
              female (i.e., 114 participants), decreasing from the baseline of 25 percent and not meeting
              the original target of 40 percent.

Outcomes:

      A framework to scale up municipal EE in the country was not accepted by the Secretary of Energy
       (SENER: Secretaría de Energía), not meeting the original target. The framework was to include
       relevant procurement methodologies for performance-based contracting and studies to refine the
       financial and operational mechanism to support a market solution for national-scale deployment (PAD,
       annex 2, page 21).

The outcome of strengthening the enabling environment to support a market solution for national-scale
deployment of EE interventions was not achieved. Overall, the achievement of Objective 2 is rated negligible.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The objective statement remained the same as Objective 2 but the indicators were revised. [Objective after
the 2018 Restructuring]

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC): The ToC remained the same as the one for Objective 2, except for additional
activities to strengthen the municipalities’ financial sustainability aspect in the enabling environment. The ToC
included activities to establish the Municipal EE Contingency Facility (Component 4) to partially cover the risk
of default by eligible municipalities under their respective ESAs.

Outputs:

      As outlined above, the number of capacity-building and outreach activities implemented did not meet
       the first revised target of 30.

Outcomes: Same as the one in Objective 2.

The achievements of the outcome and the upwardly revised output target were negligible. Overall, the
achievement of Objective 2 Revision 1 is rated negligible.



Revised Rating


                                                                                                  Page 13 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EE in Public Facilities -PRESEMEH (P149872)



Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
The objective statement remained the same as Objective 2, but the Theory of Change of the objective and
the indicators were revised from Objective 2 Revision 1. [Objective after the 2020 Restructuring]

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC): Based on the project documents, this ICRR reconstructs the ToC of Objective 2
Revision 2 as follows.

The ToC of the objective was revised due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the shifts in the government’s
priorities, as described in sections 2.e. and 3. Regarding the policy framework aspect, the municipality EE
scale-up framework was replaced with the regulatory information tools for the national EE strategy, which put
an emphasis on supporting public utilities. Regarding the financial sustainability aspect, the activities
related to performance-based contracts were dropped. The results chain for the capacity building on EE
aspect remained the same as that under Objective 2. The original and revised outputs were to contribute to
the outcome that the enabling environment would be enhanced to strengthen the role of the public institutions
in the EE sector.

Critical assumptions are the same as those for the ToC of Objective 1.

The ToC reduced its scope due to the restructuring as the key outcome was changed from the establishment
of the municipality EE scale-up framework for the sector-wide reform to the development of three tools to
inform updates of three separate national EE norms. In addition, no information was provided by the ICR
regarding how and to what extent the output of the updated national EE norms for residential and commercial
buildings contribute towards the outcome of the promotion of EE in municipal and public facilities.

Outputs:

      Average of payment discipline per municipality (percentage, avoidance of default) was 100 percent,
       exceeding the first revised target of 90 percent. During the 2020 restructuring, the indicator was
       revised from measuring the non-payment to measuring the payment discipline (ICR, table 8.2, page
       60).
      As outlined above, the number of capacity-building and outreach activities implemented exceeded the
       second revised target of 12.
      692 participants participated in engagement activities during project implementation, exceeding the
       first revised target of 300. During the 2020 restructuring, this indicator was revised from the number
       of participants in “consultation activities” to that in “engagement activities” to better reflect the type of
       interventions that could be delivered (ICR, table 8.2, page 61).
             o 114 female participants participated in engagement activities during project implementation,
               exceeding the first revised target of 100 participants. The unit of this indicator was revised
               from “percentage” to “number” during the 2020 restructuring.

Outcomes:



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EE in Public Facilities -PRESEMEH (P149872)




      The PDO indicator on the number of frameworks accepted by the Secretary of Energy (SENER:
       Secretaría de Energía) to scale up municipal EE in the country was dropped. This was because
       the government’s focus on the enabling environment changed from the policy advice and setting the
       basis for scaling up the project to contributing to updating, strengthening, and tailoring three key
       energy efficiency norms (ICR, table 8.2, page 60).
      Three regulatory information tools were designed to support the implementation of the national energy
       efficiency strategy, meeting the target set at the 2020 restructuring of 3 regulatory information
       tools. This PDO indicator was added during the 2020 restructuring to replace the dropped PDO
       indicator above; however, this indicator measured an intermediate result at best without measuring to
       what extent the tools were used to support the implementation of the national EE strategy.

In addition to the outcomes defined in the Results Framework, the project task team reported on the following
achieved outcome which did not have any formal target.

      The three regulatory information tools informed the government to update three national EE norms,
       namely, (i) NOM-013-ENER-2013 related to EE in street lighting, (ii) NOM-020-ENER-2011 related to
       EE in residential buildings, and (iii) NOM-008-ENER-2001 related to EE in commercial buildings (ICR,
       para 37). At project closing, the updated EE norms were to be approved with a stipulation by the
       Quality Infrastructure Law (LIC: Ley de Infraestructura de la Calidad, published in the Federal Official
       Gazette on July 1, 2020) (ICR, footnote 30, page 15). After implementation, the updated norms were
       expected to contribute to electricity savings of 1,790 GWh and GHG reductions of 782,160 tCO2 per
       year (ICR, para 37).

The revised outcome of the utilization of the regulatory information tools was achieved. It is plausible that the
updated national EE norms would be approved in the future to contribute to the energy savings. Additionally,
referring to the ToC, the outcome of enhancing the enabling environment to strengthen the role of the public
institutions in the EE sector was substantially achieved. Overall, the achievement of Objective 2 Revision 2
was substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 3
Revised Objective
Same as Objective 2 Revison 2. [Objective after the 2021 Restructuring]

Revised Rationale
Same as Objective 2.



Revised Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                   Page 15 of 25
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                EE in Public Facilities -PRESEMEH (P149872)




OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Objective 1 is rated modest. Objective 2 is rated negligible. Overall, the efficacy of the original objective is
                            rated modest due to low achievement.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                     Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                      Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            The achievements of the first revisions of Objectives 1 and 2 are rated negligible. Overall, the efficacy of the
                            first revised objectives is rated negligible due to low achievement.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                          Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                                  Low achievement
                  OBJR2_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 2
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rationale
                            The achievements of the second revisions of Objectives 1 and 2 are rated substantial. Overall, the efficacy of
                            the second revised objectives is rated substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR3_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 3
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 3 Rationale
                            The achievement of Objective 1 Revision 3 is rated high but with moderate shortcomings. The achievement of
                            Objective 2 Revision 3 is rated substantial. Overall, the efficacy of the third revised objectives is rated
                            substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 3 Rating
                            Substantial



                                                                                                                                  Page 16 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EE in Public Facilities -PRESEMEH (P149872)



 5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Analysis: The project documents (e.g., PAD, Project Paper, Restructuring Papers,
and ICR) presented the Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR), the Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR)
with direct support, and/or the FIRR without direct support for the whole project and/or each subproject type at
different time of the project implementation.

This ICR Review assesses changes in the EIRRs. At appraisal, the PAD (table 2, page 13) presented EIRRs for
three subproject types: 8 percent for street lighting subprojects, 57 percent for municipal buildings subprojects,
and 64 percent for water utility subprojects. The EIRR of the project was 43 percent. The economic and financial
analysis focused on Component 2, which accounts for 94 percent of the IBRD loan (PAD, para 38). The
discount rate for the EIRR was 4 percent for street lighting subprojects and 6 percent for municipal buildings and
water utility subprojects (PAD, annex 7, pages 58-67).

At the time of restructuring and additional financing in 2018, the project paper (table 3, page 18) presented
EIRRs for five subproject types, which included two additional subproject types (i.e., schools and hospitals): 8
percent for street lighting subprojects, 8 percent for municipal buildings subprojects, 18 percent for water utility
subprojects, 10 percent for school subprojects, and 13 percent for hospital subprojects. The project’s EIRR was
expected to be 11 percent with the Economic Net Present Value (ENPV) of US$ 41.34 million (ICR, table 4,
page 19). The economic and financial analyses consider Components 2 and subcomponent 3(b), which
accounted for 93 percent of IBRD financing (Project Paper, para 26).

At project closing, the ICR (table 5.3, annex 5, page 51) presented EIRRs for two subproject types based on
actual results: 19 percent for street lighting subprojects and 20 percent for hospital subprojects. The project’s
EIRR was 19 percent with the ENPV of US$ 54.08 million (ICR, table 4, page 19). The percentage of total
project cost for which the EIRR was calculated was not provided by the ICR, but the project’s task team
explained that the calculation was based on the investment portion of the project expenditure.

While the whole project’s EIRR decreased from the ex-ante rate of 43 percent to the ex-post rate of 19 percent,
the EIRRs of subprojects on street lighting and hospitals increased from the ex-ante rates of 8 percent and 13
percent to the ex-post rates of 19 percent and 20 percent, respectively. For the street lighting subprojects, the
key factors of the improvement in the EIRR included the lower costs and longer lifetimes of procured and
installed equipment observed during implementation (ICR, para 10, annex 5, page 49).

Implementation and Administrative Efficiency: The project extended the project duration for 24 months, and
the project’s actual disbursement of US$ 51.84 million was approximately half of the originally approved World
Bank financing of US$ 100.00 million (ICR, datasheet, page 2). The project had a slow pace of disbursement in
the early years of implementation, due to (i) the complexity of the project and its organizational arrangements
that required establishing a new implementation model in multiple institutions at different levels of government
and (ii) the prolonged government transition period following the 2018 national elections (ICR, para 61).
Additionally, the procurement processes were delayed due to the absence of a procurement specialist from
2017 to 2020 (ICR, paras 64 and 85). Moreover, at the municipal level, the implementation efficiency was
negatively affected by: (i) the misalignment among the project’s timeline and the municipalities’ electoral
calendars, which caused difficulties for some municipal leaders to commit expenditures for the benefits (and
repayments) that would fall on a subsequent administration; and (ii) the bureaucratic process and time to obtain
the necessary information and approvals from municipalities to sign the ESAs that could take from a few months
up to a year (ICR, paras 66 and 68).



                                                                                                      Page 17 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EE in Public Facilities -PRESEMEH (P149872)



Although the project’s EIRR decreased from appraisal to project closing, the substantial changes in the project
components and allocations during implementation meant these rates were not directly comparable to each
other. In fact, the EIRRs of two types of subprojects that were implemented (i.e., street lighting and hospitals)
increased from the ex-ante rate to the ex-post rate due to the lower costs and the higher qualities of the
procured equipment. On the other hand, the implementation and administrative efficiency was negatively
affected by the complexity of the project design and the political and governance factors at the national and
municipal levels. Overall, with moderate shortcomings, the efficiency is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)         *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     94.00
 Appraisal                                                   43.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                                19.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Table 1. Overall Outcome Ratings.

    Rating Dimension        Objective       Objective after Objective after Objective after
                              before          the 2018        the 2020        the 2021
                           Restructuring    Restructuring Restructuring Restructuring
Relevance of
                                                        Substantial
Objectives
Efficacy
  Objective 1             Modest           Negligible        Substantial     High
  Objective 2             Negligible       Negligible        Substantial     Substantial
Overall Efficacy          Modest           Negligible        Substantial     Substantial
Efficiency                                              Substantial
                     Moderately
Outcome Rating                             Unsatisfactory    Satisfactory    Satisfactory
                     Unsatisfactory
Outcome Rating Value 3                     2                 5               5
Amount Disbursed
                     1.03                  13.77             6.05            30.99
(US$ million)*
Disbursement (%)     2                     27                12              60

                                                                                                     Page 18 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EE in Public Facilities -PRESEMEH (P149872)



Weight Value             0.06             0.53             0.58            2.99
Total weights                                             4

                                (0.06 + 0.53 + 0.58 + 2.99 = 4.16, rounding down to 4)
Overall Outcome Rating                          Moderately Satisfactory

* The amount disbursed for each period is based on the datasheet in the ICR (page 3).


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government Ownership Risk. There is a potential risk that an adoption of the three EE norms to support
the national EE strategy might be delayed as the actual decision to adopt the norms would follow a
preestablished process outlined in the Quality Infrastructure Law (ICR, para 93). To mitigate the risk, the
project collaborated closely with the National Commission for the Efficient Use of Energy (CONUEE:
Comisión Nacional para el Uso Eficiente de la Energía) and provided the technical studies to update the
norms to be feasible to implement, aligned with Mexico’s needs, and instrumental in increasing the country’s
EE performance to achieve its emissions reductions targets (ICR, para 93). In addition, SENER continued
working with CONUEE after the project closing, defining an action plan for the approval of the norms (ICR,
para 93).

Financial Risk. There is a potential risk that operation and maintenance (O&M) of the investments might be
affected by budget allocations (ICR, para 94). Beneficiary institutions could face challenges in the event of
having to replace investments not covered under the warranty, due to (i) budget constraints and costs higher
than prices they were used/allowed to pay; and/or (ii) limited knowledge of technical specifications and
market availability at the local level (ICR, para 94). To mitigate the risk, the Energy Savings Trust Fund
(FIDE: Fideicomiso para el Ahorro de Energía Eléctrica) provided asset managers of each sub-project with
(i) O&M capacity building, (ii) information on the warranty, and (iii) some additional lights adapted to each
system in the event of a needed replacement (ICR, para 94). FIDE also made a commitment to remain
engaged with each sub-project until the end of the repayment period (ICR, para 94). Moreover, the
streetlighting subprojects were envisaged to continue receiving the necessary support and funding to operate
satisfactorily given their popularity among the communities (ICR, para 96). Furthermore, the Mexican Social
Security Institute (IMSS: Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social) informed the World Bank that it was
integrating the project-supported investments in its O&M strategy (ICR, para 96).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry



                                                                                                  Page 19 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EE in Public Facilities -PRESEMEH (P149872)



  The strategic relevance was adequate, as described in section 3. The project’s approach to
  operationalize the new EE revolving fund mechanism was appropriately designed, as the financing
  mechanism was found to be critical to enable the capacity to deliver subprojects (ICR, para 70).
  Technical aspects were adequately designed, building upon prior interventions including the technical
  assistance (TA) engagements. For instance, the first completed municipal EE subproject, a street lighting
  investment in León, was based on an earlier TA engagement and served as the showcase project,
  providing evidence of the benefits, and thus encouraging other municipalities to participate in this project
  (ICR, para 86). On the other hand, the M&E arrangements were average, as described in section 9. The
  risk assessment underestimated the risks related to the political and governance challenges and the
  changing market conditions (ICR, para 88). Moreover, the objectives and targets were overoptimistic in
  terms of the magnitude of influence the project could have in improving the private sector market for EE
  (ICR, para 89). This shortcoming in the project design, combined with the changes in the government
  priorities, resulted in substantial changes in the scope of the second objective in the PDO (i.e., enabling
  environment) and the activities under component 1, as described in sections 2-4. Overall, the quality at
  entry is rated moderately satisfactory due to moderate shortcomings at the project preparation and
  appraisal stages.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision of fiduciary and safeguard aspects was adequate in general, as described in section 10. The
 World Bank ensured adequate transition arrangements after project closing, which led to the government’s
 decision to continue using the sustainable financing mechanism established by the project to prepare six
 new street lighting subprojects to install 10,300 new light points which are expected to generate additional
 energy savings (35,844 MWh) and emission reductions (15,700 tCO2) (ICR, para 42). The client, as well
 the sub-national entities that participated in the project, expressed their interest in exploring a continuation
 of the project, signaling their satisfaction with the project’s performance (ICR, para 35). On the other hand,
 the focus on development impact was only partially adequate. Although the project proactively adapted to
 the changing implementation conditions and revised the project designs through four restructurings, the
 revisions were mainly driven by excessive focus on the achievement of indicator targets in the Results
 Framework rather than refining the indicators to better capture the intended outcomes. This resulted in
 setting unrealistically high targets during the 2018 restructuring that were downscaled several times
 through the other restructurings. Additionally, the shortcomings in the M&E arrangements were not
 adequately addressed during implementation, as described in section 9. Moreover, the World Bank’s
 supervision support was not seamless. The client noted that four turnovers of the TTLs during
 implementation caused disruptions to implement this highly-complex project in terms of client engagement
 and responsiveness (ICR, para 73). Overall, the quality of supervision is rated moderately satisfactory due
 to moderate shortcomings in the proactive identification of opportunities and resolution of threats.

 The overall performance of the World Bank is rated moderately satisfactory, based on the moderately
 satisfactory ratings for the quality at entry and the quality of supervision.




                                                                                                      Page 20 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EE in Public Facilities -PRESEMEH (P149872)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Theories of Change (ToC) that were described or visualized in the PAD and the ICR were mostly
 sound and reflected in the Results Framework; however, the reconstructed ToC of the project (ICR, figure
 1, page 7) combined the original and revised project designs and aggregated project inputs and outputs,
 resulting in unclear results chains, as mentioned in section 4. The first objective in the PDO was clearly
 specified, though the second objective was vague about its target and scope, as described in section 3.
 The M&E design and arrangements were embedded institutionally. The indicators encompassed most of
 the outcomes and intermediate results. On the other hand, the methodologies to measure expected
 performance of energy savings and GHG emission reduction were not adequate, as the calculations relied
 on many estimates and assumptions, which were supposed to but not fully refined by the detailed energy
 audits during implementation (ICR, para 89). In addition, the Results Framework missed an opportunity to
 include an indicator to measure results regarding essential investments in enabling infrastructure and
 enhancing the level and quality of service (to meet national norms and address instances of suppressed
 demand), as mentioned in the ICR (para 76).



b. M&E Implementation
  The Results Framework was proactively revised to be in line with the changes introduced to the project
  design through restructurings. For instance, the indicator on the projected lifetime GHG emission
  reductions was reclassified from an Intermediate Results (IR) indicator to a PDO indicator, as per
  objective of the GEF grant added in the 2018 restructuring (ICR, para 77). In addition, during the 2020
  restructuring, the PDO indicator for the second objective in the PDO was revised, as the approach to
  contribute to improving the enabling environment evolved and the original indicator was not deemed
  relevant anymore (ICR, para 77). The indicators included in the Results Framework were sufficiently
  measured and reported, as required by the loan agreements (ICR, para 78). The shortcomings in the
  M&E design (mentioned in section 9.a.) were partially addressed during implementation, as these issues
  remained at project closing. Moreover, M&E data collection for the indicator on the number of public
  facility interventions were financed by the project was not fully aligned with the original definition of the
  indicator, as described in section 4.



c. M&E Utilization
  The collected data and information through the Results Framework were used to calibrate the project
  restructurings and day-to-day decisions to overcome implementation challenges (ICR, para 78). The
  M&E findings were communicated to the teams on the ground, and their feedback regarding progress
  toward outputs and outcomes was crucial to processing project restructurings and updating the targets,

                                                                                                     Page 21 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EE in Public Facilities -PRESEMEH (P149872)



  particularly those that were adjusted with the approval of the additional financing and the subsequent
  cancellation of funds (ICR, para 78). The M&E data and findings were likely to inform
  subsequent interventions planned by the government. On the other hand, the Results Framework did not
  provide evidence of achievement of the outcome on the expansion in coverage of quality energy
  services, as described in section 4. The ICR provided the qualitative data to supplement the data;
  nevertheless, adding a methodologically sound indicator in the Results Framework through a
  restructuring when the need for such indicator became apparent could have provided better evidence on
  achievements of the outcome.

  The M&E design had some shortcomings that were partially addressed during implementation, limiting
  full utilization of the M&E data. On the other hand, the additional data provided in the ICR complemented
  some of the shortcomings. Overall, the M&E quality is rated substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards: At appraisal, the project was defined as environmental risk
   Category B, and triggered the safeguard policies of Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Physical
   Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) (ICR, para 79).
   As a result of the assessment, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was
   prepared and disclosed in the country and on the World Bank’s external website on September 4, 2015,
   after consultation with key stakeholders (ICR, para 79). The ESMF included the criteria to implement the
   other safeguard policies triggered. Regarding the Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50), an
   exception was granted, as the project would not finance any works or activities that would exceed the
   original scheme or change its nature (ICR, para 79). The safeguard policy on Physical Cultural Resources
   (OP/BP 4.11) became irrelevant, as the municipal building subprojects that could include historical
   infrastructure were never implemented (Task Team meeting). During implementation, the ESMF was
   revised to add requirements and guidance to implement subprojects in compliance with the safeguard
   policies (ICR, para 80). Overall, the project complied with the applicable safeguard policies (ICR, para 82).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: Throughout implementation, financial management (FM) requirements were
   generally complied with in a timely manner (ICR, para 83). During implementation, there were considerable
   delays in the process of capitalizing the Contingent Facility financed under Component 4. GEF proceeds
   were disbursed as an advance to the project’s Designated Account on February 4, 2021, but were not
   documented until January 26, 2022, which was a week after the funds were transferred to the Energy
   Savings Trust Fund (FIDE: Fideicomiso para el Ahorro de Energía Eléctrica)’s Designated Account to
   capitalize the Contingent Facility on January 18, 2022 (ICR, para 83). After the initial advance, GEF
   proceeds were transferred to the Treasury of the Federation (TESOFE: Tesorería de la Federación) and

                                                                                                   Page 22 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EE in Public Facilities -PRESEMEH (P149872)



   remained there for over 11 months, pending the Ministry of Finance’s approval to transfer funds from the
   TESOFE to FIDE. Audit reports were generally submitted in due time, including unmodified (clean)
   opinions (ICR, para 84). As a result of these audits, there were some findings and internal
   control recommendations related to weaknesses in administrative processes and planning, resulting in low
   implementation and disbursement progress during the first half of the implementation period (ICR, para
   84). To address administrative weaknesses, the SENER implemented additional administrative controls
   regarding project and procurement process files and archives, control over consultant’s contract payment
   management (ICR, para 84).

   Procurement: Procurement performance was generally found to be compliant with World Bank
   requirements (ICR, para 85). The World Bank delivered several procurement-related trainings to the
   implementing agencies. The project rating for procurement decreased from Satisfactory to Moderately
   Satisfactory in May 2018 and to Moderately Unsatisfactory by December 2018, mainly due to the absence
   of a procurement specialist since December 2017 and weaknesses detected in the decision-making
   process during procurement processes (ICR, para 85). By June 2020, the rating was revised upward to
   Moderately Satisfactory, after intensified follow-up from the World Bank over several months and improved
   project performance, including acceleration of the implementation through successful procurement
   processes (ICR, para 85). As procurement reactivated after the peak of the COVID-19 health crisis and the
   market revealed significant changes that required testing several alternatives to contract the products and
   services required for the subprojects, the World Bank’s intensive and timely implementation support was
   instrumental to find pragmatic procurement solutions to address the new and evolving realities (ICR, para
   91).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR (para 56) did not report unanticipated effects that were quantifiable and of significant magnitude.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                The quality at entry and the
                                                                                quality of supervision are rated
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                moderately satisfactory due to
                                                                                moderate shortcomings.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial



                                                                                                  Page 23 of 25
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       EE in Public Facilities -PRESEMEH (P149872)



12. Lessons

The ICR (paras 97-101) provided five recommendations. Three of them are presented here with
rephrasing.

Considering the gaps in the level and quality of pre-project (baseline) energy services, it may
help to adequately assess the actual success and relevance of EE subprojects in
municipalities and public institutions facing poverty and vulnerability. The idea behind EE
investments is that they can be repaid with energy savings from replacing inefficient equipment with
efficient alternatives. However, a balance is needed between maximizing actual energy savings and
the need for infrastructure investments to ensure sustainability and minimum levels and quality of
services. Throughout the project’s execution, the implementing team noticed that there were several
instances where energy services were lacking or did not comply with relevant national regulations
(ICR, para 6, annex 5, page 48).

An Energy Efficiency (EE) revolving fund mechanism may enhance the impact and
sustainability of publicly financed EE projects, though it may demand considerable effort and
time. During implementation, this project observed that putting in place all elements to
operationalize the new financial model of the revolving fund and gaining the trust of stakeholders
took longer than expected, but investing in this effort was critical as the budget constraints severely
limit municipalities and health institutions’ capacity to allocate financial resources toward EE
investments (ICR, para 70). The ICR (para 98) recommended that effective early communication to
highlight the project's benefits, such as energy savings and improved service quality, would be
crucial to the planning process.

Implementing a project across multiple municipalities and government levels is complex,
though it may bring benefits. The project involved different institutions at different levels of
government and in multiple municipalities, which inherently brought complexity to the project’s
implementation and resulted in a slow pace of disbursement in the early years of implementation
(ICR, para 61 and footnote 49, page 22). Despite the challenges, the project established the EE
revolving fund that would work across the country beyond the project’s timeframe and ensured
payment discipline by the beneficiaries (ICR, para 35). The ICR (para 99) recommended that
designing and planning of EE operations should: (i) account for local capacities, resources, decision-
making processes, and the political landscape; and (ii) leverage existing structures and balance the
trade-off between quick, large investments in fewer, larger municipalities and broader, inclusive
investments across many smaller municipalities.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR




                                                                                                   Page 24 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EE in Public Facilities -PRESEMEH (P149872)



The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project with good quality of evidence. The evidence is robust,
based on credible sources, and appropriately referenced. The narrative is candid and mostly focused on
results. The narrative supports the ratings and available evidence and tries to triangulate data to reach
conclusions. The ICR’s recommendations are clear and useful. In response to IEG’s inquiry, the project’s task
team provided data and information to complement the ICR, including the evidence that the project completed
the planned mitigation activities for safeguards compliance, as described in section 10. On the other hand, the
reconstructed ToC of the project (ICR, figure 1, page 7) does not articulate individual results chains, as
mentioned in section 4. This has limited the report’s capability to revert to and articulate progress against the
ToC. Moreover, the ICR’s recommendations do not explicitly describe which specific experiences of the project
informed formulation of each recommendation. Furthermore, the ICR is of an excessive length at 31 pages,
compared to the OPCS-recommended 15 pages. Overall, the quality of ICR is rated substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 25 of 25
