     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KP Governance and Policy (P156410)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0024148

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P156410                                  KP Governance and Policy

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Pakistan                                 Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A3361,TF-B3385                        30-Jun-2022                                         17,989,425.78

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Apr-2017                              30-Jun-2023

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         18,000,000.00                                    18,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                          17,989,426.00                                    17,989,426.00

 Actual                                      17,989,425.78                                    17,989,425.78




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Gloria Carolina           Vandana Chandra              Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC (Unit 1)
 Gutierrez Tejada




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP)/ Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA)/ Balochistan Multi-
   Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) Grant Agreement (GA) dated May 23, 2017 (GA, p. 5) and the Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD, p.7), the Project Development Objective (PDO) was:




                                                                                                Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KP Governance and Policy (P156410)



   “To strengthen the capacity for Sales Tax on Services collection and improve public investment
   management and accountability of public service delivery in the water sector in Khyber
   Pakhtunkhwa.”

   On 15 July, 2020, the PDO was revised as follows under the first restructuring with Additional Financing (AF)
   (Report No. RES 36996, p. 5; ICR, p. 1):

   “To strengthen the capacity for Sales Tax on Services collection and improve public investment
   management and accountability for public service delivery in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa.”

   For the purpose of this review, the PDO has been reformulated as follows:

         PDO1: To strengthen the capacity for Sales Tax on Services collection.
         PDO2: To improve Public Investment Management (PIM) for public service delivery.
         PDO3: To improve accountability for public service delivery.

   Since the revised PDO had a wider scope to capture results beyond the water sector and the portion of the
   PDO that was dropped was not related with the achievement of any significant activities prior to restructuring,
   this ICRR will not undertake a split evaluation. It will assess the project based on the revised and expanded
   PDO and indicators/ targets.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval


c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were three components that remained unchanged during the life of the project. However, related
   indicators/targets and allocations were revised after the first restructuring.

   The estimated total cost of the project was US$10 million at approval. AF at the time of the first restructuring
   increased the total from US$10 million to US$18 million. The actual amount disbursed was US$17.99
   million (PAD, p. 7-9).

   Component 1: Increasing capacity for revenue mobilization and public financial management (Cost
   at approval: US$3.75 million. Revised cost after AF and restructuring: US$7.25 million. Actual amount
   disbursed: US$7.03 million). This component aimed to strengthen capacity for own source revenue
   collection in line with the 18th Constitutional Amendment and the 7th National Finance Commission (NFC)


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  KP Governance and Policy (P156410)



Award of 2010 that gave more taxing powers to the provinces to strengthen public financial management
(PAD, p. 7, ICR para 12). There were two subcomponents:

    1. increasing capacity for Sales Tax on Services (STS) collection; and
    2. strengthening public financial management (PFM) and accountability.

Component 2: Improving public investment management and accountability in public services (Cost
at approval: US$3.55 million. Revised cost after AF and restructuring: US$7.25 million. Actual cost:
US$7.70 million). This component aimed to help the Government to improve the effectiveness of public
spending on infrastructure and strengthen accountability in public services (PAD, p. 7-8, ICR para 12).
There were two subcomponents:

    1. strengthening PIM; and
    2. improving accountability in the delivery of public services.

Component 3: Providing effective support for the coordination of governance reforms and
operational management (Cost at approval: US$2.50 million. Revised cost after AF and restructuring:
US$3.50 million. Actual cost: US$3.26 million). This component aimed to strengthen the government’s
capacity to track reform implementation, coordinate external support, provide training to government
officials, and prepare and implement development projects. There were no subcomponents (PAD, p. 8, ICR
para12).

Significant changes during implementation

Restructuring No. 1: A first restructuring was approved on July 15, 2020 (ICR, p. 9-10) to address
governance challenges resulting from the merger of the FATA with the province of KP and focus on broader
areas of governance where service delivery was being affected. This restructuring provided additional
financing of US$8 million and led to the revision of the PDO and the Results Framework (RF). The scope of
the PDO was expanded from the water sector to include all publicly provided services and additional
capacity building activities. Project indicators, targets and activities were revised, disbursement categories
were changed, and the closing date was extended from June 30, 2020, to June 30, 2022 (Report No. RES
36996 on 2nd restructuring, p. viii).

No new components were introduced and the two Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) which were: (i)
STS collection and geotagging of public assets, and implementation arrangements with the Planning and
Development Department (P&DD) (that was responsible for implementation of Components 2 and 3) and;
(ii) Finance Department (FD) (that was responsible for implementation of Component 1) remained the
same.

The following changes were made to the PDO indicators and Intermediate indicators in the Results
Framework (RF) during the restructuring in 2020 (ICR, Table 1 adjusted with units of measurement, p. 10):

PDO indicators                                          Revised indicators
Increased collection of the Sales Tax on Services       Increased collection of the Sales Tax on Services
(Percentage, revised).                                  (Text/ Number).
Increased average size of the appropriation per water
                                                        Improvement in Public Financial Management (Text).
sector project included in the ADP (Dropped).


                                                                                                 Page 3 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  KP Governance and Policy (P156410)



Number of districts where citizen feedback on WSS
                                                        Reduction in total throw-forward amount in the
services is systematically collected and disseminated
                                                        Annual Development Plan (Text).
(Dropped).
Percentage of women among feedback providers            Citizens reporting satisfaction with selected notified
(Dropped).                                              services (Percentage).
Number of districts where citizens are engaged in
monitoring WSS services (Dropped).
Percentage of women in monitoring WSS services
(Dropped).
Number of officials (and females) certified in FM,
procurement, project management, and M&E
(Dropped).
Intermediate indicators                               Revised intermediate indicators
                                                      Increase in number of STS taxpayers that filed tax
Number of STS registered taxpayers that have filed
                                                      returns (Percentage; Performance Based Conditions
tax returns (%, DLI 1; Targets revised).
                                                      - PBC).
Rate of filing compliance (Dropped).                  Increase in registered taxpayers (Number).
Deviation between STS revenue forecasts and actual Enhanced human resource capacity for tax
revenue collected (Dropped).                          administration.
                                                      Share of taxpayers who paid any tax payment
                                                      amount with returns (Percentage. Registered
…
                                                      taxpayers are required to file monthly STS returns
                                                      using automated filing system).
                                                      Departments of the GovKP using Framework
…
                                                      Agreements (Number).
                                                      Government departments and other procuring
…                                                     entities publishing procurement plans online
                                                      (Number).
Increased share of development projects in the water Public investment schemes monitored, and results
sector that have been completed within original       published in publicly disclosed progress reports
schedule (Dropped).                                   (Percentage).
Increased average size of the appropriation per water Increase in public investment assets that are geo-
sector project included in the ADP (Dropped).         mapped and published online (PBC) (Text).
                                                      Public investment schemes with unapproved PC-1
…
                                                      prior to inclusion in the budget (Percentage).
                                                      Improved legal and institutional framework for anti-
…
                                                      corruption (Text).
M&E reports on KP Long-Term Governance Action         Complaints resolved through Pakistan Citizen’s
Plan (Dropped).                                       Portal (Percentage).
                                                      Citizens reporting that Water and sanitation Services
Reduction in WSS services provided to citizens
                                                      (WSS) services were provided within the stipulated
beyond the stipulated time (Revised).
                                                      time frame (Percentage).
Number of officials in FM, procurement, project       Public officials (and females) participating in project
management, and M&E (Revised).                        financed training (Number/ Percentage).



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KP Governance and Policy (P156410)




   Restructuring No. 2: A second restructuring in 2022 extended the project’s closing date from June 30,
   2022 to June 30, 2023 to allow for completion of activities interrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project cost at appraisal was US$10 million. The revised cost after AF and restructuring
   was US$18 million. The actual cost was US$17.9 million.

   Financing: The project was financed by an IBRD/IDA grant of US$18 million. The total amount disbursed
   was US$17.9 million.

   Borrower Contribution: The Islamic Republic of Pakistan did not provide any counterpart funding.

   Dates: The Bank approved the project on April 20, 2017, and the project became effective on May 23, 2017
   with an original closing date of June 30, 2020. The project was restructured twice.

   The first restructuring was approved on July 15, 2020. The closing date was extended from June 30, 2020
   to June 30, 2022 (ICR, para 14).

   The second restructuring, approved on June 28, 2022, further extended the closing date to June 30, 2023
   when the project closed. (ICR, para 14).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Pakistan, a lower-middle-income country had made considerable progress in reducing
poverty and improving shared prosperity in the two decades prior to the project’s approval. However, due to
weak recovery from the 2008–09 financial crisis, nearly three-quarters of the population were still either
poor or vulnerable and performance on human development indicators and Millennium Development Goals
(MDG) targets was one of the weakest in South Asia (PAD, p. 2).

Service delivery in Pakistan was affected by a frail private sector environment and weak public sector
management and implementation capacity.

A new federal government had been elected in May 2013 with a strong reform mandate to decentralize
power and resources to the provincial level in line with the 18th Constitutional Amendment and the 7th
National Finance Commission (NFC) Award of 2010. The provinces were given more taxing powers,
including the collection of the STS (CPS, p. 1).

The province of KP was the third largest by population in Pakistan and one of its least developed regions.
Most of its population (85%) lived in rural areas with low access to public services and jobs and 39% of its



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KP Governance and Policy (P156410)



households lived below the poverty line. KP also suffered from political and social instability due to its
proximity to conflict-affected Afghanistan (PAD, p. 2).

In addition to improving human development outcomes, KP’s priorities also required improvements in the
security situation and fostering job creation to provide conducive conditions for development (CPS, para
32).

Given KP’s service delivery situation, PDO2 was relevant because of the need to enhance the efficiency of
public investment management for improved public service delivery. PDO3 was relevant as it would
address weaknesses in the accountability of public service delivery. The new institutional and political
changes that gave more taxing powers to the provinces and promoted greater resource decentralization
supported the relevance of PDO1 in strengthening KP’s capacity for the collection of the STS.

Bank strategy. The project’s PDO was well-aligned with the World Bank Group’s (WBG) Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY15-19. The CPS (para 34) prioritized public sector development,
inclusion, and service delivery as three of its four strategic areas. It supported the devolution of
responsibilities to the provinces as this had implications for governance and service delivery. The CPS also
focused on other high priority governance themes for Pakistan which included gender and the need to
address sources of fragility and conflict by emphasizing restoration of trust between citizens and the
Governments of KP, FATA and Balochistan (para 35). PDOs 2 and 3 were aligned with the World Bank’s
strategy for improving public investment management and transparency and accountability of government
services through greater citizen engagement and capacity building in public administration. PDO1 was
aligned with the World Bank’s strategy on the need to strengthen the capacity for the collection of STS and
recognition of the benefits of devolution of taxation power to the provinces.

The project’s PDO was aligned with the Results Framework of the Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) that
focused on governance outcomes. Specifically, these outcomes supported: (a) improved transparency and
accountability of government services through citizen engagement in the delivery of selected services; and
(b) capacity building of public administration through improved management, training, and strengthening of
systems used by government institutions.

At Project closing, the project’s PDO was aligned with WBG’s Report Pakistan @ 100: Shaping the Future,
that was published in 2019 and contributed to 3 of the 8 focus areas: tax revenues, transparency, and
accountability (ICR, p. 13).

The project was also informed by previous analytical work conducted by the World Bank, such as the 2007
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) Assessment (ICR, para 8) that assessed the
weaknesses in the provincial PFM system. This led to the project’s support for a revised assessment of the
PFM system.

Government strategy. The PDO was aligned with the pillars of the government’s tax reform: tax policy;
measures to increase the tax base; and improved tax administration. It was also aligned with the
government’s plan to enhance revenue administration for sales tax, excise, and customs that was launched
in December 2013. Finally, it was aligned with the government’s five-year development vision and the long-
term Vision 2025 (CPS, p. 10-11).

At the provincial level, the project’s PDO responded to KP’s Integrated Development Strategy (IDS; 2014-
2018), KP Growth Strategy (2015-2016), and KP Long-term Governance Action Plan (2015-2025). The IDS
prioritized increased coverage and quality of basic services and highlighted the need for greater citizen

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      KP Governance and Policy (P156410)



               engagement. Likewise, among other priorities, KP’s Growth Strategy focused on improving governance,
               rule of law, and e-government. Finally, the Governance Action Plan outlined reforms in governance,
               transparency, accountability, and citizen facilitation including e-procurement and taxpayer facilitation, local
               government capacity building, anticorruption, and service delivery monitoring in key sectors (ICR, p. 6). In
               addition, at the time of project’s restructuring, the PDO was aligned with PFM reforms strategy (2017-2020),
               and Good Governance Strategy 2019 – whose five elements were supported by the project: i) Open
               Government and Transparency, (ii) Public Service Delivery, (iii) Citizen Participation, (iv) Performance and
               Accountability, and (v) Ideas, Innovation and Technology. PDO1 was aligned with tax reform and
               government’s plan to enhance revenue administration to strengthen the capacity for STS collection. PDOs
               2 and 3 were consistent with the IDS priorities on coverage, quality of basic services and need for improved
               accountability.

               Level of ambition of the project. The overall level of ambition of the project was appropriate. The original
               and revised PDOs were clear and highly relevant for the government and the World Bank strategy for
               Pakistan. The revised PDO continued to focus on improving collection of STS and public investment
               management, and the focus on the water sector was broadened in a timely manner and with the
               corresponding adjustment of the Results Framework. Adjusted activities and indicators/ targets were
               responsive to changing needs of the province while keeping objectives fully relevant. The overall relevance
               of the PDO is rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen the capacity for Sales Tax on Services collection.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). The project’s activities aimed to develop capacity for own source revenue
                             collection to increase Sales Tax on Services (STS). The causal links between project activities (inputs),
                             outputs and outcomes were logical.

                             The outputs of activities such as providing technical assistance and advisory services, establishing
                             specialized units, developing sector notes and audit guidelines, training of staff and operational support in
                             data analytics, and providing infrastructure support were likely to help increase collection of STS (ICR, p. 48,
                             ToC post-restructuring).

                             The intended outcomes were measurable and monitorable.



                                                                                                                                Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KP Governance and Policy (P156410)



Outputs

      Improved STS filing compliance and increase in registered taxpayers.
      Technical assistance for KP Revenue Authority (KPRA).
      Institutional assessment and training needs assessment for KPRA.
      Sectoral notes and audit guidelines for KPRA.
      KP PFM law.
      Specialized units established in FD and P&DD department to support implementation of PFM reforms.
       These included internal audit, debt management and corporate governance of SOEs units.
      PFM accreditation program.

Outcomes

The outputs listed above were expected to contribute to the desired outcome of increasing the collection of
STS. Achievement of PDO1 is assessed by the following indicators (ICR, Annex 1):

      Increase of STS annual collection. Baseline: PKR 11 billion. Target: PKR 18 billion. Actual: PKR
         27.08 billion in FY23. The project exceeded the target. Achieved.

There were 3 Intermediate Outcome Indicators (IOI) that informed the achievement of PDO 1:

      IOI1: Increase in registered taxpayers. Baseline: 7,588 registered taxpayers in FY20. Target: 9,106
       registered taxpayers. Actual: 20,264 registered taxpayers in FY23. The project exceeded the target.
       Achieved.
      IOI2: Increase in number of STS taxpayers that filed tax returns. Baseline: 46% (578 out of 1,259) of
       the registered STS taxpayers filed returns in FY16. Target: 40% cumulative increase above baseline.
       Actual: 65% of registered STS taxpayers filed tax returns in FY23 (12,475 out of 19,367). The
       cumulative increase above baseline was 19%, which is below the target. The project did not achieve
       the target. Not Achieved.
      IOI3: Share of taxpayers who paid any tax payment amount with returns. Baseline: 18% of taxpayers
       who paid any amount with returns in FY20. Target: 22% of taxpayers who paid any amount with
       returns. Actual: 10% of taxpayers who paid any amount with returns in FY23. The project did not
       achieve the target. Not Achieved.

The missing of the targets for the share of registered taxpayers who filed returns and the share of filers that
paid any amount with their returns weakens the efficacy of the revenue indicator as it could be undermined by
these two factors in the future.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

                                                                                                 Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KP Governance and Policy (P156410)



Improve PIM for public service delivery.

Rationale
ToC. The project activities aimed to help the government to improve public investment efficiency by
strengthening the effectiveness of public spending on infrastructure for public service delivery. The causal
links between project activities (inputs), outputs and outcomes were logical.

The activities to achieve PDO2 included legislation such as the PFM law which was a first for Pakistan and
would be an important step towards laying the rules for the entire planning, budgeting, and accounting cycle
necessary for efficient PIM. Other important activities included training of staff in financial management (FM),
procurement, project management and monitoring and evaluation (M&E); training of staff and operational
support in data analytics; support for the establishment of specialized units in the FD and operational support
for public investment management, public-private partnerships and Public Sector Development Plan (PSDP)
monitoring (gender and social protection units).

These would contribute to improved budget management to, among other things, redress the critical issue of
the throw-forward factor that weakened PIM. Throw-forward expenses were those that could not be met in the
current year and were pushed to future years compromising budgetary discipline. They were related to critical
needs that were identified but could not be financed due to insufficient budget allocations and slow execution
of projects.

Outputs

      Passing of the PFM Law.
      Database and dashboard for geo-mapped public investment assets.
      Policy framework and PPP action plan for 2019-2024.
      Public investment schemes monitoring mechanism.
      Design of a PIM action plan, project manual, and automation of the government’s Annual
       Development Plan (ADP) system, linked with the database of public investments schemes.
      Establishment of specialized units in P&DD which included: PIM unit, social protection and gender
       mainstreaming section, and an ADP monitoring unit.
      Innovative use of technology to transform the management and monitoring of public investment assets
       by automating and geo-tagging their record. It also helped strengthen the M&E directorate, its field
       offices, and GIS hub at P&DD.

The intended outcomes were poorly monitorable. The PDO indicator for PIM – throw forward amount – was
an inappropriate indicator as it did not reflect the various ways in which the project sought to document the
inventory of public investment assets, and manage them.

Outcomes

Achievement of PDO2 is assessed by the reduction in the throw-forward indicator. This indicator reflected
several aspects of PIM that the project’s activities and outputs were intended to support. An increasing throw-
forward had a negative impact on budgetary discipline resulting from insufficient budget allocations and slow
execution of projects. With improved data analysis capacity, the databases for public investment schemes




                                                                                                   Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KP Governance and Policy (P156410)



and assets were intended to help optimize resource allocation and align public assets more closely with
community needs.

The ICR notes (para 37) that the reduction in overall throw-forward was beyond the control of the project,
especially after FATA’s merger with KP when both annual development programs were combined, and the
worsening macro-fiscal situation of the province towards the end of the project. The TTL clarified that the
performance on this indicator was affected by lack of sector strategies that could inform the inclusion of
projects in ADP; inclusion of unapproved projects in ADP; insufficient budget allocation or disbursement; and
slow execution of projects, areas that were not in the project’s control. However, the author acknowledged
that after FATA’s merger with KP the team missed the opportunity to either replace this indicator or at least
change the baseline or final target as the baseline data did not include allocations for FATA, and the actual
numbers reported against final target included allocations for the merged areas.

Reduction in total throw-forward amount in the Annual Development Plan. Baseline: PKR 420 million in
FY19/20. Target: At least 15% reduction over the baseline. Actual: PKR1,345 million increase in FY
22/23 (over 200% increase). The project did not achieve the target and warrants a Negligible rating. Not
Achieved.

Intermediate Outcome Indicators used to inform the project’s progress in PIM towards PDO2 also indicate
weak outcomes.

      IOI4: Unapproved projects as a share of total new projects included in the budget: Lack of discipline in
       reducing the number of unapproved projects included in the budget affected timely implementation of
       the projects and increased ADP throw-forward. Baseline: 29%. Target in FY23: 20%. Actual: 77% in
       FY23. The target was missed by a significant margin, supporting the Negligible efficacy rating for
       PDO2. Not Achieved.
      IOI5: Improving the implementation of public investment schemes. The monitoring of public
       investment schemes also indicated weak progress in PIM towards PDO2. Baseline: 25% in FY20.
       Target: 35% in FY2023. Actual: 29% in FY23 (662 out of 2,288 schemes) but was below the target.
       The intervention of combining the monitoring of schemes with the publication of their progress had the
       potential to enable timely completion of investment schemes which could have helped to reduce
       throw-forward. Not Achieved.

Unapproved projects, in the previous two years (FY21 and FY22) were reported to be 19% (on target). The
interview with the TTL clarified that this was due to the total number of new projects (Table 3) included in the
budget being substantially reduced in FY23, while the number of unapproved projects remained high,
resulting in a higher percentage than previous years’ performance.

The project’s target for training of public officials in PIM was overachieved (2,055 against the target of 820
officials trained) but the female participation target was missed (Target: 35%; Actual: 11% in FY23).
Exceeding the training target could have been a meaningful achievement if it contributed to measurable
outcomes in PIM but all three key indicators (main and two Intermediate indicators) fell significantly short of
their targets, justifying the Negligible efficacy rating for PDO2.

The project achieved positive outcomes for PDO2 by (i) the geotagging of 20,313 public investment assets by
FY2 against the target of 600; and the passing of the PFM Law in June 2022.



                                                                                                   Page 10 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KP Governance and Policy (P156410)



The activities to achieve PDO2 included legislation such as the PFM law which was a first for Pakistan and
would be an important step towards laying the rules for the entire planning, budgeting, and accounting cycle
necessary for efficient PIM. However, most of the other activities included training and support for the
establishment of specialized units in the FD which included a PIM unit, a social protection and gender
mainstreaming section and an ADP monitoring unit. The ICR does not explain how the quality of these
measures affected PIM.

Evidently, the KP PFM law was passed in 2022 and the KP PFM reforms strategy supported the
implementation of the law through pension and cash management reforms. The initial work for the latter was
done under GPP KP and other ongoing projects (KP Revenue Mobilization and Public Resource
Management Program, and KP Spending Effectively for Enhanced Development Program). Despite these
efforts, the implementation of the PFM law has been slow and has been affected by the turnover of
government staff.

The GPP KP also supported the establishment of the PIM unit, social protection, gender mainstreaming
section, and unit to monitor ADP schemes and public assets in the P&DD. The TTL interview confirms that
except for the digitization and geo-tagging of ADP schemes and public assets, the impact of these units in
improving PIM, accountability and transparency has been insignificant.

The main outcome indicator is rated Negligible. As both intermediate outcome indicators also missed their
targets, PDO2 is rated Negligible.




Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve accountability for public service delivery.

Rationale
ToC. The project activities aimed to address weak accountability for public service delivery through
leveraging governance reforms, operational management, capacity building and use of measures to improve
citizens’ feedback to achieve this. Specifically, the project activities aimed at strengthening government’s
capacity to track reform implementation, provide training to government officials, and prepare and implement
development projects. The causal links between project activities (inputs), outputs and outcomes were logical.

The activities to achieve PDO3 included supporting implementation of PFM reforms by establishing
specialized units in KP FD, supporting analytical work and technical advisory services, and providing
infrastructure support, and capacity building. These would help strengthen PFM and its accountability (ICR, p.
8, 16). The intended outcomes were monitorable.




                                                                                               Page 11 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KP Governance and Policy (P156410)



The activities to achieve PDO3 also included providing support for citizen engagement in service delivery
monitoring, and operational and infrastructure support, as well as support for strengthening of anti-corruption
measures and judicial reforms to improve accountability in public service delivery (ICR, pages 16 and 48).

Outputs

      Establishment of a PFM Accreditation Program and a procurement and supply chain management
         diploma program for continuous capacity building, post-closure of the project.
        Establishment of specialized units in KP’s FD, including internal audit, debt management and
         corporate governance of SOEs units.
        Study on pension liabilities.
        Design of an E-procurement software, launch a website to share information about tenders and
         contract awards, and provide a platform for grievance redressal.
        Creation of a Center of Excellence at KPPRA that offered a Public Procurement and Supply Chain
         Diploma Program to build the procurement capacity of public officials.
        Extension of the KP Citizen’s Portal to the whole country in 2018. The portal was then available under
         “Pakistan Citizen’s Portal,” managed by the Prime Minister’s Performance Delivery Unit.
        Implementation of accountability measures and institutions such as the KP Right to Public Services
         Act 2013 and the KP Right to Information Act 2013.
        Strengthening of anti-corruption measures and judicial reforms to improve accountability.

Outcomes

Citizens reporting satisfaction with selected notified services. Baseline: 0% in FY20. Target: 75%. Actual:
84% of citizens reported satisfaction with select notified services in FY23. The project overachieved the
target.

Intermediate Outcome Indicators used to inform the project’s progress towards achievement of PDO3 also
indicate positive outcomes:

      IOI6: Citizens reporting that water and sanitation services (WSS) were provided within the stipulated
       time frame. Baseline: 0% of citizens’ satisfaction with WWS in FY20. Target: 50% of citizens’
       satisfaction with WWS. Actual: 77.5% of citizens’ satisfaction with WWS in FY23. Data for this
       indicator is based on the Citizens’ Perception Survey. The target was exceeded. Achieved.
      IOI7: Complaints resolved through Pakistan Citizen Portal. Baseline: 60% of complaints received from
       KP were reported as resolved in FY21. Target: 75% of complaints resolved. Actual: 98.5% of
       complaints received from KP were reported as resolved in FY23. The project overachieved the target.
       Achieved.
      IOI8: Procuring government entities publishing procurement plans online. Baseline: 27 in May 2020.
       Original Target: 42. Revised Target: 37. Actual: 38 in June 2023. Target was achieved. Achieved.
      IOI9: Improved legal and institutional framework for anticorruption. Baseline: Existing legal and
       institutional framework for anticorruption is inadequate. Target: Action Plan for rationalization of
       provincial government entities dealing with mandate for anti-corruption finalized and submitted for
       cabinet approval. Draft new anti-corruption legislation submitted to the Provincial Assembly. Actual:
       Institutional assessment for all entities with anti-corruption mandate completed, and Action Plan and
       new Anti-Corruption Act drafted. Draft Act was not submitted to the Provincial Assembly for approval

                                                                                                 Page 12 of 22
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                KP Governance and Policy (P156410)



                                     and Action Plan was also pending approval of the Cabinet. The project partially achieved the target.
                                     Partially Achieved.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall project efficacy under the revised objectives is rated as Modest. The efficacy rating for PDO1 is rated
                            Substantial with two critical revenue indicators not achieved. PDO3 is rated Substantial. However, the project
                            fell significantly short of achieving PDO2: ‘To improving PIM for service delivery’ which is rated Negligible. In
                            addition, two other intermediate PIM indicators (IOI4 and IOI5) also missed their targets by large margins,
                            indicating weak progress towards PDO2.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency: There was no cost-benefit analysis prepared either at the time of appraisal or when the
   project was restructured. The ICR attempted to assess efficiency gains with respect to operations costs (Annex
   4) by linking project activities to medium and long-term gains in development related to impact on revenue
   growth, transparency in the tax system and improved public trust related with higher revenue collection and
   taxpayer compliance along with higher efficiency from digitization; and enhanced decision-making and efficiency
   in public asset management due to the geotagging of public assets.

   The ICR’s assessment of the project’s benefits is largely qualitative and points to increased capacity building
   and accountability, and support for the legal framework. However, the project’s outcomes did not lead to
   improved PIM. Notably, inadequate advancement of HR/staffing and training plans for KPRA, increase in throw-
   forward, and unapproved projects’ inclusion in the budget were risks to the effectiveness and long-term
   sustainability of the project. In addition, the missed STS indicators related with the share of payers filing returns
   and the share of taxpayers filing any tax payment amount on their returns are likely to undermine the future
   achievement of the revenue indicator.

   Operational Efficiency: The duration of the project was from 2017 to 2023 and its overall financing almost
   doubled from US$10 million to US$18 million. It was restructured twice. By the closing date, 99% of the
   approved allocation was utilized with 18% for operation management (OSU cost) and 12% for the department’s
   monitoring and PDO activity management.




                                                                                                                               Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      KP Governance and Policy (P156410)



There was good value for money invested, given the political, economic, and social country context due to a
new government mandate, the instability derived from conflict-affected neighboring countries, and the
interruption of activities due to the pandemic. The project’s implementation yielded some positive outcomes and
while the actual cost almost doubled compared to the cost estimated at appraisal, it reflected the broader and
expanded sectoral and geographical scope.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The PDO was Highly Relevant to the Government strategy and the Bank strategy for Pakistan and the province
of KP. Overall efficacy is rated as Modest, given that outcomes for PDO2 fell significantly short of their targets.
Overall efficiency is rated as Modest, given that the project did not demonstrate economic or operational
efficiency due to shortcomings in achieving improved PIM, despite its good value for money in a fragile country
context. The overall outcome of the project is rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to the sustainability of the development outcome is assessed as Moderate. The project secured
strong progress, but it needed to be sustained, consolidated, and built upon. Development outcomes could
be constrained by the following factors (ICR, p. 31, para 93):

 Technical risk

      The success of the technical aspects of the sustainability plan including transferring procurement
        strategy and e-procurement system to GovKP’s own budget and continuity of several activities such

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      KP Governance and Policy (P156410)



       as geotagging and monitoring of public investment schemes online; e-stamp system; Citizen’s Portal;
       maintaining the online procurement portal; and taxpayers’ facilitation for registration and filing.
      The need to complete the processing of PC-1 approvals and Annual Development Plan (ADP)
       execution for which continuous training and staffing support will be needed.

Financial risk

      Deterioration in the fiscal situation after COVID-19 could undermine the continuation of some
       interventions or the implementation of the sustainability plan.

Social risk

      The shortage of funds faced by accountability institutions such as the Ombudsperson office, RTIC
       and RTSC would prevent the continuation of project activities central to citizens’ engagement.
      The shortage of funds for staffing and training financed under the project.

Political risk

      Risks associated with new conflicts in neighboring countries which could lead to political and social
       instability and economic disruptions deteriorating public service delivery and trust in public institutions
       (ICR, p. 5)
      Other risks the ICR failed to mention are associated with the national and provincial KP governments
       being supported by opposing ruling parties, and the risks related with the sustainability of
       the decentralization reforms beyond the electoral momentum. Both could imply a reduction in the
       resources allocated at the provincial level for continuation of the reforms after the project ended.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design was relevant to the KP government’s strategy and responded to the specific
  governance and service delivery needs of the KP province. The design benefited from previous World
  Bank technical and analytical work, including the MDTF-financed Governance Support Projects; the 2007
  PEFA assessment; the Assessment and the Post-Conflict Needs Assessment (PCNA) of 2010; and the
  Bank’s global experience in the areas of governance reforms and ICT innovation for accountability.

  Government ownership was strong due to the incorporation of the lessons from these previous Bank
  operations along with successful coordination with government authorities. Support was provided by the
  Operations Support Unit (OSU) and the Governance Reforms Support Unit (GRSU).

  Nonetheless, there were moderate shortcomings in the quality at entry. The original results framework
  had indicators that were either out of the project’s control, difficult to measure, had unrealistic targets, or
  in some cases, needed better definitions (ICR, p. 7). The project team had an opportunity to make
  appropriate modifications to account for these shortcomings at the time of the first restructuring in 2020
  when the project’s PDO and the results framework were substantially modified. However, only some

                                                                                                       Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KP Governance and Policy (P156410)



  indicators were revised or dropped. Other indicators such as the throw-forward amount intended to
  measure key PIM outcomes related with PDO2 were not revised. They were ambitious and the ICR notes
  that they did not account fully for the challenges posed by the merger of FATA with KP, as well as the
  weak capacity of the administration. As a result, at project closing, instead of making progress, the PIM-
  related indicators showed (i) growing throw- forward amounts, and (ii) budgets with a large share of
  public investment schemes with unapproved PC-1s, which jeopardized the sustainability of PFM.

  While the mitigation measures were generally appropriate, the ICR notes that the project could have
  benefitted from hiring a Financial Management Specialist, reducing the hires under the Incremental
  Operating Cost (IOC) category and making clear the responsibilities of the Project Coordinator (ICR, p.
  23)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank’s team conducted regular implementation support missions, provided regular advice to
 implementing agencies and benefitted from some of its members being based in the country which allowed
 for closer interaction with the government (ICR, para 89, p. 30). The supervision of the project was
 satisfactory due to: (i) consistent engagement with the client and regular supervision missions; (ii)
 adequate documentation of supervision missions according to Bank procedures; (iii) timely reporting of
 progress against project targets based on information provided by the implementing agencies, and in the
 case of Performance Based Conditions (PBC) indicators, by Third Party Validation (TPV) reports; (iv)
 timely coordination and suggestions for solutions to new challenges such as the expansion of the project’s
 scope and revision of the results framework; (v) support for project coordination and peer learning for
 improved performance between GPP KP, GPP FATA and GPP Balochistan; and (vi) responsiveness to the
 challenges emerging from the COVID-19 pandemic, which led the Bank’s team to implement virtual
 communication and extend the project’s end date to allow for the completion of some activities. However,
 there were minor shortcomings: (i) Weak performance in most indicators before restructuring was not
 flagged by the team in the Implementation Status and Results Reports; (ii) The need for restructuring could
 have been flagged at the time of the FATA merger in 2018 instead of 2020; (iii) The first restructuring in
 2020 failed to incorporate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic that warranted an extension in project
 closing. This led to a second restructuring in 2022 to allow time for project completion.

 In addition, the ICR notes that in the early stage of implementation there were problems related to
 understaffing and capacity constraints which were resolved over time. Likewise, towards the end of the
 project, there were delays in disbursements from the FD (ICR, para 65).

 Finally, four changes in TTLs during the lifetime of the project may have contributed to these shortcomings
 in supervision, although the ICR noted (para 97) that continuity and institutional knowledge of some Bank
 team members helped to offset the challenges posed by frequent changes in the project’s TTL.

 Despite these challenges, the project was fully disbursed and the impact on unachieved targets was
 minimal.


                                                                                                 Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KP Governance and Policy (P156410)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The original results framework had a few shortcomings as noted in the quality-at-entry section (8a) related
 to inappropriate indicators. At the time of project restructuring, while some of these shortcomings were
 redressed, the WBG team failed to design adequate results indicators related to PIM which was central for
 the monitoring of progress towards PDO2. The indicator: “reduction in total throw-forward amount in the
 Annual Development Plan (ADP)” had limitations in terms of the clarity/linkage of its baseline/targets with
 the post-merger situation of the FATA and KP provinces and needed to be adjusted as the operating
 context changed.

 The PAD did not provide an explicit exposition of the ToC but the latter was clearly reflected in the causal
 links between project activities, intermediate outcomes/ outputs and outcomes.




b. M&E Implementation
  Project M&E institutional arrangements (PAD, p. 9) were adequate and the M&E framework was also
  used for monitoring the utilization of funds. The M&E data helped inform project decision-making, such as
  the first restructuring and the mitigation of delays related to the COVID-19 pandemic, which introduced
  remote working tools and extended the project’s closing date to complete the implementation of ongoing
  project activities.

  Daily management and coordination of the project, including monitoring results and generating
  performance and financial reports on implementation was adequately supported through an Operational
  Support Unit (OSU). The OSU was headed by a Project Coordinator who reported to the Director General
  PCNA and had very low turnover in government that contributed to effective functioning. The M&E
  function was assigned to an M&E specialist in the OSU and the implementing agencies assigned focal
  persons for monitoring relevant PDO and intermediate indicators. A TPV firm was also hired to assess
  progress on Performance Based Conditions indicators and results (ICR, p. 26, para 71). It submitted bi-
  annual reports which were consistently used as the basis for authorizing Bank’s disbursements upon
  successful achievement of PBC targets. Verification reports were also found to be consistent with
  information provided by implementation agencies.



                                                                                                   Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KP Governance and Policy (P156410)




c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data on performance and progress against project’s targets were satisfactorily used to inform
  strategic project direction, resource reallocation, monitoring utilization of funds, project management,
  and decision-making. After restructuring of the project, potential overlap in activities with FATA GPP was
  avoided by regular monitoring of the project funds and coordination between the OSUs of KP and FATA
  GPPs. The Annual Work Plans of the project were approved by the project Steering Committee and the
  World Bank’s TTL. With the availability of additional financing after restructuring in 2020, the project
  included requests for complementary support from additional departments which were not included in
  the project document or restructuring paper (for example, support for Board of Revenue, Excise
  Tax and Narcotics Control Department). The activities in these work plans were aligned with the
  project’s results, and complemented interventions under other projects. As a result, the project financed
  additional activities in 13 departments.
  M&E data was also used to guide decision making, such as the actuarial study on pension liabilities
  which underpinned the policy reform of pensions in KP.

  The automatic geo-tagged record of public assets was used for assessing flood related damages in
  public infrastructure in 2022 and helped to strengthen KP’s resilience to floods.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards: The project was classified under Category C (partial assessment
   project) at appraisal as it did not include any activities that involved environmental or social risks, primarily
   because no construction or major civil works were envisaged.

   Although at appraisal, the Project Information Document rated social risks as “significant” because the
   region’s security situation and vulnerability to natural disasters could have resulted in social disruptions, the
   Category C classification was maintained during implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. Throughout implementation, the project effectively complied with the financing
   agreement covenants and financial management was consistently rated as Satisfactory. The project
   submitted to the Bank regular financial reports and audited Annual Financial Statements that were judged




                                                                                                      Page 18 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KP Governance and Policy (P156410)



   satisfactory. The Internal Audit report prepared by an external firm showed satisfactory performance of the
   overall FM function (ICR, p. 27)

   Procurement. Procurement was carried out in accordance with Bank procedures but some weaknesses
   were identified. The hiring processes for staff and procurement procedures were not implemented as the
   Bank’s guidelines mandated. There were delays in payments to consultants/contractors and the IOC
   (Incremental Operating Costs) budget line was used to hire staff above the number required by the project
   (ICR, p. 28).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR noted unintended positive impacts that contributed to the overall PDO (p. 22). The results of
   project activities supported reforms under other WB lending operations, including programs on revenue
   mobilization and public resource management, effective expenditure for enhanced development, raising
   revenue, and institutional resilience.

   In addition, the project helped strengthening KP’s resilience to floods. The automatic geo-tagged record of
   public assets was used for assessing flood related damages in public infrastructure in 2022.



d. Other
   The ICR raised no other issues.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 PDO2’s Negligible rating, also
                               Moderately            Moderately
Outcome                                                                          validated by the ICR, led to a
                               Satisfactory          Unsatisfactory
                                                                                 Modest rating for Efficacy.
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

The following lessons are informed by the ICR and project documents (ICR, p. 31-33).
Political ownership is needed to sustain momentum in governance reforms and ensure successful
implementation of project activities. A significant factor in KP Governance and Policy Program
project was its strong alignment with the government’s strategy and the project team’s
responsiveness to the governance challenges that surfaced during project implementation.

                                                                                                   Page 19 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       KP Governance and Policy (P156410)



Implementing agencies in KP led the project’s design and supervision of project activities, fostering a
sense of ownership and commitment to project outcomes. Project implementation benefited from
political ownership of reforms. Leadership and reform commitment in the implementing agencies and
participating departments was in place and was encouraged by the performance orientation of top
political leadership (e.g., by directly seeking citizens’ feedback through the portal).

Incremental Operating Cost (IOC) expenditures should be clear, subject to review and approval, and
included in the operations manual to prevent ineligible expenditures from being included in the
budget. Since IOC spending does not pass through WBG’s procurement review process, it can
provide room for ineligible expenditures. The case of KP Governance and Policy Program project
shows that problems such as staff hiring without due process, excessive spending on repair and
maintenance of assets and inclusion of expenditures which were otherwise procurable in nature that
led to delays could have been prevented had there been upfront training on IOC rules at the start of
the project and greater scrutiny throughout the project by the Bank’s financial management team.

Dedicated effort and strategies are needed upfront to develop gender-sensitive approaches to
capacity-building to ensure the inclusion of and impact on women. The case of KP Governance and
Policy Program project shows that female participation in capacity building activities in KP was low
(11% of total trainees) at the beginning and became a constraint in rolling out a gender-sensitive
approach to capacity building because special measures to improve women’s participation were not
taken at an early stage of the project. Examples of government policies that could have increased
female participation in KP are related with mobility issues which could have been solved by offering
women virtual participation or providing training closer to the place of duty/residence or by improving
transportation. Introducing incentives in hiring departments (or hiring managers) to ensure higher
female employee participation in trainings or making relevant training mandatory for promotion in
certain job descriptions to ensure that they did not exclude women could also have been addressed
by improved government policies.

ICT-based solutions can improve public service delivery, but their success also depends on strong
political leadership and the government’s ability to hire and retain quality ICT professionals. The
case of KP Governance and Policy Program project shows that innovative technology using ICT-
based solutions can go a long way in improving public service delivery in countries or provinces
where government’s overall administrative capacity is low. In KP, the technologies that made an
important contribution were the establishment of a KP’s Citizen’s portal to collect feedback and
monitor responses; geotagging of public investment assets and schemes for efficient monitoring and
policy decisions; implementation of e-procurement systems to enhance transparency and
monitoring; virtual hearings of cases in the Secretariat for District Judiciary; and an e-stamp system
for taxpayers’ facilitation. The project unit had staff for key positions –including an ICT specialist. In
addition, the use of ICT technology transformed citizens’ engagement through the citizens’ portal for
the accountability of public services.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

                                                                                                      Page 20 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      KP Governance and Policy (P156410)




14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Structure. The ICR presented a clear and coherent narrative to the background of the project. However, the
ICR did not follow the ICR guideline that requires the discussion to be focused on the objectives of the
project. Instead, the discussion in the ICR, especially the Efficacy and Efficiency sections that are central to the
overall Outcome rating, is focused on the components of the project. This Review reformulated the PDO into
three objectives or PDOs 1 – 3 and selected some of the indicators listed in Annex 1 to evaluate the project’s
performance and outcome. There is abundant detail and analysis in the ICR about component-based activities
and outputs but most of them are not directly relevant to the central focus of an ICR which is supposed to be
PDO-focused.

The ICR evaluated the relevance and achievement of the PDO through two components covering inputs and
outputs and an additional component supporting training. Many of the results indicators are also evaluated in
the context of the components. Despite a good presentation of the figure displaying the ToC underlying the
project, the discussion in the ICR, its results matrix and results indicators switches between the three
components and the PDO (which can easily be reformulated into three objectives) with no clear assignment of
indicators for the PDOs.

The ICR reformulated the PDO into two objectives which are covered by two outcome areas (i-increasing
capacity for revenue mobilization and PFM, and ii- improving PIM and accountability in public services), which
are measured through four PDO indicators; and an additional outcome area (providing effective support for the
coordination of governance reforms and operational management) was assessed as an intermediate indicator.
Nonetheless, the ICR clearly stated that “Assessment of key components and associated PDO/outcome and
intermediate indicators of the Project was considered to provide a comprehensive picture of the efficacy of the
project” (p. 55, i, a).

Lessons. The lessons learned were clear, comprehensive, and on target, but missed potential lessons in the
political economy context. They logically flow from the data and analysis provided in the ICR.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                     Page 21 of 22
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
KP Governance and Policy (P156410)




                                                                  Page 22 of 22
