     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EQRA (P159378)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023452

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P159378                                   EQRA

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Afghanistan                               Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D3810,TF-A8449,TF-A9570,TF-           31-Dec-2023                                          89,326,187.33
 B5406

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Sep-2018                               31-Dec-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          200,000,000.00                                  223,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           122,893,312.59                                   47,398,148.09

 Actual                                         89,326,187.33                                  47,398,148.09




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Judyth L. Twigg            Christopher David            Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                            Nelson                       Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (p. 4) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 8), the project's
   objectives were to increase equitable access to primary and secondary education, particularly for girls, in
   selected lagging provinces, and to improve learning conditions in Afghanistan. According to the PAD (p. 8),
   "lagging provinces" were defined as those with the highest proportion and highest number of out-of-school
   girls (more than 70 percent).


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EQRA (P159378)



   As "equitable access" referred primarily to access for girls, this Review will assess achievement of three
   objectives:

          Increase access to primary and secondary education (overall access, in selected provinces)
          Increase access to equitable primary and secondary education, particularly for girls (equitable access,
           in selected provinces)
          Improve learning conditions in Afghanistan (learning conditions, nation-wide)

   A reverse split rating will be applied here, as agreed with OPCS, to reflect the operational changes after the
   Taliban takeover in August 2021.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  07-Oct-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project was approved with four components:

   1. Equitable access to basic education (appraisal: US$190 million, of which US$68 million was from the
   International Development Association [IDA]). Following a traditional investment project financing (IPF)
   approach, the intention was to: (a) improve school infrastructure in rural areas in 17 selected provinces,
   through the construction of new school buildings, the provision of missing essential elements for
   rehabilitation of existing buildings, and strengthening of the Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and
   Development's (MRRD's) capacity, including with respect to school construction; (b) provide school grants
   to eligible schools, to finance school supplies, access to hygienic products for girls, transport facilities for
   female students and teachers, bridge courses, and operations and maintenance expenditures; and (c)
   support community-based education (CBE) through strengthening the Ministry of Education's (MOE)
   capacity to develop an implementation plan for CBE policy, and expanding CBE classes in selected
   provinces.

   2. Improving learning conditions (appraisal: US$35 million, of which US$9.5 million was from IDA),
   following a results-based approach, which was to support: (a) subject knowledge training of teachers of
   selected grades and the development of standardized examinations for teacher training colleges; (b) a pilot
   program, including its evaluation, to strengthen coaching and training of teachers and classroom
   observation; and (c) the development of new curricula and relevant learning materials for schools, and the
   delivery of textbooks from provincial education directorates (PEDs) to schools. Disbursements were to be



                                                                                                       Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    EQRA (P159378)



  made against an eligible expenditure program upon achievement of pre-specified results as measured by
  disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs).

  3. Strengthening education sector planning capacity and transparency (appraisal: US$39 million, of
  which US$11 million was from IDA), following a results-based approach, the intention was to support: (a)
  improving the education management information system (EMIS), including refining data sets, integrating
  fragmented systems, and strengthening data verification processes through monitoring of data reported in
  the EMIS with respect to CBE, conducting monthly phone surveys for schools, conducting physical
  verification of data among a random sample of schools, and comparing data with citizen scorecards; (b)
  improving teacher recruitment and management, by establishing a personnel database and supporting
  MOE in clarifying and communicating relevant regulations, policies, guidelines, norms, and targets; and (c)
  improving budget planning and introducing results-based reporting by developing norms for the annual
  O&M budget allocation for provinces and introducing a basic performance management system for PEDs
  and district education directorates (DEDs). Disbursements were to be made against an eligible expenditure
  program upon the achievement of pre-specified results as measured by DLIs.

  4. Technical assistance (appraisal: US$34 million, of which US$11.5 million from IDA), following a
  traditional IPF approach, was to support technical assistance intended to strengthen MOE's capacity, a pilot
  of early childhood education, and third-party verification of DLIs. At an October 2020 restructuring, this
  component was sorted into three sub-components: (i) project management, technical assistance, and
  monitoring and evaluation (M&E); (ii) an early childhood education pilot; and (iii) MOE's COVID-19
  response, covering maintenance works to prepare schools for reopening and the provision of
  supplementary courses in math and science grades 10-12 to mitigate learning losses during school
  closures.

  Because of the rapid fall of the government in August 2021 and the subsequent takeover by the Taliban, it
  has not been possible to get complete information on disbursements by component (this information would
  normally be provided by government counterparts).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Total costs at appraisal were US$298 million, to be financed through a US$100 million grant from IDA,
  US$100 million from the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund, and US$98 million from the Global
  Partnership for Education (GPE). Additional financing of US$25 million was provided at a February 2021
  restructuring, bringing total project costs to US$323 million. US$25 million was cancelled in June 2020 as
  part of a collective portfolio restructuring to support the country's COVID-19 response under a different
  project. US$89.3 million was eventually disbursed. An additional US$75 million was verified by the third-
  party monitoring agency on June 15, 2021, but had not yet been disbursed by August 2021.

  No government contribution was planned or made. Under the second and third components, it was required
  that the government demonstrate that spending against the agreed eligible expenditure programs was at
  least equal to the DLI amounts.

  The project was approved on September 28, 2018, and became effective on January 3, 2019. It was
  suspended (with the rest of the country portfolio) after the Taliban takeover of the government in August
  2021, and it was formally closed on the original scheduled closing date of December 31, 2023.


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EQRA (P159378)



   There were three restructurings:

         October 7, 2020: The project restructured the fourth component, reallocated US$16.3 million to
          COVID-19 response efforts under that component, and scaled back other activities and outcome
          indicators accordingly. A new Component 5 on contingency emergency response, with an allocation
          of US$0, was added (this component was not triggered). Condensed procurement procedures were
          incorporated for activities related to COVID-19.
         November 27, 2020: Due dates for DLI disbursement conditions were adjusted to reflect delays
          related to the COVID-19 pandemic, and some DLIs were revised.
         February 24, 2021: Additional financing was allocated to scale up activities related to school
          construction, establishment of CBE classes, and the addition of two new activities: implementation of
          a gender-based violence action plan, and teacher training focused on early grade reading.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project's objectives were highly relevant to country context. Afghanistan faced tremendous challenges
at the time of project appraisal. Its fragility, in terms of weak state institutions, poor governance, and
dysfunctional societal relations leading to violent conflict between groups, impacted almost every aspect of
development. Poverty had increased from 38.3 percent in 2012-2013 to 54.5 percent in 2016-2017.
International security forces had begun to withdraw in 2011, contributing to high political uncertainties and
an escalation of violence. With an extremely underdeveloped private sector, the economy relied almost
entirely on foreign aid and public expenditure.

Afghanistan had made great strides in access to general education, but a large number of children,
especially girls, were left behind. Although school enrollment had increased from 0.8 million in 2002 to over
8 million in 2017, there was still significant disparity among provinces. There were eight provinces where
over 70 percent of school-age girls were not attending school. Nation-wide, boys were 1.5 times as likely as
girls to attend middle school, and twice as likely to attend high school. The 2014 Afghanistan Living
Conditions Survey pointed to three primary drivers of this gender disparity: security concerns, lack of family
permission for girls to attend, and lack of an available school or a school within a reasonable distance.
Construction of new schools and expansion of existing ones had contributed to some positive growth in the
sector, but half of all schools still lacked buildings, and others did not have surrounding boundary walls
(essential for security reasons). Half of the student population was being taught under tents or in the open
air. CBE (educating students in private spaces) had emerged as an important practice, especially for girls in
conflict-affected and sparsely populated areas.

Education quality remained "abysmally" low (PAD, p. 4), in large part due to low capabilities of teachers.
Even the half of teachers who met minimum qualifications (a two-year post-secondary degree) were not
delivering satisfactory learning outcomes among students. The distribution of teachers was uneven across
regions, lacking correlation with number of students or school-age population. There was no thoroughly
assessed and relevant curriculum or set of standard learning assessments. Centrally managed education


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 20
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       EQRA (P159378)



policies left little room for PEDs to innovate or adapt to the diverse range of local contexts. MOE staff—who
constituted 68 percent of the total civil service—suffered from severe capacity constraints, cumbersome
internal processes, poor interdepartmental coordination, inconsistent enforcement of regulations and
guidelines, and widespread corruption. Continued reliance on externally funded technical assistance
negatively impacted sustainability and the capacity of permanent civil servants and regular structures.

The project's objectives were consistent with government strategy. The government's strategic vision, as
outlined in the Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework (October 2016), focused on
improving governance and state effectiveness, building social capital, creating jobs and economic growth,
and reducing poverty. The Framework contained a Citizens' Charter program that outlined specific steps for
improving the quality of health and education programs. Afghanistan's third National Education Plan (2017-
2021), prepared under MOE leadership, was anchored in three priority areas—quality and relevance,
equitable access, and efficient and transparent management—that were all reflected in project activities
and outcomes.

Finally, the project's objectives were aligned with Bank strategy. The Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
for FY2017-2020 (extended to FY2022 by the 2019 Performance and Learning Review) contained an
objective on improved human development, with a specific focus on improved access to quality education.
CPF indicators included improved primary school completion rates, a halt in the declining ratio of girls to
boys attending primary schools, and improved quality of school graduates.

This project's objectives were appropriately pitched given the Bank's prior engagement with Afghanistan's
education sector. The First and Second Education Quality Improvement Programs (EQUIP, US$44 million,
2004-2010; and EQUIP II, US$87 million, 2008-2017) were national programs focused on increasing
access to basic education through school construction, quality enhancement grants for schools, teacher
training, social mobilization, strengthening of the EMIS, and piloting learning assessment. This project
learned lessons from its predecessors (see Section 8a) and took advantage of newly transparent and
competitive procedures for recruiting procurement staff, a shift in responsibility for construction of rural
schools from MOE to MRRD, and fresh recruitment of PED directors through the Bank-supported Capacity
Building for Results facility (US$71.8 million, 2011-2018). According to the PAD (p. 6), "these changes
offered an opportunity for successful implementation of the EQRA [Arabic for "read"] project." In an
exchange with IEG on April 11, 2024, the project team stressed that the project's focus shifted to targeting
provinces but still intended to have national-level impact, as the targeted provinces—which constituted half
of all provinces—were those with the worst access and gender equity performance. Under conditions of
insufficient capacity to carry out civil works nationally, province-level targeting was appropriate. Further,
given capacity constraints, the project focused on a small set of national-level activities to enhance
education quality (policy changes, curricular revisions, distribution of learning materials) that were relatively
simple to implement.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)



                                                                                                       Page 5 of 20
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  EQRA (P159378)


EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Increase access to primary and secondary education in selected lagging provinces

               Rationale
               The project's theory of change held that easing the constraints that limited school participation and regular
               school attendance, including deteriorating security, availability of schools, and distance to schools, would
               increase access to education. Specific interventions aimed at addressing these constraints—developing a
               school site selection policy, expanding construction of new schools, rehabilitating/upgrading existing schools
               in targeted provinces, providing resources in the form of school grants to address school-specific needs, and
               providing resources for expansion of CBE arrangements—would lead to an increase in the number of schools
               available to students, and that were schools families would choose for their children to attend. This, in turn,
               would increase access to primary and secondary education.

               Outputs

               722 schools were constructed or expanded with classrooms, boundary walls, water points, and gender-
               segregated latrines, not meeting the original target of 2,646 or the revised target of 2,398 schools.
               Construction was actively under way at another 371 school sites as of August 15, 2021, but had stalled at 406
               other sites due to a shortage of funds, security issues, and social and land problems.

               Preparatory work for the school grant program took place, but the program was not operational by August 15,
               2021. No school grants were implemented, not reaching the target of 2,298 school grants. Similarly, a
               mapping of CBE needs and guidelines on a harmonized approach to CBE were completed, but the CBE
               program did not become operational.

               Planned COVID-19-related activities were not implemented.

               Outcomes

               The number of students attending school regularly in selected provinces was 4.32 million in 2016 and 4.01
               million in 2021, not meeting the original target of 5.02 million or the revised target of 4.99 million students.

               The number of out-of-school children in selected provinces was 2.29 million in 2016 and 2.86 million in 2021,
               not reaching the original target of a reduction to 1.09 million or the revised target of a reduction to 1.10 million
               children.

               The ICR (p. 15) rated achievement of this objective Substantial based on the argument that "it is likely that the
               PDO-level indicator targets were on track to be met by the original December 31, 2023, closing date."
               However, this ambitious claim is not supported by the relatively slow building program and minimal progress
               beyond preparatory work for the grants and the CBE support. There is insufficient evidence provided in the
               ICR to support the assertion that the project would get close to its intended targets. There was backsliding
               from the baselines on both outcome indicators, with a decrease in the number of children attending school
               regularly and an increase in the number of out-of-school children in selected provinces. While these figures
               were inevitably influenced by the COVID-19 pandemic and fraught security situation, the fact that they
               occurred in a situation of additional classrooms being provided suggests that the intended theory of change
               did not align with the response to this development challenge. On April 11, 2024, the project team provided

                                                                                                                     Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EQRA (P159378)



additional information from the Afghanistan Welfare Monitoring Survey indicating that primary school
attendance had improved by 18 percentage points for boys and 24 percentage points for girls between 2020
and 2023. However, that same survey showed stagnation in secondary school attendance for boys, and
sharp drop-offs (large regression from baseline) in secondary school attendance for girls, over that same time
frame. Thus, the achievement of this objective is rated Negligible.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The objective was not revised, but official operations ceased after the Taliban takeover on August 15, 2021.

Revised Rationale
Since the Taliban takeover on August 15, 2021, there has been no official relationship between the World
Bank and the government. The ICR (p. 16) speculated that the construction was completed on 109 additional
schools after that date, but this conclusion was based on a sample of construction sites visited by the third-
party monitoring agency with no information provided on how that sample was selected. Only 14 schools
were actually confirmed to have been completed. The ICR (p. 16) cited preliminary data from the ongoing
UNICEF education survey indicating that, as of June 2022, school attendance had increased at the primary
level but decreased at the secondary level. On April 11, 2024, the project team provided additional
information from the Afghanistan Welfare Monitoring Survey indicating that primary school attendance had
improved by 18 percentage points for boys and 24 percentage points for girls between 2020 and 2023.
However, that same survey showed stagnation in secondary school attendance for boys, and sharp drop-offs
(large regression from baseline) in secondary school attendance for girls, over that same time frame.
Therefore, the rating following the Taliban takeover is Negligible.



Revised Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Increase equitable access to primary and secondary education, particularly for girls, in selected lagging
provinces

Rationale
In addition to the logic governing the first objective, the theory of change for this objective held that gender-
friendly school construction and rehabilitation, with a focus on features such as boundary walls and gender-
segregated latrines, as well as the incorporation of gender-sensitive activities such as increasing access to
female hygiene products and transport facilities for female students and teachers under the school grants
program, and priority access under the first round of school grants to all-girl schools, would transform schools
into spaces that are more acceptable to girls and their families. This, in turn, would increase equitable access

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EQRA (P159378)



to primary and secondary education, particularly for girls, in the project-targeted provinces. However, as the
ICR (p. 32) noted, this logic emphasized almost entirely supply-side issues. In this specific country
environment, with deteriorating economic conditions and ideological factors suppressing school attendance
for girls, interventions focused on the demand side—direct subsidies, specific incentives to keep girls in
school, efforts to engage communities and religious leaders—may have also been required. In addition,
presuming that these mechanisms applied equally across the different targeted regions also diminished the
complexity of the given development challenge. On April 11, 2024, the project team noted that other parallel
projects were addressing demand-side issues through an array of different interventions.

Outputs

The 772 schools that were constructed or expanded were placed in areas with lagging gender enrollment,
without regard for political considerations (ICR, p. 15). Priority was given to provinces with the highest
numbers and the highest percentages of out-of-school girls, and to the construction of girl-only and mixed
schools.

The school grants program that was intended to incorporate gender-sensitive features and activities in
project-supported schools was not implemented. This was an essential element of the design theory.

Following allegations of child sexual abuse in one province (ICR, p. 21), a dedicated inter-agency working
group was established to address gender-based violence. This group began to establish protocols and uptake
channels, including a draft code of conduct and grievance redress mechanism. It remains unclear whether
this mitigated future risks for attendees.

Outcomes

The number of girls attending school regularly in selected provinces was 1.62 million in 2016 and 1.47 million
in 2021, not meeting the original target of 1.92 million or the revised target of 1.91 million girls.

The number of out-of-school girls in selected provinces was 1.38 million in 2016 and 1.63 million in 2021, not
reaching the original target of a reduction to 0.64 million or the revised target of a reduction to 0.65 million
girls.

The ICR (p. 20) noted that "the project did not have a marked impact on reducing gender disparities." With
key outputs not implemented and regression from the baseline on relevant outcome targets, there is little
evidence to illustrate that the chosen approach had any impact on shifting the drivers for why girls were not
attending school. Again, the increasingly fraught security situation and the impending pressures on the
government were undoubtedly working against the intended program theory. However, the backward slide in
the numbers also suggests that there were numerous additional constraints to progress above and beyond
those incorporated in the project. Thus, the achievement of this objective is rated Negligible.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EQRA (P159378)




Revised Objective
The objective was not revised, but official operations ceased after the Taliban takeover on August 15, 2021.

Revised Rationale
Since the Taliban takeover on August 15, 2021, there has been no official relationship between the World
Bank and the government. There is no information about any project activities relevant to this objective after
that date, and considerable evidence points to further backsliding in terms of girls' education in Afghanistan.
Therefore, the objective here is rated Negligible.



Revised Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve learning conditions in Afghanistan

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective held that conducting of formal subject-based in-service training and
early-grade reading training for teachers, as well as intensive coaching, mentoring, and observation for
teachers and improved teacher recruitment practices, would lead to improvements in teacher allocation and
teaching quality. Curriculum reform and the development/distribution of new textbooks, teacher guides, and
instructional materials would lead to an enhancement of the offered curriculum in all grades. These
interventions would, taken together, lead to improved learning conditions across the country. This objective
also rested on assumptions that improvements in planning, data systems, and transparency—through the
provision of equipment and technology to refine EMIS datasets and strengthen data verification processes,
the establishment of a credible MOE personnel database, and the development of norms for annual budget
allocations and a performance management system for PEDs and DEDs—would lead to improved
procedures for quality assurance and teacher recruitment and management, ultimately improving overall
learning conditions.

Outputs

12.2 million primary textbooks (grades 1-6) were distributed from PEDs to DEDs and schools, not reaching
the target of 45 million textbooks. New textbooks for grades 1-6, along with teacher guides, were drafted, but
the MOE had not yet endorsed the curriculum by August 2021.

A teacher policy for prioritization in the hiring and allocation of teachers based on need was drafted and
endorsed by the MOE, the Civil Service Commission, and the Ministry of Finance, and were submitted for
Bank approval. The ICR (p. 21) referred to this teacher policy as a "major achievement." However,
development of the policy alone did not meet the target of development of the policy and hiring of at least 90
percent of newly hired permanent teachers and 75 percent of all temporary teachers based on the policy.

Baseline data collection on teaching quality and the identification of groups of teachers to be trained was
implemented, and some training and implementation manuals for teacher training and coaching were
developed. However, no grade 1-3 teachers and headmasters were trained in early grade reading, as

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EQRA (P159378)



planned. A planned evaluation of subject teacher training was not conducted. Teaching quality was not rated
based on classroom observations, as planned, and therefore the target of an increase in the teacher quality
rating by 0.4 or more standard deviations among sampled teachers was not reached.

The Bank provided hands-on support to building institutional capacity among MOE teams, but the results
were mixed. The ICR (p. 21) reported that it took time for new processes to be internalized. From a baseline
of no annual results-based reporting between MOE, PEDs, and related DEDs, reports for approximately 90
percent of target PEDS were completed, and work on remaining PEDs and DEDs was in progress in 2021.
This did not meet the target of 100 percent annual results reporting at all levels. As of 2021, the MOE made
progress towards reporting on results of its 2018 annual operational plan based on actual on-budget
allocations and projected off-budget allocations for 2020; this did not meet the target of progress reporting on
results of the 2018, 2019, and 2020 annual operational plans. While the MOE made good progress towards
the organizational mapping of all education staff, with all data (including biometric data for 223,000 teachers
and staff) entered into the personnel database, there were issues with reliability. After cleaning the data, MOE
and the Independent Administrative Reform and Civil Service Commission found that some entries were
incomplete. In addition, an interface between the personnel database and payroll was not completed as
planned. Provincial workshops were not conducted as planned with DED, schools, and shura representatives
to identify constraints to education. A call survey was completed toward the targeted goal of collecting data on
CBE and entering and verifying those data in the EMIS, but the survey was deemed to be unscalable in its
current form as of 2021. Many of these engagements are emblematic of the challenges of civil service reform.

The number of students benefiting from direct interventions to enhance learning increased from 6.45 million in
2016 to 7.53 million in 2021, exceeding the target of 7.25 million students. Of these, the number of girls
increased from 2.46 million in 2016 to 2.98 million in 2021, exceeding the target of 2.83 million girls.

Outcomes

The percentage of teachers meeting subject-specific qualifications was 52 percent at baseline (2018), and the
target was an increase to 72 percent, though no information is available on the level achievement for this
cohort of teachers. While there is very limited outcome-level evidence against the expected transformation
outlined in the theory of change, it is worth acknowledging the array of structural improvements that were
under way prior to the takeover. Given this progress towards the intended outcome, this objective is rated
Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The objective was not revised, but official operations ceased after the Taliban takeover on August 15, 2021.

Revised Rationale
Since the Taliban takeover on August 15, 2021, there has been no official relationship between the World
Bank and the government. There is no information about any project activities relevant to this objective after


                                                                                                 Page 10 of 20
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 EQRA (P159378)



                              that date, and many of the reform agendas under way will have inevitably fallen over, hence a Negligible
                              rating for this objective.



                              Revised Rating
                              Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is rated Negligible for the period prior to August 15, 2021. The ICR noted that, with the
                            project's focus on improvements in service delivery, transparency, and accountability, much of its planned
                            activity in its initial years was explicitly intended to be preparatory work. The ICR therefore assigned an
                            efficacy rating of Substantial for this period based primarily on progress in this preparatory work for school
                            construction and some other activities. However, reported outcomes on student attendance represented
                            consistent regression from baseline, and no data were available on other outcomes (teacher qualifications).
                            While some progress was made on essential reforms to improve learning conditions, this was insufficient to
                            instill confidence in their long-term sustainability.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                                Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is rated Negligible for the period after August 15, 2021. Following the Taliban takeover,
                            limited data on outputs or outcomes have been available. The ICR (p. 18) rated progress during this period
                            Modest "since school construction is being continued by communities," but there is insufficient evidence to
                            support these claims.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                        Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                                External shock


    5. Efficiency
   The PAD's economic and financial analysis (pp. 30-32) proceeded from the assumption, informed by
   international literature, that higher rates of schooling—and by extension, increased skills—will generate higher
   economic growth. With project provinces starting from a relatively low point, returns were expected to be high.
   The analysis found a net present value of over US$1 billion (using a 10 percent discount rate), considering only



                                                                                                                              Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EQRA (P159378)



future productivity gains from the flows of new students reached through project-financed interventions.
The internal rate of return was estimated at 21.1 percent.

The ICR did not conduct a formal economic analysis, stating only that "there is no reason to believe that with
continued support the project's investments would not yield positive returns" (p. 19). No data were provided to
support this supposition, and given the circumstances surrounding the Taliban takeover, this is highly unlikely.

The PAD (p. 26) outlined donor collaboration strategies designed to encourage implementation efficiency,
including a Local Education Group with representation from the government, development partners (DPs),
international non-governmental organizations, and various civil society organizations with a long-standing history
of engagement in the sector and with the government. In addition, a joint working group with representatives of
DPs, MOE, and MRRD was to provide oversight of annual sector budget planning, review project
implementation progress, and resolve bottlenecks as they arose. The ICR did not provide information on donor
coordination during project implementation. The project team later confirmed that a project steering committee
co-chaired by MOE and MRRD, with participation from DPs, met at least every two months to oversee
implementation, identify bottlenecks, and agree on next steps. DPs were invited to all project implementation
support missions, as planned, and were heavily engaged in the project from the early design stage through
implementation.

School construction implementation started before project effectiveness with US$8 million in bridge financing
from the Ministry of Finance, and early progress was made on the design of school grants and the MOE
personnel database. However, progress was stalled by significant implementation inefficiencies. Some of these
inefficiencies were caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, and some were a product of the country's deteriorating
security situation, which affected both the supply and demand of education services. Many of the key
inefficiencies, however, pre-dated the pandemic or were due to factors inherent in the project's design,
institutional arrangements, and implementation, irrespective of the pandemic or the country's security
environment. It was difficult for MOE to access financing from the Ministry of Finance to pre-finance project
activities toward meeting the DLIs (ICR, p. 32). Improvements to the MOE EMIS slowed due to disagreements
between MOE and the National Statistics and Information Authority on division of labor. Structural reform and
changes in the senior leadership of MOE in November 2020 led to requests for revision of some planned
activities and slowed overall implementation. The project required two different restructurings in consecutive
months in 2020 because of the need to obtain official approval from the management committee of the
GPE Secretariat and endorsement from development partners on modifications to DLIs. The ICR (pp. 19, 24)
also noted implementation inefficiencies stemming from delays in contracting technical assistance required for
implementation (resulting in extremely slow budget utilization), approval of school construction plans by multiple
entities, recruitment of district engineers by MRRD, hiring of the third-party verification agency for DLIs, and
finalization of project implementation manuals for most major project activities. The delays in contracting of
technical assistants and consultants "affected staffing across the board, including project management, fiduciary
areas, safeguard management, construction engineers, diverse activity coordinators, etc." (ICR, p. 24). The ICR
noted that hiring of a firm to review the engineering designs for school construction and renovation helped
reduce construction costs, but project records show that 208 school construction projects suffered cost
escalations exceeding 25 percent due to increases in transportation costs and the need to incorporate disaster
mitigation measures.

In light of the absence of an economic analysis at completion and evidence of significant implementation
inefficiencies, project efficiency is rated Modest.




                                                                                                    Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EQRA (P159378)



Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      100.00
 Appraisal                                                  21.10
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Under the original project, relevance is rated High, efficacy is rated Negligible, and efficiency is rated Modest.
Overall outcome is therefore rated Unsatisfactory.

The same ratings apply to the project following August 2021.

A split rating methodology was adapted specifically for the Afghanistan portfolio, given the abrupt fall of the
government and takeover by the Taliban. However, in this project, with the same ratings assigned to project
outcome both before and after August 2021, implementation of that methodology does not affect the ratings.

The project's overall Outcome is rated Unsatisfactory, reflecting major shortcomings in its preparation,
implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

With no evidence of achieved outcomes, any discussion of risk to development outcome is limited to project-
supported outputs. Even before the Taliban takeover, there were significant risks related to continued
reliance on externally funded technical assistance and weak capacity of civil servants, critical governance
challenges, and the country's security situation. Since August 2021, there are additional overwhelming
factors related to prohibitions on girls' secondary school attendance. Following the World Bank Board of
Directors approval of Approach Paper 2.0 in March 2022, the Bank is partnering with other institutions to
support the Afghan people through a programmatic approach that engages in four priority sectors, including



                                                                                                      Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EQRA (P159378)



education. According to the ICR (p. 30), the support for education remains under development, with a focus
on access to primary and secondary education and support for female students and teachers.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project's objectives were well aligned with the country's development priorities and with Bank
  strategy. Its theory of change was logical, though it did not adequately incorporate demand-side factors
  related to education access, and it did not articulate the benefits intended to come from targeting specific
  regions on the one hand and working nationally on learning conditions; the project team explained on
  April 11, 2024 that the project targeted the most disadvantaged and vulnerable provinces with the
  expectation that improvements in those provinces would impact national-level outcomes, and that there
  was no capacity to management construction across the country, at the national level. The
  project's results framework was well designed. Project design drew from lessons learned during EQUIP I
  and II: the need to focus on professionalization of MOE staff; the danger of a siloed approach to provision
  of inputs under a standard IPF; the need for focus on governance challenges in the sector at
  decentralized levels; lack of MOE capacity to implement school construction; the importance of attention
  to the specific needs of individual schools; the challenges posed by mismatches between teacher training
  and the actual needs of students and schools; the need to strengthen the quality and reliability of MOE
  data; and the wide gap between actual school attendance and recorded enrollment, sometimes as high
  as 30-35 percent, with schools counting students (especially girls) as still enrolled even if they had not
  attended for as long as three years. Based on these lessons, the project incorporated results-based
  financing; focused on the 17 most lagging provinces in terms of girls' school attendance; directed the
  system toward tracking and rewarding student attendance, especially for girls, as opposed to enrollment;
  and aimed to strengthen governance of general education, including at the PED level, to improve service
  delivery with transparency and accountability. Project design was also informed by a two-day consultation
  in August 2017 with PEDs from 24 provinces that provided important insights on security, access, and
  education management.

  Risk assessment at appraisal (PAD, pp. 27-30) was candid. Political & governance, fiduciary, and
  economic & social risks were rated high, and macroeconomic, technical design, institutional capacity, and
  other risks were rated substantial, culminating in an overall risk rating of substantial. Mitigation strategies
  included support for community empowerment, use of third-party monitoring, embedding of governance
  reforms throughout project design, support for professionalization and transparency in teacher
  recruitment, provision of a one-time advance of US$18.5 million to initiate the project's DLI-based
  components, and recruitment of additional fiduciary staff. The risk of a wholesale change of government
  and consequent reversal of commitment to the project's objectives on ideological grounds was not
  contemplated (nor should it have been reasonably expected).

  However, project design was highly ambitious and complex in relation to existing capacity and in an
  environment of fragility and insecurity. As the ICR (p. 23) noted, "it may well have been preferable to
  focus on fewer priority reforms to allow the government to build capacity for more challenging
  interventions." On April 11, 2024, the project team noted that activities were selected on the basis of
  being relatively easy to implement or because they were scalable, and that actions were sequenced to
  build capacity and momentum in the early implementation period. However, operating in rural areas

                                                                                                      Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EQRA (P159378)



  through PEDs and DEDs introduced complexity that made the timeline for school construction unrealistic,
  especially in view of the need to finalize preparation activities after approval. Furthermore, a disaster risk
  assessment carried out during implementation by the project team found that 127 school construction
  projects had not considered mitigation measures adequate to remedy anticipated natural hazards such
  as landslides, floods, site drainage, and slope stabilization (ICR, p. 28; see also Section 10a). There are
  also questions as to whether a DLI-based design was the best mechanism to drive reform and
  improvement in the program, given the many development issues confronting the MOE.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team expended considerable effort to support and compensate for an incompletely staffed
 counterpart team and for severe delays in contracting staff for key fiduciary, safeguard, project
 coordination, and other functions. A large part of the supervision structure relied on a third-party monitoring
 agency, whose monthly reports were regularly discussed and upon which remedial actions were based.
 Monthly meetings were held with DPs. The ICR (p. 30) noted that the Bank's safeguards team provided
 strong support to help MRRD develop a Safeguards Action Plan to help flag key issues and agree on
 timebound remedial strategies. The implementation support team also acted promptly in response to
 allegations of gender-based violence. However, there were moderate shortcomings. Safeguards
 compliance remained an issue throughout project implementation (ICR, p. 28; also see Section 10a).
 Additional financing was approved to expand the project's scope despite the deteriorating security situation
 in the country, major implementation issues (delays and safeguard compliance), and low disbursement
 rates for the initial financing; the ICR (p. 32) noted that additional financing was a questionable choice
 under these circumstances.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) functions were to be carried out by MOE and its departments, supervised
 by the Department of General Education. The project was to provide specific technical assistance to refine
 EMIS datasets, introduce individual student identification numbers to track students and their learning
 cycles, and support the establishment of a personnel database integrated with payroll. Results indicators
 covered an appropriate set of outcomes and intermediate outcomes, with annual targets set to provide an
 ongoing picture of project performance. The PAD (pp. 37-68) contained detailed information on baselines

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EQRA (P159378)



 (derived from household surveys), targets, and data sources for each indicator. The seven DLIs were a
 subset of input/process, output, and outcome indicators from the project's results framework. Selection of
 the third-party verification agency for DLIs was to be completed within six months of project approval.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E data were collected and analyzed throughout implementation, with an important role played by a
  third-party monitoring agency. Monitoring through satellite imagery complemented other monitoring
  mechanisms. There were major issues with contracting the third-party verification agency and the firm to
  conduct a planned impact evaluation of the school grant program. Despite the third-party verification
  agency not being in place until September 2020, monitoring of DLIs was eventually carried out in
  accordance with established protocols. The COVID-19 pandemic impacted the ability of MOE and MRRD
  to report on progress against DLIs and results indicators. An updating of outcome indicators based on
  proxies obtained from phone surveys revealed that baseline data had been overestimated, and targets
  were scaled back accordingly at the first 2020 restructuring. The ICR (p. 27) reported that the school
  grant evaluation was partially conducted, but no information from that evaluation was reported.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data were used to verify disbursement conditions based on achievement of DLIs; however, issues
  with contracting the third-party verification agency delayed disbursement of funds. The verification
  agency's final report on compliance with 2019 DLIs, for example, was issued in January 2021. According
  to the ICR (p. 27), MOE met three out of five 2020 DLIs, but the verification agency was not contracted
  by August 15, 2021, to verify the status of these achievements. The ICR (p. 27) stated that M&E data
  helped to highlight areas of concern, particularly with regard to bringing construction projects into
  compliance with safeguard policies (see Section 10a). Monitoring through a range of means and
  triangulating data helped to provide the information needed to monitor implementation progress and
  identify emerging issues. While there were limitations on the project's M&E, the overall design and
  expectations of the system were substantial given the many capacity constraints.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as environmental assessment category "B" and triggered the Environmental
   Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) safeguard policies. Potential
   environmental impacts of school construction and rehabilitation activities were expected to be modest and
   localized. These impacts were related to site location and planning, building design and construction, and
   maintenance. The MRRD and MOE adopted an Environmental and Social Management Framework to

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    EQRA (P159378)



  address potentially negative impacts, with guidelines for the preparation of site-specific Environmental and
  Social Management Plans and other relevant tools as required. Under the project's first component, land
  was to be acquired for provision of school infrastructure. Because not all construction sites could be
  identified in advance, a Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal.

  The project's safeguards rating was downgraded to Moderately Unsatisfactory at the second
  Implementation Status and Results Report and was upgraded to Moderately Satisfactory only in August
  2021, when the project was suspended. Initial issues were related to delays in hiring MOE safeguard staff,
  establishing a complaint redressal mechanism at MOE, and demonstrating that necessary documentation
  for land registration was in place for school construction. By mid-2020, "severe" safeguard issues had been
  identified at four school construction projects due to poor site selection that did not adequately take
  environmental hazards into account (ICR, p. 27), escalating to 112 projects with "safeguard issues" by early
  2021 (ICR, p. 28). The Bank held meetings with MRRD in July 2021 to identify remedial actions and
  expedite mitigation measures for the remaining schools. By the time the project was suspended, resources
  had been allocated to additional mitigation measures, and MOE had agreed to ensure that site selection
  followed approved checklists. However, third-party monitoring reports indicated that there were continued
  gaps in preparation and implementation of safeguard-related documentation, though MRRD reports
  reported full document compliance at all sites.

  The Bank's Grievance Redress Service and project-level grievance redress mechanisms were available to
  communities or individuals who believed that they were adversely affected by the project. The PAD (p. 36)
  provided information on how to submit complaints. By August of 2021, over 1500 grievance redress centers
  had been established, and 135 of 190 complaints regarding school construction had been resolved (ICR, p.
  28).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management relied on country systems. Government budgeting processes applied, and the
  project's budget was part of the government's annual budget. Accounting records were maintained at the
  central level by the Ministry of Finance, and the MOE and MRRD maintained subsidiary records. A detailed
  financial management manual provided a comprehensive internal control framework. Although overall
  financial management risk was assessed as High at appraisal due to previous shortcomings in budget
  allocation, internal audit, and financial reporting, the financial management rating was mostly Moderately
  Satisfactory during implementation. Issues included delays in procurement of technical assistance for
  financial management, low budget utilization, lack of any internal audit during implementation, and
  significant delays in hiring key financial management and audit staff.

  Procurement was carried out in according with Bank procurement regulations and was subject to the
  Bank's anti-corruption guidelines. Based on an initial procurement capacity assessment, the threshold of
  High Risk Implementing Agency applied for prior review of contracts under MOE, and Substantial Risk
  under MRRD. Procurement was rated Moderately Unsatisfactory from the first Implementation Status and
  Results Report through early 2021 due to challenges in updating the procurement plan and delays in
  advancing procurement of major packages and contracting of procurement staff. Although the procurement
  function improved as implementation progressed, it continued to be a constant source of delays.



                                                                                                 Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EQRA (P159378)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  Reported outcomes on student
                                                                                  attendance represented
                                                                                  consistent regression from
                                                                                  baseline, and no data were
                                                                                  available on other outcomes
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Unsatisfactory              (teacher qualification). While
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                  some progress was made on
                                                                                  essential reforms to improve
                                                                                  learning conditions, this was
                                                                                  insufficient to instill confidence in
                                                                                  their long-term sustainability.
                                                                                  Overly ambitious and complex
                                                                                  project design in relation to
                                Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                  country capacity, and continued
                                Satisfactory          Unsatisfactory
                                                                                  issues with environmental
                                                                                  safeguard compliance.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 31-32) presented a series of insightful lessons, including:

In fragile and conflict environments, high needs and gaps in human development are
generally accompanied by equally high implementation challenges. In this case, access to
education, especially for girls, was a clear and urgent need, but the pathways toward meeting that
need required work in underserved rural areas and coordination among multiple levels of
government entities with low capacity.

In a low-capacity environment accompanied by conflict and violence, a deliberate focus on
capacity and system building can help sustain momentum toward government ownership,
but this approach may lead to delays in achieving results. In this case, scheduling tasks that are


                                                                                                      Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       EQRA (P159378)



usually completed during project preparation for the early implementation stage resulted
in significant delays.

In a fragile and low-capacity environment, the mix of results-based instruments and pure
investment financing should be carefully considered. In this case, it was an ongoing challenge
to pre-finance activities with high price tags towards meeting DLIs that may not have been a
necessary stimulus to drive the required reforms. Results-based financing, under these conditions,
may be better suited for "soft" activities that are not costly but that are still difficult to achieve, such
as policy reforms and improvement in inter-ministerial collaboration.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR presented data of high quality and insightful lessons. It mostly followed established guidelines.
However, there were significant shortcomings. The ICR was frequently repetitive. It provided little information
on the project's additional financing, the contingency emergency response component, and the funds
cancellation. It made assumptions about progress with school construction after August 15, 2021, based on a
sample of construction sites visited by the third-party monitor, without assessing whether those samples were
representative of all construction sites. In general, insufficient evidence was provided to justify the ICR's
assigned efficacy and efficiency ratings. No economic analysis was attempted, nor was any effort made to
benchmark infrastructure against previous norms; the ICR instead merely asserted that positive returns would
have been likely if project support had continued. There were internal contradictions in the ICR's narrative; for
example, the ICR asserted in its efficiency discussion (p. 19) that "most of the notable products and outputs
were achieved shortly before the COVID-19 pandemic surfaced," even though other sections of the ICR
described major shortfalls in reaching output targets and DLIs. The ICR's main text (p. 26) referred to an annex
containing a summary of DLIs that were achieved, but no such annex was included. Overall, the ICR was
insufficiently candid and analytically critical of project achievements. It struggled to make a reasonable case on
what significant progress was made before the Taliban takeover and the likelihood of development results
being sustained at any level in the future. Thus, the ICR is rated Modest.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                          Page 19 of 20
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
EQRA (P159378)




                                                                  Page 20 of 20
