     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi-ASWAP SPII MDTF (P164445)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0024107

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P164445                                   Malawi-ASWAP SPII MDTF

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Malawi                                    Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A7166,TF-A7167,TF-B7497,TF-B753330-Jun-2023                                                68,152,324.12

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 07-Apr-2018                               30-Jun-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          68,172,000.00                                    68,172,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           68,152,367.21                                    68,152,325.30

 Actual                                       68,152,324.12                                    68,152,324.12




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Maher Amin          Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Waly




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Second Agriculture Sector Wide Approach Support Project
   (ASWAp-SPII) as articulated in the Grant Agreement (page 6) was identical to the one stated in the Project
   Appraisal Document (paragraph 19) and aimed to:

   "Improve the productivity of small-holder farmers and market access of selected commodities for
   small-holder farmers in Selected Districts of the Recipient’s territory."


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi-ASWAP SPII MDTF (P164445)



   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on the following two Objectives:

   1. To improve the productivity of small-holder farmers of selected commodities for small-holder farmers in
   Selected Districts of the Recipient’s territory.

   2. To improve market access of selected commodities for small-holder farmers in Selected Districts of the
   Recipient’s territory.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  29-Sep-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following four components:

   1. Sustainable Agricultural Productivity and Diversification (appraisal cost: US$17.21 million, actual
   cost: US$27.60 million). This component aimed to address constraints related to improving agricultural
   productivity and diversification, with a primary focus on promoting resilience to climate-induced shocks in
   the sector that have prevented its productive potential. It included two sub-components as follows:

   1.1. Promotion of Diversified Integrated Crop Production and Management Systems financed four
   activities. These included: (i) diversified seed systems activity, which supported micro and macro
   propagation and establishment of communal nurseries for mass production of clean banana planting
   materials, in response to the banana bunchy top virus (BBTV) disease; (ii) FISP by promoting access to
   improved inputs including high yielding maize varieties, other cereals and legume seeds; (iii) strengthening
   crop protection through the promotion of IPDM for pests and diseases control and reduction of post-harvest
   losses; and (iv) strengthening innovative agricultural extension and advisory services.

   1.2. Promotion of Integrated Soil Fertility Management financed two activities. The first activity sought
   to increase the adoption of Climate-Smart Agriculture (CSA) technologies among small-holder farmers and
   promote their use to enhance resilience of agricultural systems to climate change shocks. The CSA
   practices supported included conservation agriculture with trees, agroforestry, fruit trees, compost manure
   and integrated sustainable land and water management practices. The second activity, was through the
   implementation of area specific fertilizer recommendations and other good agronomic practices based on
   soil testing/analysis, ensuring dissemination of the messages, and piloting the recommendations in specific
   districts through demonstrations and trials, and in line with findings from the soil maps.



                                                                                                   Page 2 of 25
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Malawi-ASWAP SPII MDTF (P164445)



2. Improvement of Roads Infrastructure for Market Access (appraisal cost: US$30.64 million, actual
cost: US$28.1 million). This component aimed to improve road and bridge infrastructure to facilitate
market access for farmers. It included two subcomponents as follows:
2.1. Improvement of rural unpaved roads. This included activities that supported the improvement of
unpaved rural roads through labor-intensive rehabilitation and upgrading works using Low Volume Sealing
Methods in 12 selected districts, and where the activities under Component 1 took place. Emphasis was
placed on providing incomes and jobs to the local communities through rehabilitation works.
2.2 Implementation support to District Councils (DCs). This aimed to provide implementation support to
the District Councils (DCs) to facilitate proper supervision and monitoring of the works. The activity provided
the DCs with equipment, resources, and hands-on/practical skills to facilitate the implementation of the
works and equip the DCs with an enabling environment for decentralization. Based on lessons learned from
ASWAp-1 the activity was designed to enable the Road Fund Administration (RFA) maintain its role of
making all payments related to the project and providing periodic technical audits to monitor quality and
adherence to standards. In addition, this activity provided operational funds to the RFA, DCs, and
consultants, as well as funded workshops and training requirements for contractors and supervision
consultants to improve capacity.

3. Institutional Capacity Building for the Implementation of the National Agricultural Investment Plan
(NAIP) (appraisal cost: US$5.70 million, actual cost: US$7.70 million). This component aimed to build
the capacity of the MOAIWD to operationalize the NAIP2 by strengthening the Department of Planning
Services (DAPS) to enhance strategic planning, monitoring, and evaluation functions at all levels. It included
two sub-components as follows:

3.1. Institutional Capacity Building. This activity involved addressing the critical capacity gaps identified
under the Core Function Analysis (CFA). The project activity entailed supporting the training officers at
Master and Diploma levels at the national agricultural college, Bunda and Natural Resource College. It also
entailed supporting the DAPS to (i) operationalize the NAIP processes through improved planning and
alignment of the Ministry's budget to the NAIP Framework; (ii) supporting and strengthening coordination
structures and dialogue among stakeholders through the NAIP Institutional Mechanisms; (iii) and facilitating
capacity building in other key institutions linked to the project such as transport.

3.2. Strengthening Monitoring and Evaluation and Agricultural Statistics. This activity involved
strengthening the capacity of the DAPS to enhance strategic planning, monitoring, and evaluation functions
of the MoA at all levels. This process involved strengthening the M&E system through a web-based
management information system to track progress of the NAIP indicators at various levels, (ii) support
improvement of the methodology for the agricultural production estimates, (iii) the development of an
agricultural statistics data bank; carry out food security monitoring and reporting; (v) rationalizing of district
administration M&E requirements. In addition, the project activities were to place activities for the
beneficiary communities to provide feedback through an independent service provider.

4. Project Coordination and Management (appraisal cost: US$3.70 million, actual cost: US$5.90
million). This component financed project management activities that were related to coordination and
implementation of project activities. This included the hiring of the Project Facilitation Team (PFT) whose
task was to coordinate the implementation and monitoring of the project as well as ensuring sound fiduciary
management of project activities, compliance with environmental safeguards, and communication and
reporting thereof. The component supported several studies, including a baseline survey, and two outcome
surveys – Midterm review and endline. In addition to putting in place a citizen engagement and social
accountability mechanism, including grievance redress mechanism. The project mainstreamed gender,

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Malawi-ASWAP SPII MDTF (P164445)



  nutrition, climate smart agriculture (CSA) and mechanisms for building resilience throughout the project
  components. The project sought to narrow the gender gap in the areas of productivity and access to
  agricultural inputs and service.

  Revised Components.

  A sub-component on livestock production and productivity was added under component 1 through the AF to
  complement the productivity-enhancing CSA interventions of the project. This sub-component also aimed to
  diversify farmer’s sources of income.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost was estimated at US$55.00 million. The actual cost was US$69.17
  million. The increase was due to additional financing worth US13.17 million. The total cost at completion
  was US$68.15 million (ICR, Data Sheet, page 2).

  Financing. The project was financed through a Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) Grant worth
  US$55.00 million. In September 2021, the project received additional financing (AF) worth US$13.71
  million. The total financing was 68.17 million. The actual amount disbursed was US$68.15 million (ICR,
  Data Sheet, page 2).

  Borrower Contribution. The Borrower was expected to provide US$1.00million of counterpart funds.
  However, this did not materialize.

  Dates. The project was approved on April 7, 2018, and became effective on April 25, 2018. The Mid-Term
  Review (MTR) was conducted on February 14, 2020, about one year and ten months after effectiveness.
  The PAD did not specify a date for the MTR. The project closed on June 30, 2023 which was three years
  and six months beyond its original closing date. The project was Restructured twice and received one
  additional financing as follows:

  1. On December 14, 2019, when the amount disbursed was US$37.01 million, in order to revise the Results
  Framework, change components and cost, extend the Loan Closing Date by 24 months from December
  31,2019 to December 31, 2021 to align it with the revised grant Administration Agreement closing date, and
  change the implementation schedule.

  2. On September 29, 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$43.01 million, in order to revise
  the Results Framework, change components and cost, and reallocate funds between disbursement
  categories.

  3. Additional financing (US$13.71 million) was approved on September 2021 to expand successful
  interventions under components 1 and 3.

  A split rating will be applied because the PDO indicators' targets were revised as part of the second
  restructuring.




                                                                                                  Page 4 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi-ASWAP SPII MDTF (P164445)



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. At appraisal, agriculture contributed 30% to the GDP and represented over 80% of
national export earnings. Two-thirds of the workforce were employed in this sector, and small-scale farms
accounted for 80% of producers. Small-scale farmers face significant challenges, including limited access
to inputs, low mechanization, weak technical skills, inadequate extension services, insufficient financing,
recurrent pest and disease outbreaks, minimal irrigation, and soil fertility depletion. Additionally, smallholder
farmers faced ongoing challenges such as weak market connections and inadequate infrastructure. Poor
rural road conditions and inefficient district road networks, often worsened during the rainy season, led to
high transportation costs and reliance on middlemen, resulting in lower commodity prices. To address these
challenges, Malawi implemented the Agriculture Sector Wide Approach Support Program (ASWAp-SP1)
from 2010 to 2016. ASWAp-SP II aimed to capitalize on the achievements of ASWAp-SPI and continue
fostering agricultural growth in Malawi, ensuring the sector thrives and contributes significantly to the
country's overall development.

Previous Bank Experience. ASWAp-SP II benefited from the lessons learned from ASWAp-SP I as well
as other projects and studies related to agriculture, water and land management in Malawi. Those included
the Agriculture Commercialization Project (P158434), the Shire Valley Transformation Project (SVTP)
(P158805), Rural Livelihoods and Agricultural Development Project (IRLADP - P048184) and Community
Based Rural Land Development Project (CBRLDP -P075247). This project was also informed by lessons
from the Global Gender-Based Violence Task Force Report. The World Bank also has extensive
experience supporting agriculture/infrastructure projects in Africa and other regions of the world. Overall,
the World Bank was on a strong foundation to guide the implementation of ASWAp-SP II.

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PAD (paragraph 17) noted that the Bank was in the
process of preparing a Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Malawi. The challenges evidenced in the
agricultural sector were strongly associated with key binding constraints to achieving the WBG twin goals of
ending extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity. At completion, the PDO was in line with the
Bank's Country Partnership Framework for Malawi (CPF, FY2021-FY2025). The project was expected to
contribute to the CPF's objectives related to agricultural productivity, job creation, livelihood promotion, and
climate adaptation through integrated CSA practices.

Consistency with Government Strategies/Priorities. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with
Malawi's National Agriculture Policy (NAP). Specifically, the NAP outcomes related to: increased
agricultural production, productivity, diversification, and marketed surplus; increased access by producers
and consumers to well-functioning markets; and increased engagement by women, youth, and vulnerable
groups in agricultural policy, processes, and Programs. The PDO was also in line with Malawi Growth and
Development Strategy (MDGS III) whose overall objective was to move the country to a productive,
competitive and resilient nation through sustainable agriculture and economic growth, energy, industrial and
infrastructure development while addressing water, climate change and environmental management and
population challenges.

At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with Malawi's MW 2063 strategy which replaced MDGS III.
The PDO was also in line with the National Agriculture Investment Plan (NAIP) which was the framework
guiding investment in Malawi’s agricultural sector. NAIP policy foundations were mainly the Malawi Growth
and Development Strategy (MGDS), the National Agricultural Policy (NAP), the CAADP Compact and the

                                                                                                      Page 5 of 25
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Malawi-ASWAP SPII MDTF (P164445)



               Malabo Declaration. The project's emphasis on gender responsiveness in agricultural and rural
               development further emphasized its alignment with the NAIP's key results areas.

               Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. The PDO statement was clear, focused and pitched
               at an adequate level of ambition relative to the Bank's experience and the envisioned targets of the
               operation. At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the Bank strategies and the Government
               priorities as noted above. Furthermore, enhancing agricultural productivity and building resilience in the
               face of climate change will continue to be crucial for Malawi, given its vulnerability to climate events.

               Therefore, Relevance of Objectives is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the productivity of small-holder farmers of selected commodities for small-holder farmers in
                             selected districts of the Recipient’s territory.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported the following activities:

                             1. The project supported promoting diversified and integrated crop production and management systems;
                             seed multiplication and screening; development of clean planting materials of selected crops (cassava,
                             banana, sweet potatoes). These activities aimed to address limited access to quality inputs, and recurrent
                             pest and disease outbreaks and lack of knowledge to address them.

                             2. Promote integrated soil fertility management, climate smart agriculture technologies, and area-specific
                             fertilizer application recommendations. These activities aimed to improve knowledge about soil management
                             needs, improve overall crop management, and improve resilience against climate shocks.

                             3. Institutional capacity building and implementation support, and strengthening M&E and agricultural
                             statistics. This aimed to address weak national institutions, low technical labor skills, weak extension service,
                             and weak M&E system.

                             The outputs of the above-mentioned activities included: amount of seeds produced, banana suckers
                             delivered, clean planting material delivered, farmers adopting integrated soil management and CSA
                             applications, and number of staff trained.



                                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Malawi-ASWAP SPII MDTF (P164445)



The expected intermediate outcomes were: farmers reached with agricultural assets and services, area
planted with clean plant materials, area under CSA, and farmers reached through livestock pass on program.

The expected outcomes were: improved crop productivity and diversification, and improved soil health.

Anticipated long-term impacts included: increase in diversified food production and food security, increased
resilience to climate change, and improved livelihoods for smallholder farmers.

The achievement of the stated objective was underpinned by the following four key assumptions: 1.
Smallholder farmers will adopt at least two or more CSA technologies, utilize improved seed varieties, and
adopt clean planting materials, 2. Yields will increase due to the implementation of CSA practices and the use
of clean planting materials, 3. Upgraded roads will be maintained and passable during the rainy season,
facilitating smallholders' access to input and output markets, and 4. Extension staff will receive capacity
building training and transfer knowledge to farmers.

Overall, the ToC reflected relevant activities that were directly connected to the outputs, intermediate
outcomes and outcomes in plausible causal chains. Also, the critical assumptions were logical and realistic.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      270,602 farmers including 143,288 females were reached with agricultural assets or services
       substantially achieving the original target of 300,000, and exceeding the original target for females
       of 120,000.
      27,645 hectares (ha) were under climate smart agriculture exceeding the revised target of 18,000,
       baseline was none. CSA practices included included: permanent soil cover, minimum tillage, fertilizer
       tree species, compost manure, intercropping, land and soil conservation technologies , and integrated
       homestead farming.
      194 staff received training which substantially achieved the original target of 220.
      90% of beneficiaries were satisfied with services provided by the project exceeding the original target
       of 80%.

Outcomes

      By project completion, the direct project beneficiaries achieved an overall 35.5% yield increase for
       selected agricultural commodities (maize, groundnuts, sweet potatoes, and bananas) exceeding the
       original target of 30%. Maize yield increase was 31% exceeding the target of 20%, and banana yield
       increase was 116% significantly exceeding the target of 40%. These two crops accounted for over
       70% of the project planted area (ICR, paragraph 40). Groundnuts yield increase was
       33% substantially achieving the target of 35%, and sweet potatoes yield increase was 17% which was
       below the target of 30%. The ICR (figures 2 &3) showed that, on average, project farms outperformed
       non-project farms located in the same districts for maize and groundnuts. No information was provided
       on banana and sweet potato.
      Also, 257,385 farmers including 138,293 females were adopting an improved agricultural technology
       exceeding the original overall target of 150,000, and the original target for females of 60,000. The
       data reported in the ICR (paragraph 41 and figure 4) indicated that technology adopters consistently
       achieved higher yields than non-adopters, which indicated the effectiveness of the selected
       interventions on crop performance.

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Malawi-ASWAP SPII MDTF (P164445)




      The project results were negatively impacted by climate shocks as Malawi faced two major natural
       disasters: a drought in 2022 and Cyclone Freddy in 2023, affecting nine out of the twelve project
       districts (ICR, paragraph 50). To assess the effect of the project on farm climate change resilience,
       yield growth was compared between disaster-affected districts versus non-affected ones. In districts
       affected by disasters, maize yield increased by 38% from 2018 to 2023 on project farms, while it
       decreased by 6% on other farms in their respective districts. Groundnut yields followed a similar
       pattern: they increased on average by 29% yield for project farms in affected districts but decreased
       by 4% on other farms in their respective districts.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. To improve the productivity of smallholder farmers, the project focused
on select crops (maize, groundnuts, sweet potatoes, and bananas) and introduced interventions such as
climate-smart technologies, enhanced seed varieties, and clean planting materials. The project also
supported technology adoption through a comprehensive approach that included farmer field schools (FFS),
collaboration with lead farmers, improved seed access, post-harvest handling programs, and community-
based training initiatives, such as deploying plant doctors. The project exceeded its targets for the two PDO
outcome indicators as noted above. Also, most targets for the intermediate results indicators were fully
achieved or exceeded. However, comparison between project and non-project areas were only provide for
maize and ground nuts.

Overall, and based on the reported results, it is plausible that the project contributed to improving the
productivity of small-holder farmers of selected commodities for small-holder farmers in selected districts of
the Recipient’s territory. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve the productivity of small-holder farmers of selected commodities for small-holder farmers in
selected districts of the Recipient’s territory.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). The PDO was not changed and the same ToC and underlying assumptions
applies. The PDO outcome targets were revised down. Also several new intermediate results indicators were
added and a livestock activity was also added under component 1.

To achieve the stated objective, the project supported the following activities:

1. The project supported promoting diversified and integrated crop production and management systems;
seed multiplication and screening; development of clean planting materials of selected crops (cassava,
banana, sweet potatoes). These activities aimed to address limited access to quality inputs, and recurrent
pest and disease outbreaks and lack of knowledge to address them.




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Malawi-ASWAP SPII MDTF (P164445)



2. Promote integrated soil fertility management; climate smart agriculture technologies; and area specific
fertilizer application recommendations. These activities aimed to improve knowledge about soil management
needs, improve overall crop management, and improve resilience against climate shocks.

3. Promote livestock production. This would diversify smallholders' income and improve resilience to climate
vulnerability.

4. Institutional capacity building and implementation support and strengthen M&E and agricultural statistics.
This aimed to address weak nation institutions, low technical labor skills, weak extension service, and weak
M&E system.

The outputs of the above-mentioned activities included: amount of seeds produced, banana suckers
delivered, clean planting material delivered, farmers adopting integrated soil management and CSA
applications, livestock groups formed and trained, number of staff trained, M&E system for NAIP in place, and
joint sector reporting system for NAIP in place.

The expected intermediate outcomes were: farmers reached with agricultural assets and services, area
planted with clean plant materials, area under CSA, and farmers reached through livestock pass on system.

The expected outcomes were: improved crop productivity and diversification, improved soil health, and
increased livestock production.

Anticipated long-term impacts included: increase in diversified food production and food security, increased
resilience to climate change, and improved livelihoods for smallholder farmers.

The achievement of the stated objective was underpinned by the following five key assumptions: 1.
Smallholder farmers will adopt at least two or more CSA technologies, utilize improved seed varieties, and
adopt clean planting materials, 2. Yields will increase due to the implementation of CSA practices and the use
of clean planting materials, 3. Smallholder farmers will participate in the pass on system for crops and/or
livestock, 4. Upgraded roads will be maintained and passable during the rainy season, facilitating
smallholders' access to input and output markets, and 5. Extension staff will receive capacity building training
and transfer knowledge to farmers.

Overall, the ToC reflected relevant activities that were directly connected to the outputs, intermediate
outcomes and outcomes in plausible causal chains. Also, the critical assumptions were logical and realistic.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      270,602 farmers including 143,288 females were reached with agricultural assets or services
       substantially exceeding the revised target of 180,000, and exceeding the revised target for females
       of 72,000.
      27,645 hectares (ha) were under climate smart agriculture exceeding the revised target of 18,000,
       baseline was none. CSA practices included: permanent soil cover, minimum tillage, fertilizer tree
       species, compost manure, intercropping, land and soil conservation technologies, and integrated
       homestead farming.
      4,456 ha were planted with clean planting materials and improved varieties exceeding the revised
       target of 2,300, baseline was none. This included the area planted with clean banana materials


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Malawi-ASWAP SPII MDTF (P164445)



         (2840.91 ha), fortified sweet potato (975 ha), and cassava (341 ha) for both primary and secondary
         beneficiaries, who have received planting materials from the first beneficiaries in a pass-on modality.
        5 new recommended fertilizer blends were cleared by MoA and released on the market fully achieving
         the revised target of 5.
        181 farmer groups were established and trained with market approach slightly exceeding the revised
         target of 180. Members received animals in total: 11,250 goats; 1200 pigs and 50 dairy cows.
        317 metric ton of early generation legume seeds were produced by progressive farmers through the
         use of the Department of research irrigation infrastructure supported by the project (no target
         provided).
        194 staff received training which substantially achieved the revised target of 220.
        12 National Agriculture Management Information System (NAMIS) modules rolled out to project
         districts fully achieving the revised target of 12.
        90% of beneficiaries were satisfied with services provided by the project exceeding the revised target
         of 80%.

Outcomes

      By project completion, the direct project beneficiaries achieved a 35.5% yield increase for selected
       agricultural commodities (maize, cassava, groundnuts, sweet potatoes, soybeans and bananas)
       exceeding the original target of 30%. Maize yield increase was 31% exceeding the revised target of
       20%, and banana yield increase was 116% significantly exceeding the revised target of 40%. These
       two crops accounted for over 70% of the project planted area (ICR, paragraph 40). Groundnuts yield
       increase was 33% substantially achieving the target of 35%, and sweet potatoes yield increase was
       17% which was below the target of 30%. Soybean achieved a yield increase of 30% exceeding the
       revised target of 20%, and cassava achieved a yield increase of 20% fully achieving the revised
       target. The ICR (figures 2 &3) showed that on average, project farms outperformed non-project farms
       located in the same districts for maize and groundnuts. No information was provided on banana and
       sweet potato.
      Also, 257,385 farmers including 138,293 females were adopting an improved agricultural technology
       exceeding the revised overall target of 100,000, and the revised target for females of 40,000. The
       data reported in the ICR (paragraph 41 and figure 4) indicated that technology adopters consistently
       achieved higher yields than non-adopters, which points to the effectiveness of the selected
       interventions on crop performance.
      The project results were negatively impacted by climate shocks as Malawi faced two major natural
       disasters: a drought in 2022 and Cyclone Freddy in 2023, affecting nine out of the twelve project
       districts (ICR, paragraph 50). To assess the effect of the project on farm climate change resilience,
       yield growth was compared between disaster-affected districts versus non-affected ones. In districts
       affected by disasters, maize yield increased by 38% from 2018 to 2023 on project farms, while it
       decreased by 6% on other farms in their respective districts. Groundnut yields followed a similar
       pattern: they increased on average by 29% yield for project farms in affected districts but decreased
       by 4% on other farms in their respective districts.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. To improve the productivity of smallholder farmers, the project focused
on select crops (maize, groundnuts sweet potatoes, and bananas) and introduced interventions such as
climate-smart technologies, enhanced seed varieties, and clean planting materials. The project also
supported technology adoption through a comprehensive approach that included farmer field schools (FFS),
collaboration with lead farmers, improved seed access, post-harvest handling programs, and community-

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Malawi-ASWAP SPII MDTF (P164445)



based training initiatives, such as deploying plant doctors. The project exceeded its revised targets for the two
PDO outcome indicators as noted above. Also, most targets for the intermediate results indicators were fully
achieved or exceeded. However, yield comparison between project and non-project areas were only provide
for maize and ground nuts.

Overall, and based on the reported results, it is plausible that the project contributed to improving the
productivity of small-holder farmers of selected commodities for small-holder farmers in selected districts of
the Recipient’s territory. The project also contributed to improving farm climate change resilience through
promoting CSA practices. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve market access of selected commodities for small-holder farmers in Selected Districts of the
Recipient’s territory.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective the project supported the improvement of rural
roads through rehabilitation and upgrading with the aim of improving market linkages. The expected output
was the number of roads upgraded and rehabilitated. The intermediate outcome was achieving road
improvement. The expected outcomes were: improved access to input and output markets; and market
centers connected and increased traffic to markets. Anticipated long-term impact was improved livelihoods for
smallholder farmers.

The achievement of the stated objective was underpinned by one critical assumption that upgraded roads will
be maintained and passable during the rainy season, facilitating smallholders' access to input and output
markets.

Overall, the ToC reflected relevant activities that were directly connected to the output, intermediate
outcome and outcomes in a plausible causal chain. Also, the critical assumption was logical and realistic.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      1002 kilometers (km) of rural roads were rehabilitated substantially achieving the original target of
       1,200 km.
      76 km of roads were rehabilitated using low volume seal technology substantially achieving the
       original target of 84 km.
      926 km of roads were rehabilitated using labor intensive methods substantially achieving the original
       target of 1,116 km.
      By project completion, motorized traffic volume on targeted rural roads increased by 125%
       significantly exceeding the original target of 50%.



                                                                                                  Page 11 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Malawi-ASWAP SPII MDTF (P164445)



Outcomes

      By project completion, 94 agricultural marketing centers were connected by upgraded
       and rehabilitated road substantially achieving the original target of 100. The ICR (paragraph 43)
       explained that "the project's scope was affected when the original length of the roads earmarked for
       improvement had to be shortened resulting in a partial upgrade of the roads." This change was due to
       a reallocation of funds to incorporate essential drainage structures, which were necessary for
       extended road durability but not initially included in the project budget."
      Despite the road improvements, travel costs increased and there was minimal improvements in travel
       times, especially during the rainy season. The ICR (paragraph 44) attributed these results to a number
       of challenges including heavy rains, macroeconomic issues (debt distress, slow GDP growth, high
       inflation, and increased cost of living), and the impact of COVID-19 pandemic.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project aimed to improve market access through improving rural
roads connecting market centers. The project substantially achieved its road rehabilitation target with 996 km
of the planned 1,200 km of roads rehabilitated, achieving 83% of the project's envisioned target. The project
also substantially achieved its PDO outcome target by connecting 94 market centers compared to a target of
100. While it is plausible to assume that road improvements and connecting market centers would result in
improved market access, this was not directly measured by the project's M&E system. Therefore, the efficacy
with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings due to lack of direct
evidence on improved market access.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve market access of selected commodities for small-holder farmers in Selected Districts of the
Recipient’s territory.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). The PDO was not changed. However, three intermediate outcome indicators (IRIs)
had their targets slightly revised down. The same ToC under original Objective 2 applies.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      1002 kilometers (km) of rural roads were rehabilitated substantially achieving the revised target of
       1,194.5 km.
      76 km of roads were rehabilitated using low volume seal technology slightly exceeding the
       revised target of 75 km.
      926 km of roads were rehabilitated using labor intensive methods substantially achieving the revised
       target of 1,119.50 km.




                                                                                                 Page 12 of 25
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Malawi-ASWAP SPII MDTF (P164445)




                                  By project completion, motorized traffic volume on targeted rural roads increased by 125%
                                    significantly exceeding the original target of 50% (target was not changed).

                            Outcomes

                                  By project completion, 94 agricultural marketing centers were connected by upgraded
                                   and rehabilitated road substantially achieving the original target of 100. The ICR (paragraph 43)
                                   explained that "the project's scope was affected when the original length of the roads earmarked for
                                   improvement had to be shortened resulting in a partial upgrade of the roads." This change was due to
                                   a reallocation of funds to incorporate essential drainage structures, which were necessary for
                                   extended road durability but not initially included in the project budget."
                                  Despite the road improvements, travel costs increased and there was minimal improvements in travel
                                   times, especially during the rainy season. The ICR (paragraph 44) attributed these results to a number
                                   of challenges including heavy rains, macroeconomic issues (debt distress, slow GDP growth, high
                                   inflation, and increased cost of living), and the impact of COVID-19 pandemic.

                            Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project aimed to improve market access through improving rural
                            roads connecting market centers. The project substantially achieved its road rehabilitation target with 996 km
                            of the revised 1,194.5 km of roads rehabilitated, achieving 83% of the project's envisioned target. The project
                            also substantially achieved its PDO outcome target by connecting 94 market centers compared to a target of
                            100. While it is plausible to assume that road improvements and connecting market centers would result in
                            improved market access, this was not directly measured by the project's M&E system. Therefore, the efficacy
                            with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings due to lack of direct
                            evidence on improved market access.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. The project contributed to improving the productivity of small-holder
                            farmers of selected commodities for small-holder farmers in selected districts of the Recipient’s territory. The
                            project exceeded its two original outcome targets and most targets for the intermediate results indicators were
                            fully achieved or exceeded. The project also contributed to improving market access and substantially
                            achieved it out come target and rehabilitated 83% of the target roads.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



                                                                                                                              Page 13 of 25
                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                 Malawi-ASWAP SPII MDTF (P164445)



 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. The project contributed to improving the productivity of small-holder
         farmers of selected commodities for small-holder farmers in selected districts of the Recipient’s territory. The
         project also contributed to improving farm climate change resilience through promoting CSA practices. The
         project exceeded its two revised outcome targets and most targets for the intermediate results indicators were
         fully achieved or exceeded. Finally, the project contributed to improving market access and substantially
         achieved its outcome target (connecting 94 markets out of 100) and rehabilitated 83% of the targeted roads.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

ex-ante

              The economic analysis at appraisal estimated the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) at 57% under a
                 25-year net benefit analysis using a 5% discount rate. The Economic NPV was US$796 million and the
                 benefit cost ratio was 14.8. The project’s overall Financial NPV was US$794.2 million with a Financial
                 IRR of 55% and a benefit cost ratio of 14.1. The payback period was 5 years.
                A cash flow model was used to assess the ex-ante efficiency of the project investment. Annual cash
                 flows were estimated as the difference between without-project and with-project net benefits for direct
                 beneficiaries. All project interventions were considered necessary to obtain the target impact; therefore,
                 the entire investment cost is included in this analysis. Incremental net benefits were estimated for
                 300,000 farmers targeted by the project to increase their production and productivity through provision of
                 clean improved planting materials and adoption of good crop and land husbandry practices.
                The project’s impact on Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions was estimated using the Ex-Ante Carbon-
                 balance Tool (EX-ACT). The project interventions were expected to have a net-benefit on GHG
                 emissions to the amount of 1.06 million tons of CO2-eq over 25 years, which constitutes a discounted
                 value of US$17 million.
                Sensitivity analysis. The analysis found that project delays could reduce returns by 7-13%, increasing the
                 number of targeted farmers by 17% could increase project returns by 17%, a 5% fall in crop prices was
                 estimated to lead to 18% reduction in ENPV, project returns could fall by 21% if project implementation
                 was unable to achieve more than 70% adoption rate, also if the farmers were unable to switch to higher
                 value crops it was estimated that ENPV would fall by 25%.
                Overall, the PAD included a detailed EFA that justified the project investments.

ex-post

              The EFA at completion followed the same methodology at appraisal to ensure consistency and
                 comparability. The overall EIRR for the original project+ AF was estimated at 36% with an estimated

                                                                                                             Page 14 of 25
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         Malawi-ASWAP SPII MDTF (P164445)



         ENPV of US$435.00 million. The estimated ENPV for the project excluding additional financing was
         US$329.00 million with an EIRR of 33%. The estimated ENPV for the additional financing alone was
         US$106.00 million with an EIRR of 62% due to the shorter implementation period and focus on livestock
         investments.
        The ex-post analysis applied that same model at appraisal with the addition of the project’s impact on
         post-harvest losses and improved road infrastructure.
        While the ex-post EIRR was lower than the one estimated at appraisal, the ICR (Annex 5) noted that "the
         ex-ante analysis in the PAD understated the baseline yields, overstated yield growth and change in
         cropping pattern for some crops."
        The project’s overall Financial NPV was US$93.00 million discounted at 15% over a 25-year period with
         a FIRR of 34% and a benefit cost ratio of 1.8.
        For the entire project, the social value of carbon from reduced GHG emissions constituted
         US$71.00 million for 3.3 million t/CO2-eq over a 25-year period with a shadow price of carbon of US$38/t
         CO2-eq. The social value of carbon ranges from US$7.00 million to US$144.00 million if alternative
         prices were used such as US$5/t CO2-eq and US$77/t CO2-eq, respectively.
        Estimates for representative farms indicated that the project interventions contributed to increasing
         annual farm income by 45% up to a 5-fold increase on farms with more livestock production. The
         increase ranged between US$100-2,700 per farm per year or US$20-540 per household member
         (assuming an average of 5 members per farm household).
        Sensitivity analysis. The following scenarios were tested: economic discount rate drops from 5 to 2%, no
         cropping/livestock pattern change, adoption rate by year 6 decreases from 82% to 70%, farm gate prices
         fall by 5%, and recurrent costs increase from 2% to 5%. For all tested scenarios, the EIRR ranged from a
         low of 27% to a high of 34% indicating that the project returns were substantial and robust under different
         scenarios.
        Implementation efficiency. The project closed three years and six months beyond its original closing
         date. Implementation of project activities were impacted by the protracted process of hiring and
         contracting (ICR, paragraph 78). Activities under component 2 experienced delays due to safeguard
         instruments, road rectification, and prolonged contractor procurement (ICR, paragraph 79). Also, during
         the first year the project experienced significant procurement delays which negatively impacted
         implementation. Finally, the project faced implementation delays due to COVID-19 restrictions. The
         available funding was fully disbursed at project closure. However, the cost of the project management
         component was 59% higher than the appraisal estimate (US$3.70 million compared to US$5.90 million).

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. While the ex-post EIRR at 36% which was lower than the ex-ante
EIRR at 57%, it was significantly higher than the discount rate of 5% used for the economic analysis. The ex-
ante analysis in the PAD understated the baseline yields, overstated yield growth and change in cropping
pattern for some crops, which could have potentially resulted in an overestimated EIRR at appraisal. Overall,
Efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:

                                                                                                      Page 15 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Malawi-ASWAP SPII MDTF (P164445)




                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     100.00
Appraisal                                                  57.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     100.00
ICR Estimate                                               36.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Pre-Restructuring

Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial. The project contributed to
improving the productivity of small-holder farmers of selected commodities for small-holder farmers in selected
districts of the Recipient’s territory. The project exceeded its two original outcome targets and most targets for
the intermediate results indicators were fully achieved or exceeded. The project also contributed to improving
market access and substantially achieved its outcome target and rehabilitated 83% of the target roads.
Efficiency was rated Substantial. The ex-post EIRR at 36% was significantly higher than the discount rate at
5%.

Based on the assigned ratings for the three Outcome criteria, Outcome is rated Satisfactory.



Post Restructuring

Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial. The project contributed to
improving the productivity of small-holder farmers of selected commodities for small-holder farmers in selected
districts of the Recipient’s territory. The project exceeded its two revised outcome targets and most targets for
the intermediate results indicators were fully achieved or exceeded. The project also contributed to improving
market access and substantially achieved its outcome target and rehabilitated 83% of the target roads.
Efficiency was rated Substantial. The ex-post EIRR at 36% was significantly higher than the discount rate at
5%.

Based on the assigned ratings for the three Outcome criteria, Outcome is rated Satisfactory.



Split Rating

                                       Pre-Restructuring   Post Restructuring
Relevance of Objectives                High                High
Efficacy                               Substantial         Substantial
Efficiency                             Substantial         Substantial
Outcome Rating                         Satisfactory        Satisfactory

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Malawi-ASWAP SPII MDTF (P164445)



Numerical value of outcome ratings     4                  4
Disbursement                           US$43.01           US$25.14
Share of disbursement                  63%                37%
Weighted value of the outcome rating   0.63 X4 = 2.52     0.37 X 4 = 1.48
Final outcome rating                   (4) Satisfactory   (4) Satisfactory

Based on the split rating above, the weighted Outcome rating of the project is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following risks stated in the ICR (paragraph 105) could potentially impact the Development Outcome:

1. Government ownership/commitment risk. The project has substantively achieved its goal of enhancing
small-holder farmers' productivity and market access for selected commodities in specific districts of Malawi.
The Government's commitment to these objectives remains robust.

2. Environmental risk. Malawi's heightened vulnerability to climate change, ranking 163 out of 182 countries
in the 2020 ND-GAIN Index, poses a significant threat. Increasing frequency and severity of climate-related
disasters, such as droughts and floods, could undermine project gains, especially for vulnerable households
at risk of falling into poverty. Continuous support is essential to adapt the agricultural sector and assist
farmers in coping with natural hazards.

3. Technical risk. The roads component introduces a substantial risk due to the susceptibility of low-volume
seal roads to flood damage and wear from continuous use. Despite this, the government has proposed a
sustainability strategy, including the establishment of maintenance clubs with funding from the RA, and
committing to include all upgraded roads in annual maintenance activities. It is crucial for the treasury to
allocate sufficient resources to support timely disbursement for road maintenance by the RAs.

4. Financial risk. The sustainability of the project-funded CSA activities and outcomes is promising. Cost-
effective and adaptable agricultural technologies, coupled with the integration of livestock into household
farming, contribute to organic manure production and livelihood diversification. Project activities align with
routine sector initiatives, and the Seed Revolving Fund from ASWAp-SP I continues to receive support. The
livestock pass-on program, despite a delayed start, follows a robust system backed by local leaders,
ensuring benefits for beneficiaries. Mitigation measures, such as tree planting, address potential
environmental impacts, enhancing overall sustainability. However, resource availability for follow-up
interventions in model villages, could potentially hinder continuous motivation and guidance for adopting
improved agricultural practices. The sustainability of the Seed Revolving Fund under the DARS relies on
ongoing attention to its business model implementation. Also, sustained success of NAMIS requires
increased resources, strong leadership commitment, and expansion to the remaining 16 districts for greater
usefulness.



                                                                                                     Page 17 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi-ASWAP SPII MDTF (P164445)



5. Institutional risk. Operational sustainability is anticipated through the integration of extension workers
and capacitated Lead Farmers into project processes. Revitalization of DAES and local committees promises
ongoing project success. Local structures like VAC, ASP, and MVC are well-positioned to sustain project
interventions. Registered farmer cooperatives connected to AGCOM ensure continuity through access to
grants and cooperative services despite financial constraints at the District Council.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic relevance and approach. The Second Agriculture Sector Wide Approach Support
            Project (ASWAp SP II) was designed to contribute to the government’s efforts in
            achieving sustainable agriculture and economic growth. The project was funded through a Multi-
            Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) administered by the World Bank. The PDO was in line with the Bank
            strategies and Government priorities (see Section 3 for details).
           Technical, financial and economic aspects. The project was the second phase of
            the Agriculture Sector Wide Approach Support program. The design reflected lessons and
            experiences learned under ASWAp SP I. Most notable were the need for quality data collection
            from national to village levels and the establishment of a Project Facilitation Team (PFT) with
            dedicated staff to overcome delays related to Government bureaucracies and limited capacity.
            The project design aimed to address important challenges faced by small-holder farmers to
            improve their agricultural productivity and diversification as a way of mitigating against climate
            change. The project design identified community needs through Participatory Rural Appraisal
            (PRA). Design featured a comprehensive approach that emphasized the promotion of improved
            technologies (including IPDM to tackle new pests and disease), supporting market access through
            road rehabilitation and capacity building of relevant institutions. However, design could have
            benefited from a more rigorous assessment of the road rehabilitation technical requirements to
            ensure feasibility within the project budget. Also, the design could have reflected a more realistic
            timeline for implementation of activities. The PAD included a detailed economic and financial
            analysis that justified the project investments. Overall, the project design reflected relevant
            activities to achieve the PDO.
           Poverty, gender, and social development aspects. While there was no direct evidence
            establishing a causal link between the project and poverty reduction, the project activities were
            expected to benefit the smallholder farmers. The project design prioritized gender mainstreaming,
            through focusing on women's involvement in adopting agricultural technology. The project design
            featured the model village approach which used participatory extension methods to integrate
            multi-sectoral interventions and ensure the inclusion of various gender categories in development
            programs.
           Environmental and Fiduciary aspects. The project design reflected adequate environmental
            aspects that identified the triggered safeguards and relevant measures to ensure compliance with
            Bank policies. The design also reflected adequate fiduciary arrangements that ensured
            compliance with the Bank's policies and procedures. However, procurement and financial
            management both faced challenges during the first two years of implementation.
           Implementation arrangements. Similar to ASWAp SPI, this project was implemented through
            the existing organizational structures of the responsible Government institutions in

                                                                                                     Page 18 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi-ASWAP SPII MDTF (P164445)



         Malawi. Implementation responsibility was with the line Ministries in charge of their respective
         sectors. Overall, implementation arrangements were cumbersome with multiple levels of
         management which was complicated by Government bureaucracies and limited capacity.
        Risk assessment. The project’s overall risk rating at appraisal was Substantial. Eight risks were
         identified with four risks rated substantial: political and governance, macroeconomic, institutional
         capacity for implementation and sustainability, and fiduciary risk. While several risks were
         identified and relevant mitigation measures included, the risk related to limited institutional
         capacity proved to be more challenging and contributed to implementation delays. Also, the
         technical risk related to the reliability of low-volume seal roads against flood damage and wear
         from continuous use was not considered at appraisal.
        M&E arrangements. M&E reflected an adequate design with realistic implementation
         arrangements. However, the Result Framework suffered from weaknesses in terms of measuring
         project outcomes (see Section 9 a for details).

  Summary of Quality at Entry (QAE) Assessment. The project was strategically relevant. Design
  reflected relevant activities to achieve the stated objective. However, the technical design of road
  rehabilitation could have benefited from further assessment. Environmental aspects were adequate, but
  fiduciary experienced initial challenges. Implementation arrangements involved Government institutions,
  and the project was subject to delays that stemmed from Government bureaucracies and limited
  institutional capacity. Risk identification was thorough and reflected relevant mitigation measures.
  However, the technical risk related to the reliability of low-volume seal roads was overlooked. M&E
  arrangements were adequate, but the RF had shortcomings. Overall, Quality at Entry is rated Moderately
  Satisfactory due to moderate shortcomings pertaining to technical aspects, implementation
  arrangements, risk identification, and M&E arrangements.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The project was implemented under a challenging political environment and against a limited
        institutional capacity. The Bank conducted 10 supervision missions over the duration of the
        implementation period. The project-maintained leadership continuity, with the locally based TTL
        providing consistent support. Also, most team members were stationed in Malawi. This
        arrangement facilitated continuous implementation support and dialogue with the government.
       The Bank proactively addressed implementation issues, identified gaps, extended the project's
        closing date, revised indicators in the RF to facilitate improved attribution, and reallocated budgets
        across components to enhance successful activities. The Bank also scaled up project components
        that demonstrated effectiveness and introduced the livestock component to complement CSA
        activities.
       The Bank's strategic inclusion of result-based financing as a condition for AF fostered a focused
        approach to the client's monitoring of progress and implementation. This strategic decision
        contributed to the project's high success rate in meeting targets post-restructuring (ICR, paragraph
        103).


                                                                                                    Page 19 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi-ASWAP SPII MDTF (P164445)



       The Bank also supported the PFT through providing training in procurement requirements. This
        improved procurement performance consistently. Supervision also identified issues with road
        rehabilitation where drainage features were omitted at the design stage. This could potentially result
        in road destruction following rains.
       The client's ICRR flagged the slow disbursement of funds to implementing districts, which impeded
        progress. The report also identified the Bank's slow reporting on issues related to TORs for
        consultants and procedural issues, which contributed to delays in project supervision and
        implementation. Also, the Bank's oversight post-restructuring missed opportunities to establish
        causality, particularly concerning indicators related to market access.

 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. The World Bank team provided close and effective
 support throughout the project implementation. The Bank team guided the project implementation and
 addressed evolving internal and external challenges. However, the Bank team should have addressed
 M&E weakness pertaining to the road component which have provided better clarity with regards to the
 project's impact. Overall, Quality of Supervision is rated Satisfactory with minor shortcomings.

 Based on the assigned ratings for QAE and Quality of Supervision, the overall Bank performance rating is
 Moderately Satisfactory due to moderate shortcomings pertaining to QAE and minor shortcomings
 pertaining the Quality of Supervision.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) since it was not yet required by the Bank at the
        time of appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR included a ToC that reflected the relationship between the
        project activities, outputs, intermediate outcomes and PDO outcomes in a plausible causal chain.
        This Review reconstructed a ToC narrative for the two objectives based on the detailed project
        description in the PAD (Annex 2) in combination with the ToC reported in the ICR.
       The PDO was composed of two objectives (see Section 2), which were assessed based on the
        following four PDO outcome indicators: 1. Increased volume of production of selected agricultural
        commodities in targeted districts; 2. Number of agricultural marketing centers connected by
        rehabilitated roads; 3. Farmers reached with agricultural assets or services; and 4. Farmers
        reached with agricultural assets or service of which female. The four outcome indicators were
        relevant, measurable, and connected to the PDO. However, the project did not directly measure
        improved market access which questions attribution. Also, the units for PDO outcome indicator 1
        was "volume" which would have been challenging to measure, this was later replaced by "yields"
        which provided better focus. Further, the original design measured district-level production
        increases using agriculture production estimates, which included both beneficiaries and non-

                                                                                                  Page 20 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi-ASWAP SPII MDTF (P164445)



        beneficiaries. This diluted project attribution and hindered comparisons between production and
        yields among non-beneficiaries. Finally, indicators 3 and 4 were pitched at an intermediate outcome
        level, and both were later dropped from the PDO level to intermediate outcome level.
       The original Results Framework (RF) reflected relevant intermediate results indicators to track the
        progress of the different project activities. Most IRIs were measurable, reflected reasonable
        targets, and were connected to the project activities. However, the indicator measuring the project
        contribution to CSA was difficult to measure and was later replaced. Also, the project's impact on
        institutional capacity was not tracked.
       Overall, M&E design had some weaknesses. The RF emphasized mostly outputs rather than
        outcomes and lacked a direct measurement of improved market access. There were also
        weaknesses with several indicators in the RF as noted above.



b. M&E Implementation
       The M&E system was established at various levels of project implementation. The project’s
           monitoring framework and reporting format was in place to harmonize data collection at all levels
           and all M&E responsible officers were trained. However, high vacancy rates resulted in
           inconsistent flow of data from implementing agencies and low-quality data.
          A baseline survey was conducted in 2017, as well as two annual outcome surveys for 2019/20
           and 2021/22. Also, an end of Project evaluation, an impact evaluation, one independent
           monitoring report and two Independent Verification Agents (IVAs) reports were conducted to
           collect data on yields, adoption of technologies, beneficiary satisfaction and impact (ICR,
           paragraph 85).
          The project-trained M&E desk officers collected M&E output data using a standardized reporting
           format. Participatory M&E data was collected by communities through their model village M&E
           committees.
          The integration of Performance Based Conditions as a Results Based Financing (RBF) after the
           additional financing approach enhanced monitoring and provided a robust framework for verifying
           the achievement of specific indicators. Five indicators were set under the PBC and prompted
           financial allocations upon successful attainment.
          Restructuring and revision of the RF. The second restructuring included revisions to the RF.
           These included the introduction of new indicators such as clean planting material and replacing
           soil organic matter with area under CSA. Also, indicators were shifted within the RF, with an
           intermediate result indicator (IRI) moving to the PDO level and a PDO-level indicator down to IRI.
           Additionally, the project's scale was adjusted, reducing beneficiaries from 300,000 to 180,000;
           adopters from 150,000 to 100,000, and lowering the yield expectation from an average of 30% to
           20% for various crops.
          Overall, the M&E implementation generated sufficient data through various sources for validating
           the Theory of Change and attributing productivity outcomes and impacts to project interventions.
           However, improved market access was not fully captured.



c. M&E Utilization
       The findings and recommendations derived from M&E reports informed management
           to steer corrective actions and take timely decision-making actions (ICR, paragraph 85 & 86).

                                                                                                   Page 21 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi-ASWAP SPII MDTF (P164445)



         Those findings were also used for the preparation of the MTR reports and subsequently informed
         restructurings. Also, information and data from various surveys, quarterly and routine monitoring
         reports was used to update progress in the results framework of the project during supervision
         missions.
        The Independent Verification Agents (IVA) report was used to inform decision for disbursement.
         Further, all the M&E data generated was used to update the Economic and Financial Analysis
         during ICR preparations and end-of-project assessments.

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. M&E design had moderate shortcomings that were mostly
  rectified during implementation. M&E implementation successfully generated sufficient data through
  various sources for validating the Theory of Change and attributing productivity outcomes and impacts to
  project interventions. However, improved market access was not fully captured. Utilization was
  demonstrated in using M&E data to inform project management and the ICR.

  Therefore, M&E Quality is rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
        Environmental Category and Safeguards. This project was classified as a “Category B” under
          OP/BP 4.01 with a partial assessment on the assumption that sub-projects may result in potential
          adverse environmental and social impacts that would be reversible, temporary in nature and scope,
          and could easily be mitigated. Four environmental and one social safeguard policies were
          triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Pest
          Management (OP/BP 4.09), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Involuntary
          Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). In compliance with the Bank's safeguard policies, the borrower
          prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), an Integrated Pest
          Management Plan (IPMP) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).
         Compliance with Environmental and Social Safeguards. While the ICR did not explicitly report
          that the project complied with the Bank's safeguard policies, it stated that "the safeguards rating at
          the close of the project was satisfactory for all triggered safeguards policies (paragraph 89)." For
          environmental compliance, the ICR (paragraph 90) reported that "despite capacity-building in the
          Environmental Affairs Department, delays occurred in Environmental and Social Management Plans
          (ESMP) preparation for model villages, road upgrades, livestock, and solar irrigation. This led to the
          suspension of works until document clearance, causing late commencement and implementation."
          For social safeguards, site-specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) were developed and
          approved by the Bank during implementation. However, there were delays in RAPs and
          compensation, lack of monitoring, and reporting delays (ICR, paragraph 90). Also, a fatal accident
          and a sexual exploitation and abuse case, prompted a safeguards review.




                                                                                                  Page 22 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi-ASWAP SPII MDTF (P164445)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
        Financial Management (FM). In the first two years of implementation, disbursements were slow
          due to delayed implementation of works contracts. FM performance subsequently improved
          and quarterly Interim Unaudited Financial Statements were timely submitted in the agreed format
          and content. Five independent unmodified (clean) audits were conducted, with few observed
          control and accountability issues. According to the ICR (paragraph 96) "the Project largely complied
          with the Bank's policies and procedures." At completion, FM performance was rated Satisfactory.
         Procurement. The project experienced significant procurement delays in its first year due to
          challenges in contracting, document solicitation, and evaluation procedures. Procurement
          challenges included inadequate capacity at the Roads Authority, leading to the inefficient use of a
          consultant for STEP data updates. Also, numerous small-value procurement packages increased
          transaction time and costs. Cost estimations were not aligned with project requirements, and there
          were procurement sequencing issues, such as engaging environmental and social consultants after
          contractor mobilization (ICR, paragraph 94). Procurement performance improved gradually as
          procurement specialists gained experience with the Bank procedures. At completion, procurement
          performance was rated Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   The ICR (paragraph 75) reported that "enhanced production, crop diversification and establishment of home
   gardens resulted in improved livelihood and food security outcomes among project beneficiaries enabling
   farmers to reserve more for household consumption. According to the impact study, 83.5% of the sampled
   project beneficiaries exhibited a higher HDDS compared to non beneficiaries (73.1%). This indicates that
   project beneficiaries are more likely to consume more than four food groups, surpassing the consumption
   patterns of non-beneficiaries. Moreover, findings reported in the outcome survey (March 2023) revealed that
   the FCS for project beneficiaries significantly exceeded the national average. The study indicates that a
   higher percentage of households achieved an acceptable FCS. Nationally, only 48.7% of households
   achieved an acceptable FCS, whereas in the ASWAp-SP II districts, it reached 81%. Notably, 14% of
   households fell into the borderline category."



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                               QAE had moderate
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               shortcomings.

                                                                                                 Page 23 of 25
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Malawi-ASWAP SPII MDTF (P164445)



Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included eight lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. Projects that include infrastructure investments need a critical feasibility assessment of
activities during the appraisal to ensure full implementation of the envisioned scope of
activities within the project budget. The critical reassessment of the project's budget to include
essential drainage systems underscored a shortcoming in the original project design scope. This
resulted in a reduction in the planned scope of the road upgrades or rehabilitation in each district. To
address these issues, there is a need to prioritize quality in infrastructure development. This entails
focusing on constructing fewer roads with comprehensive drainage and bridge features to enhance
durability and functionality. This approach optimizes resources and fosters resilient transportation
networks for long-term value.

2. The design of M&E needs to cover both physical outputs and broader impacts of improved
infrastructure to provide a comprehensive assessment of infrastructure activities. The
project's performance indicators were narrowly focused on quantifiable physical outputs, such as the
kilometers of roads upgraded or rehabilitated, and the number of market centers connected. This
narrow focus diverted attention from measuring the project component’s broader impact, such as
improvements in commodity volumes traded.

3. To ensure timely implementation of activities, projects need to streamline the
implementation and disbursement process to minimize delays. Delays could be minimized by
streamlining review processes, establishing clear timelines for disbursement, and ensuring effective
communication between implementing agencies and the Bank. The investment efficiency of
this project could have been higher if delays in implementation and disbursement had been
avoided/reduced. Delays meant that seeds and inputs were not available for time-sensitive farm
activities such as planting and pest and disease management. Also, delays in the propagation of
banana meant that increased demand for clean banana suckers could not be initially met.
Disbursement delays of the AF increased the risk of crop losses. Technology adoption was slowed
down due to a delay in hiring extension staff in some districts. The road components were delayed
initially by slow contracting and later by insufficient quality control, such that work had to be redone.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


                                                                                                      Page 24 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi-ASWAP SPII MDTF (P164445)



      Quality of Evidence. The project's M&E used different sources to verify data. The ICR provided an
         adequate evidence base to support most of the achievements reported.
      Quality of Analysis. The ICR used the available evidence base and provided clear links between
         evidence and findings. However, the analysis of the PDO's "improved market access" element was
         undermined by the lack of relevant indicators to assess its achievement directly.
        Internal Consistency. Various parts of the ICR were internally consistent, logically linked and integrated.
        Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.
        Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the standard structure defined in the Guidelines and used
         available evidence to justify the assigned ratings.
        Conciseness. Overall, the ICR was well written, provided a clear and concise coverage of project
         activities to the extent possible, and candidly reported on most shortcomings. However, the ICR lacked
         an explicit statement on the compliance of the project with the Bank's safeguard policies.

Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. The ICR included an adequate assessment of outcomes. The
lessons drawn by the ICR were relevant. Most sections were concise and reflected relevant evidence. Overall,
the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial with minor shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
         Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 25 of 25
