     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Competitiveness and Export Readiness (P152881)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024126

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P152881                                    Competitiveness and Export Readiness

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Kosovo                                     Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-60350                                  30-Oct-2022                                           10,616,562.08

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 18-May-2017                                30-Oct-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            15,270,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             10,596,798.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                         10,616,562.08                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Antonio M. Ollero           Ebru Karamete                Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (page 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (page 3), the project
   development objective of the Republic of Kosovo Competitiveness and Export Readiness Project was to
   support product certification for export markets, strengthen the capacity of export-oriented firms, and reduce
   the cost of business inspections.




                                                                                                    Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Competitiveness and Export Readiness (P152881)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project had two components.

   Enhancing Business Environment and Export Readiness (US$14.72 million estimated at appraisal,
   US$10.18 million disbursed at closing) supported: (a) improvements to the Kosovo National Quality
   Infrastructure -- the institutional framework that establishes and implements standardization, metrology,
   accreditation, inspections, and market surveillance -- to enable the system to attain international recognition
   in global markets including in the European Union; (b) the establishment of a matching grants program to
   help micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs) with an export potential to improve their export
   readiness, meet international quality standards and obtain product certifications, and acquire business
   development services for productivity improvements; and (c) reforms to the business inspection
   regime (which protects the public interest, public health, public safety, and the environment) under a new
   Law on Inspections aimed at raising the effectiveness and efficiency of the inspection system and reducing
   the costs of inspections to firms.

   Project Implementation and Coordination Support (US$0.55 million estimated at appraisal, US$0.44
   million disbursed at closing) supported the activities of the Project Implementation Unit at the Ministry of
   Economy, Employment, Trade, Industry, Entrepreneurship, and Strategic Investments (formerly the Ministry
   of Trade and Industry).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. The project was estimated to cost Euros (EUR) 14.3 million (US$15.27 million equivalent) at
   appraisal. The final project cost at closing was US$10.6 million (69.5 percent of the original amount). The
   reduction was due to the cancelation of some of the project activities.

   Project Financing. The project was financed by a credit from the International Development Association
   (IDA) of EUR 14.3 million (US$15.3 million equivalent) to the Republic of Kosovo. There was no financial
   contribution from the borrower. The final disbursed amount was US$10.6 million

   Dates. The project was approved on May 18, 2017, became effective one year later on May 18, 2018, and
   closed on October 30, 2023, a year after the original closing date of October 30, 2022. The delay in
   securing effectiveness motivated the extension of the closing date.

   Restructuring. The project was restructured four times (all were Level 2 restructurings). The project
   development objective remained unchanged.



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Competitiveness and Export Readiness (P152881)



         The first restructuring on June 1, 2020, with US$0.35 million disbursed (3.3 percent of the final
          project cost of US$10.6 million), revised the project components, costs and implementation
          arrangements: (a) canceled activities to improve the Kosovo National Quality Infrastructure -- after
          limited progress with the component and due to a weakening of the Government's commitment to
          the upgrading effort; (b) reduced the scope of activities to reform the business inspection system by
          dropping capital investments for the digitalization of the inspectorates -- following disagreement with
          technical specifications; (c) reallocated funding from these first and third project activities to the
          MSME matching grants program for export readiness, while also expanding the range of MSME
          activities to be supported by matching grants to include e-commerce, business continuity issues,
          and process and technology upgrading and raising the funding coverage offered by matching grants
          from 60 to a maximum 90 percent of MSME costs -- motivated as well by the economic downturn
          from the COVID-19 pandemic; (d) revised the results framework of output indicators, outcome
          indicators, and targets to reflect these changes; and (e) transferred the management of the matching
          grants program from the Grants Management Unit of the Kosovo Investment and Enterprise Support
          Agency to a contract firm to be selected by the Project Implementation Unit.
         The second restructuring on October 12, 2022, with US$1.71 million disbursed (16.1 percent of the
          final project cost), extended the project closing date by a year from October 30, 2022, to October 30,
          2023. The extension would compensate for the delay in securing the effectiveness of the project
          after early elections in June 2017, the installation of a new government, and the late adoption of the
          Project Operations Manual and establishment of the Project Implementation Unit.
         The third restructuring on September 6, 2023, with US$8.1 million disbursed (76.3 percent of the
          final project cost): (a) cancelled activities to implement e-inspections and the interoperability system;
          (b) dropped the output indicator, number of inspectorates within the government body; and (c)
          reduced the project cost by US$2.24 million, from US$15.27 million to US$13.03 million.
         The fourth restructuring on October 26, 2023, with US$9.25 million disbursed (87.1 percent of the
          final project cost): (a) reduced the project cost by US$2.44 million, from US$13.03 million to
          10.6 million, involving the cost of activities not implemented by MSME recipients of matching grants;
          and (b) cancelled the unused project funds.

   Split Rating. This ICR Review will conduct a split evaluation of this project. Although the project
   development objective was not revised, the scope of the project was reduced with the cancelation of key
   institutional activities and the deletion of one outcome indicator. The split rating will use the first
   restructuring date, taking the disbursements before and after this date to calculate the overall weighted
   outcome rating.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Binding Constraints to Development. Exports of goods and services was 23.8 percent of GDP in Kosovo
at the time of appraisal in 2016, some four percentage points lower than 27.4 percent of GDP for all
countries globally. Following the signing of a Stabilization and Association Agreement with the European
Union in 2016, Kosovo was listed among six Western Balkan states that the European Commission
considered were viable candidates for the European Union "expansion plan" in 2018 -- where the six
applicants could achieve accession as members of the union after 2025. European integration, should it

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Competitiveness and Export Readiness (P152881)



materialize, could potentially grow Kosovo's trade sector, but only if the country addressed the binding
constraints to productivity at home and competitiveness abroad.

The Republic of Kosovo Systematic Country Diagnostic of 2017 (SCD) advocated a strategy of integration
into global value chains to overcome Kosovo's small domestic market and reverse its poor export
performance and excessive reliance on low-value-added raw material exports to a limited set of markets.
The SCD suggested an extensive approach at solving the impediments to a successful value chain
integration strategy. The main challenges were: (a) a weak product quality assurance infrastructure -- there
were no domestic accreditation services, testing facilities lacked adequate equipment, and domestic
certifications were not internationally recognized; (b) micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs) were
uncompetitive, lacked economic vitality, and faced an unfavorable business environment; and (c) the
business inspection regime operated without a clear definition of the duties and mandates of inspectorates
and lacked sufficient resources to enforce inspection laws and rules.

Country Development Priorities. The project objective was consistent with the "country's top priorities"
articulated in the National Development Strategy 2016-2021 (NDS), specially with orienting the country's
development agenda "toward European integration in all areas." The NDS focused on "four thematic
pillars": Human Capital, the Rule of Law and Good Governance, Development of Competitive Industries,
and Development of Infrastructure. The project objective was relevant to the second pillar, specifically to
Intervention 10 - Improve the efficiency of the inspections system. The project objective was also relevant
to the third pillar, specifically to Intervention 16 - Increase access to finance for SMEs and to Intervention 18
- Upgrade SMEs to activities with higher value.

Bank Group Country Strategy. The project objective was aligned with the country strategy for Kosovo at
closing.

      The Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Kosovo for the Period FY23-FY27
       (CPF) commits continuing Bank Group support to the country's development strategy organized
       around three "high level objectives" -- Greater Public Service Efficiency and Quality, More Formal
       Private Sector Jobs, and Increased Environmental Resilience. The project objective was aligned
       with the second high-level objective of the CPF, which advocates for "more formal private sector
       jobs, building on previous progress toward strengthening the business‐enabling
       environment." According to the CPF, the strategy would contribute to "improving the business
       environment and trade integration, which aim to establish a more transparent and predictable
       business environment and improved conditions for sustainable productivity growth and integration
       into the global economy."

World Bank Sector Experience. There were two other Bank operations working in parallel that were
relevant to achieve the project's objectives:

      The Kosovo Investment Climate II Project of the International Finance Corporation, which aimed to
       improve the business environment through better regulations, advanced reforms to the business
       inspection system by supporting the preparation of the new overarching Law on Inspections as well
       as the bylaws; sectoral laws, and regulations to enable the implementation of the new law. The
       project also conducted the initial surveys of enterprises about the time and the cost to comply with
       business inspections.
      The Kosovo Public Finances and Sustainable Growth Development Policy Financing, which aimed
       to enhance private sector development among other objectives, required the enactment of the Law

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Competitiveness and Export Readiness (P152881)



                                        on Inspections as a prior action. The enactment of the legislation in December 2021 fulfilled the
                                        prior action and served to achieve a target for this project (see Section 4 -.

               Based on relevance of objectives to country and World Bank strategies, and because the project objectives
               were realistic and sufficiently challenging when assessed with respect to the country capacity as well as the
               World Bank’s country and sector experience in Kosovo, the relevance of the project development objective
               is rated high.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To support product certification for export markets, strengthen the capacity of export-oriented firms, and
                             reduce the cost of business inspections.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. Integration into global value chains, especially in key industries of comparative
                             advantage, including garments, textiles, and food products, offered Kosovo a strategic opportunity to grow its
                             export sector, which had historically relied on low value raw material exports and limited overseas markets. A
                             value chain integration strategy, in the wider context of future accession to the European Union, would be
                             viable if Kosovo could overcome constraints to developing export products that met quality standards in
                             overseas markets. Building an effective national system by which export products were standardized,
                             accredited, and quality certified for international markets, fostering the ability of micro, small and medium
                             enterprises to obtain business development services and financial resources to spur export readiness, and
                             modernizing the regulatory practices governing business inspections to reduce regulation compliance costs
                             would help advance Kosovo's export strategy. The attainment of these objectives would be reflected by an
                             increase in the number of products that were tested at domestic laboratories and certified by product
                             certification bodies accredited by an internationally recognized agency, a rise in the value of exports by firms
                             that received funding and business development support services from a matching grants program, and a
                             reduction in the costs of compliance by firms with government business inspection requirements.

                             Outputs. The project achieved the targets for five of ten output indicators defined at appraisal to measure
                             the achievement of the project objective.

                                        The number of firms financed through the matching grants program reached 271 by closing,
                                         exceeding the original target of 150. There were 151 MSME direct grant beneficiaries (25 in the first
                                         round of the program and 136 in the second round) and another 120 MSME indirect grant
                                         beneficiaries. According to the ICR, the direct beneficiaries: (a) received US$9.6 million in matching
                                         grants, including US$0.6 million from the Ministry of Trade and Industry; (b) invested EUR 4.65 million

                                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Competitiveness and Export Readiness (P152881)



         -- US$0.9 million of their own funds and US$3.75 million of matching grants -- in obtaining some 140
         international standard/product certifications from international certification bodies and in purchasing
         machinery related to product certifications (in the second round); (c) some 106 purchased 380 new
         machines to automate their production processes, improve product quality, reduced production costs,
         increase capacity, and introduce new products; (d) another 21 purchased computer equipment and
         software to digitalize their operations; and (e) procured the services of consultants to develop
         business plans, develop a brand, introduce new sales channels, design marketing strategies, and
         improve their technical skills. Meanwhile, the 120 indirect beneficiaries obtained training from their
         business associations.
        The number of firms with female owners that were financed through the matching grants program
         reached 37 by closing, exceeding the target of 15. The number represented 24.5 percent of all
         matching grant recipients, more than the ratio of women-owned or women-managed businesses in the
         economy.
        A new law on inspection was adopted by the Parliament, meeting the target. The Law on Inspections
         (Law No. 08/L-067) was adopted in December 2021, defining the principles of inspection, the
         establishment of the Office of the Inspector General, the rules for the organization of inspection bodies
         under the state and municipal administration, the rules for coordination and inspection
         procedures. Following the enactment of the new law, the Office of the Inspector General was
         established in the Office of the Prime Minister. Although this project did not directly finance the design
         of the new law, the Bank participated in its preparation by reviewing the draft law and supporting the
         development of an action plan to implement the new law. The Bank also supported the initial capacity
         building activities of the Office of the Inspector General though the Kosovo Investment Climate II
         Project of the International Finance Corporation
        The number of inspection visits per firm per year was reduced from 22 in the baseline to 2.93 by
         closing, exceeding the target reduction to 16. The result was achieved with the application of the risk-
         based inspection method following the adoption of the new Law on Inspections.
        The number of user survey results about the business inspection system that was shared with
         the public reached three by closing, achieving the target. The surveys in 2021 and 2022 were
         conducted by an International Finance Corporation project. The summary report for all three surveys
         were published on the website of the Ministry of Trade and Industry (https://mint.rks-
         gov.net/page.aspx?id=2,326), and in three languages.

There was no data to measure the achievement of the targets for the other five output indicators.

      The Kosovo Metrology Agency would become a signatory to the International Committee on Weights
         and Measures (CIPM) Mutual Recognition Arrangement (MRA).
        The Kosovo Accreditation Directorate would become a signatory to the MRA with the International
         Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation (ILAC) and the International Accreditation Forum (IAF).
        The participation of the Kosovo Metrology Agency in international inter-laboratory comparisons, for
         which the target was ten such inter-laboratory comparisons.
        The amount of private capital mobilized through the matching grant program, for which the target was
         EUR 2.34 million.
        The percentage of grievances about the MSME matching grant scheme that were responded to
         (Citizen Engagement), for which the target was 90 percent.




                                                                                                     Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Competitiveness and Export Readiness (P152881)




      The number of inspectorates within the government body, the target of which was a reduction from 36
       in the baseline to 15 by closing.

Outcomes. The project achieved one of three outcome indicators defined at appraisal to measure the
achievement of the project objective.

      The reduction in annual inspection compliance cost per business, reached 80 percent by closing,
       exceeding the target of 15 percent. Annual inspection compliance cost per firm -- staff time, travel
       time, other costs, but excluding fines -- was reduced from EUR 220 in 2010 (the baseline) to EUR
       148.80 in 2021, EUR 62.89 in 2022, and EUR 44.80 in 2023. As the authorities resorted to risk-based
       methods in compliance with the new Law on Inspections, the number inspections per firm fell from 22
       annually to only three, and the duration of inspections, from five hours to less than two hours,
       according to surveys of the MSME business inspection system.

There was no data to measure the achievement of the targets for the two other outcome indicators.

      The number of products tested at domestic laboratories and certified by product certification bodies
       that were accredited by an internationally recognized accreditation agency, for which the target was
       200.
      The share of beneficiaries of the matching grants program that increased their export value, for which
       the target was 50 percent.

Therefore, the achievement of the objective to support product certification for export markets, strengthen the
capacity of export-oriented firms, and reduce the cost of business inspections is rated negligible.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To support product certification for export markets, strengthen the capacity of export-oriented firms, and
reduce the cost of business inspections.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change. The results chain was partly altered to exclude inputs at upgrading the Kosovo National
Quality Infrastructure and inputs at digitalizing business inspections. Exporters were still expected to obtain
standardization, certification, and accreditation services, but from foreign rather than domestic bodies. And
business inspections would exclude digital methods.

Outputs. In addition to achieving the targets for the four output indicators defined at appraisal (see Objective
1) and retained at the first restructuring, the project achieved the target for an additional output indicator
defined at the first restructuring to measure the achievement of the project objective.




                                                                                                  Page 7 of 17
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Competitiveness and Export Readiness (P152881)




                                  The percentage of beneficiaries who reported that the project established an effective engagement
                                   process reached 91 percent by closing, exceeding the target of 70 percent. Twenty of 21 respondents
                                   in the first round of matching grant awards and 84 of 93 in the second round considered the
                                   consultation and engagement process under the matching grants program to be "effective" or "very
                                   effective."

                            The project failed to meet the revised target for the expansion of the matching grants the program at the first
                            restructuring but met the revised target for the reduction of the matching grants program at the fourth
                            restructuring.

                                  The number of firms financed through the matching grants program reached 271 by closing, failing to
                                   achieve the first revised target of 420 but exceeding the final revised target of 160.

                            Outcomes. In addition to achieving the target for one outcome indicator defined at appraisal (see Objective
                            1) and retained at the first restructuring, the project achieved the target for the second outcome indicator
                            defined at the first restructuring.

                                  The share of beneficiaries of the matching grants program that increased their export value, relative
                                   to firms of similar size in the same sector, reached 32 percent by closing, exceeding the target of
                                   15 percent. This result applies to beneficiaries of the first round of the matching grants scheme,
                                   where eight of the 25 beneficiaries increased their exports relative to comparator firms by the third
                                   year after receiving the matching grants (i.e., in 2022). A similar definitive assessment could not be
                                   made of the beneficiaries of the second round of the matching grants scheme, as the second round
                                   was completed only in 2023 and the results must be assessed under a three-year window (in line with
                                   the project design). However, according to the ICR, preliminary data compiled by the matching grants
                                   manager yielded the following: (a) 102 export-oriented beneficiaries increased their exports by 6.5
                                   percent in one year from EUR 51.1 million in 2021 to EUR 54.45 million in 2022, after making
                                   investments in certifications, equipment, and advisory services; (b) micro enterprise beneficiaries
                                   raised their exports the most -- by 47 percent year-on-year; albeit they started with a lower level of
                                   exports, at an average EUR 88,000 per enterprise; (c) the increases were more moderate among
                                   small enterprise beneficiaries at 4.5 percent, and medium enterprise beneficiaries, at 5.7 percent,
                                   and (d) 35 non-exporter beneficiaries were expected to begin exporting in the near to medium term.

                            Based on the revised indicators and targets, the project substantially achieved the objective to support
                            product certification for export markets, strengthen the capacity of export-oriented firms, and reduce the cost
                            of business inspections.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale

                                                                                                                               Page 8 of 17
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             Competitiveness and Export Readiness (P152881)



         The overall efficacy of the original objective is rated negligible.



         Overall Efficacy Rating                                      Primary Reason
         Negligible                                                   Low achievement
 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         The overall efficacy after the first restructuring is rated substantial, based on achievement of the revised
         indicators and targets.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency. The ICR calculated the economic rate of return (ERR) of the project at 40.1 percent,
lower than the 45.9 percent estimated at appraisal. With the cancellation of the project activities related to
supporting the upgrade and the international recognition of the Kosovo National Quality Infrastructure, the ICR
computed the ERR as consisting of 23.5 percent for the matching grants program and 91.2 percent for business
inspection reform. In contrast, the Project Appraisal Document estimated ERRs of 43.5 percent for the Kosovo
National Quality Infrastructure upgrading, 46.3 percent for the matching grants program, and 50.4 percent for
the business inspection reform.

Operational Efficiency. The implementation period was a year longer than planned. The second restructuring
extended the project closing date by a year to compensate for the one-year delay in attaining
effectiveness. Due to a change of leadership after the project's approval, it took a long time to ratify the project,
establish a PIU and adopt the operational manual. Frequent change of project directors delayed the decision
making process. As a result of insufficient coordination with relevant stakeholders to project
activities, inadequate follow up on project activities, the Kosovo National Quality Infrastructure upgrading and
the the implementation of the e-inspection and interoperability systems were canceled leasing to disbursement
of 69.5 percent of the original IDA credit.

Because of poor operational efficiency, the efficiency of the project is rated modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest




                                                                                                              Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Competitiveness and Export Readiness (P152881)



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      96.00
Appraisal                                                  45.90
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      96.00
ICR Estimate                                               40.10
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Based on a split evaluation, the outcome of the project is rated moderately satisfactory.

                                    Original                            Revision 1
                                                                        (1st Restructuring)
Relevance of Objective              High
Efficacy:
Objective 1 - To support product Negligible                             Substantial
certification for export markets,
strengthen the capacity of export-
oriented firms, and reduce the cost
of business inspections
Overall Efficacy                    Negligible                          Substantial
Efficiency                          Modest
Outcome Rating                      Unsatisfactory                      Moderately Satisfactory
Outcome Rating Value                2                                   4
Amount Disbursed, US$ million       0.35                                10.27
Disbursement, %                     3.3                                 96.7
Weight Value                        0.07                                3.87
Total Weights                       3.93
Overall Outcome                     Moderately Satisfactory




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Competitiveness and Export Readiness (P152881)



The ICR (para 75) noted that the risks to the sustainability of the development outcomes achieved by this
project are substantial due to the redirection of the key institutional capacity building activities to more short-
term interventions.

The cancellation of project activities supporting the upgrading of the Kosovo National Quality Infrastructure
may have set back the country's agenda to build its own product standardization, metrology, accreditation,
inspection, and market surveillance system, forcing enterprises to rely on foreign certifications in the
meantime. Recent events, however, indicate that the Government may have since reversed its stance on
the Kosovo National Quality Infrastructure upgrading with a proposal for the Bank to finance key metrology
laboratories (which would be part of the Kosovo National Quality Infrastructure) under the Western Balkans
Trade and Transport Facilitation Project II, according to the ICR (para 69). The measure would mitigate risks
to building a workable quality assurance system for export products.

The cancellation of activities advancing the digitalization of business inspection services, including the
procurement of an e-inspection system and an inspection interoperability system, may detract from gains
made with the reform of the business inspection system, headlined by the enactment of the Law on
Inspections, the creation of the Office of Inspector General, and the adoption of risk-based
inspections. Digital inspections remain necessary to improve the efficiency of the system. Separate
assistance from the U.S. Agency for International Development and other donors to the Office of Inspector
General may help mitigate sustainability risks, but additional assistance from the Bank may be necessary to
complete the reforms, according to the ICR (para 76).

Political and institutional capacity risks pose additional outcome sustainability issues. While the project
supported the creation the Office of Inspector General and helped improve the institutional capacity of the
Kosovo Investment and Enterprise Support Agency, political decisions pose risks to the sustainability of
these gains. The Government recently downscaled the mandate of the Kosovo Investment and Enterprise
Support Agency and created a new investment and export agency in the Office of the Prime Minister,
muddling the institutional setup for export development and investment promotion.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Analytical Underpinnings. The planned upgrading of the Kosovo National Quality Infrastructure was
  informed by both an extensive gap assessment of the capacity of the existing product quality assurance
  system and a credible roadmap for its reform, including the renovation of the Kosovo National Quality
  Infrastructure facilities and the recruitment of an additional staff of twenty over time. The roadmap also
  featured collaboration with other national metrology institutes globally and substantial technical
  assistance on accreditation.

  Link to Other Bank Operations. The project design (as well as implementation) benefitted from two
  complementary Bank operations, as mentioned in Section 3.



                                                                                                        Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Competitiveness and Export Readiness (P152881)



  Operational Risks and Mitigation Measures. The Bank considered the overall risk to be
  substantial. Political and governance risk was substantial considering the fragility of the governing
  coalition. The Bank worried that the enactment of the proposed Law on Inspections might be derailed but
  considered the inclusion of the legislation in the European Reform Agenda to be a mitigating
  factor. Macroeconomic risk was rated substantial and might be reflected in a thin budget for the Ministry
  of Trade and Industry, although an ongoing arrangement with the International Monetary Fund would
  help address budgetary issues. Institutional capacity risk was substantial because agencies lacked
  experience with Bank projects. The Bank thought a Project Implementation Unit, backed by Bank training,
  would address this issue, but this proved to be insufficient. Fiduciary risk was considered substantial for
  the matching grants program, but would be mitigated through technical assistance from, and close
  supervision by, the Bank.

  Implementation Arrangements. The Ministry of Trade and Industry would implement the project, for
  which the Project Implementation Unit would be responsible for coordination, procurement, financial
  management, monitoring and evaluation, and reporting. Policy oversight would be vested in a Project
  Steering Committee consisting of representatives from the Prime Minister's Office, the Ministry of
  Finance, and the Ministry of Trade and Industry. The project plan also called for the preparation and
  submission, in a form acceptable to the Bank, of a Project Operations Manual and a Matching Grants
  Manual. Overall, these implementation arrangements were sound.

  Shortcomings at Entry. Project design could have been better if the Bank required the enactment of
  the Law on Inspections prior to the approval of the project, as the legislation was necessary to implement
  inspection reform. Moreover, implementation arrangements were insufficient particularly for the matching
  grants program, which led to the outsourcing of the implementation of this component to an external
  implementing entity.

  Based on the foregoing, the quality at entry is rated moderately satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision. The Bank supervised the project regularly and filed eleven Implementation Status and
 Results Reports (ISRs) over the six-year life of the project, matching the average two-a-year for investment
 project financing operations. With the agencies lacking experience with Bank projects, the Bank team
 provided extensive support in many aspects of project implementation, including with procurement,
 financial management, monitoring and evaluation, and project reporting. The Bank Task Team Leaders
 held weekly meetings with the Project Implementation Unit. Moreover, a Bank recommendation to
 outsource the implementation of the matching grants program to a private firm proved beneficial.

 Adaptation. While the Bank was proactive in restructuring the project, it would have been useful to include
 a revision of the PDO and the TOC, to better capture the narrowing of the project’s focus (ICR, para
 72). The first restructuring recognized the changed political setting for the Kosovo National Quality
 Infrastructure upgrading, and the second, the lengthy delay in securing project effectiveness (see Section
 2.E). The third and fourth restructuring, which cancelled unused funds, ensured the possibility of

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Competitiveness and Export Readiness (P152881)



 reprogramming the unused resources for Kosovo's IDA20 Replenishment (the process by which the IDA
 would support countries in their recovery from the COVID-19 crisis and transition to green, resilient, and
 inclusive development).

 Based on the foregoing, quality of supervision is rated satisfactory.

 With the quality of entry rated moderately satisfactory, and the quality of supervision, satisfactory, the
 overall Bank performance is rated moderately satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Bank defined ten output indicators and three outcome indicators to measure the achievement of the
 project objective (see Section 4 - Objective 1). Most of the original results indicators were well defined,
 measurable, and time bound.

 The M&E plan called for the Government, through the Ministry of Trade and Industry, to monitor and
 evaluate the progress of the project and to prepare quarterly Project Reports, based on the project
 indicators, which would be submitted to the Bank within a month after the end of each reporting period.



b. M&E Implementation
  The cancellation of the Kosovo National Quality Infrastructure upgrading at the first restructuring, the
  cancellation of the implementation of the e-inspection and interoperability system at the third
  restructuring, and changes to the matching grants program at the first and fourth restructurings
  prompted revisions to the results framework.

  The Bank also clarified the outcome indicator, "share of beneficiaries of the matching grants program that
  increased their export value", to mean "the share of beneficiaries of the matching grants program that
  increased their export value, relative to firms of similar size in the same sector." The qualifier provided a
  relevant comparator, but was challenging to measure during implementation, according to the ICR, since
  it required a special effort at collecting data on comparator firms from the customs office and the state
  statistical office. The bank also expanded the definition of women MSMEs to include women-owned
  MSMEs and women-managed MSMEs.

  The final results framework consisted of six output indicators and two outcome indicators (see Section 4 -
  Objective 1 - Revision 2). Although data to measure the final set of results indicators was available at


                                                                                                      Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Competitiveness and Export Readiness (P152881)



  closing, the implementation of the M&E plan was problematic in many aspects, according to the ICR: (a)
  data collection was often late and complete numbers were available only in the last year of project
  implementation; (b) data analysis was incomplete; (c) the Project Implementation Unit lacked the capacity
  for M&E work and the unit's performance improved only after it hired a dedicated M&E specialist, which
  did not occur until the second half of project implementation; and (d) there were few substantive meetings
  about progress toward the results targets.

  Although M&E was rated satisfactory in the last ISR of July 2023, the performance was less
  noteworthy at moderately satisfactory in September 2021 and October 2022, and moderately
  unsatisfactory in April 2022.




c. M&E Utilization
  For at least the matching grants program, M&E data about the export performance of beneficiary firms
  and their comparators during the first round of the program was useful to inform recommendations about
  the conduct of the second round, according to the ICR.

  Because of weaknesses with M&E implementation, the overall M&E quality is rated modest.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards. The project was classified as an environmental assessment category C
   project at appraisal, meaning that no environmental review was required. The project did not involve any
   civil works. All MSME matching grant applicants were required to answer and file an environmental
   questionnaire that the Kosovo Investment and Enterprise Support Agency used to assess adherence to the
   country's environmental regulations.

   At closing, the ICR concluded that the matching grants program for MSMEs likely had a "positive
   environmental impact": (a) 72 firms obtained International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
   14001:2015 certifications -- for environmental management systems: (b) 59 firms obtained ISO 45001:2018
   certifications -- for occupational health and safety management systems; (c) all MSME matching grant
   recipients adopted environmental and social standards acceptable to the Bank.




                                                                                                 Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Competitiveness and Export Readiness (P152881)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement. Procurement faced substantial delays, exacerbated by the resignation of the procurement
   specialist at the Project Implementation Unit and the difficulty in hiring a replacement. The lack of an
   agreement on the technical specifications of the e-inspection system and inspection interoperability
   system, as well as the limited time available to complete the procurement (even if an agreement on
   specifications were reached), prompted the Bank to cancel the e-inspection project component at the third
   restructuring in late 2023. Procurement was rated moderately satisfactory in the last ISR of July 2023, a
   surprising assessment considering the problems with procurement for the e-inspection system until that
   time.

   Financial Management. Financial management was rated satisfactory through most of project
   implementation and in the last ISR of July 2023. According to the ICR: (a) the financial management staff
   were qualified and experienced; (b) the Ministry of Trade and Industry managed budget challenges
   adequately; (c) funds flow arrangements were sound; (d) there were sufficient controls over the matching
   grant operation; (e) the Project Implementation Unit managed the matching grant operation efficiently after
   subsequently taking over the function from the private operator (se Section 2.E); and (f) audit reports were
   acceptable and audit findings were aligned with the Bank's own assessments.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR noted that (para. 55), the matching grants component of the project was used to mitigate the
   adverse economic impacts of Covid-19, as it led to protect and create jobs.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                Overall Bank performance was
                                                                                moderately satisfactory, with
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                moderate shortcomings with the
                                                                                quality at entry.
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Competitiveness and Export Readiness (P152881)



Three lessons are drawn from the ICR, with some adaptation.

Because enactment of laws by legislative bodies is a complex process over which
implementing agencies have little control, the Bank may alternatively consider treating
legislation as a prior action in a development policy operation or embedding it in a
programmatic investment project financing operation. In this operation, the passage of the new
Law on Inspections took four years to accomplish from project approval in 2017, with the enactment
of Law No. 08/L-067 in 2021. The Law on Inspections was necessary to reform the regulatory
framework for business inspections, establish the Office of Inspector General, and enable the
adoption of modern inspection methods including risk-based inspections. The delayed passage of
the legislation left little time to accomplish some operational measures to implement reforms,
including purchasing an e-inspection system, which also ran into procurement problems. Linking
legislative reforms to prior actions under complementary development policy operations may help
address political challenges.

Micro, small, and medium enterprises could benefit from more flexible matching grant terms
at a time of economic crisis. In this operation, the Bank and the Government liberalized the
conditions for the extension of matching grants to MSMEs in response to the pandemic to include a
reduction in the contribution of beneficiaries from 40 percent to 10 percent of total certification costs,
the treatment of equipment purchases as an eligible expenditure, and the differential in the
contributions by MSMEs to capital expenditures from 50 percent for medium sized enterprises to
30 percent for micro and small enterprises. These innovations enabled the beneficiary firms to
expand their product offerings, improve their product quality, and obtain product certifications even
at a time of economic distress. Meanwhile, incentives for women-owned and women-managed firms
yielded positive outcomes including in less developed regions. The outsourcing of the operation of
the matching grants program to a private provider facilitated the implementation and the transparent
management of the support scheme but may have come at the cost of neglecting to
foster institutional capacity building at a competing government agency.

Although comparisons between treatment and control groups represent the gold standard
for impact evaluations, projects must recognize the limitations of these methods. In the
second round of the matching grants program supported by this operation, not enough time had
lapsed between the treatment (the extension of matching grants to MSMEs) and the effect (a rise in
exports by matching grant recipients, relative to the control group). The sample size was also small
and data availability was a constraint. The ICR suggests using intermediate indicators, including
trade exhibitions in foreign markets, commercial contacts with new buyers, and signed export
contracts, but the use of these proxies would fail to measure the intended effect of the
intervention. The method could still be used, however, but at a time after project closing when the
interventions would have had sufficient time to claim results.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

                                                                                                      Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Competitiveness and Export Readiness (P152881)




The ICR is consistent with OPCS guidelines on ICRs for investment project financing operations. Considering
four episodes of changes to the project activities, the output and outcome indicators, the project cost and
financing, and the project schedule, the ICR presents a detailed account of the evolution of the project over a
lengthy period. The efficacy assessment is outcome-oriented and based on the degree of achievement of the
results targets. The efficiency assessment is realistic. The ICR presents ample evidence to support its
assessment of the Bank’s performance at design and implementation. The lessons learned will be applicable
to similar Bank operations, including matching grant programs.

Although the ICR does not conduct a split evaluation, the ratings are similar with those of this ICR Review as
the weight placed on the original objective was small (i.e., the project was restructured early, when
disbursement levels were still low).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 17
