     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     S KARAKALPAKSTAN WATER RES MGMT IMPR (P127764)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023984

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P127764                                     S KARAKALPAKSTAN WATER RES MGMT IMPR

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Uzbekistan                                  Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-83890,IDA-54900                       30-Sep-2021                                            168,545,960.78

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 12-Jun-2014                                31-Jul-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                         Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           260,790,000.00                                                     0.00

 Revised Commitment                            214,260,575.18                                                     0.00

 Actual                                        168,530,693.21                                                     0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Azada Hussaini              Fernando Manibog             Ramachandra Jammi                 IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project objective as written in the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)
   Financing Agreement (p.4) dated October 29, 2014, and the Project Appraisal Document (p.11) is to restore
   irrigation and improve water management in the project area in a sustainable and financially efficient manner.

   This ICR Review will assess the achievement of the following PDOs:

       1. To restore irrigation in the project area in a sustainable and financially efficient manner.

                                                                                                         Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     S KARAKALPAKSTAN WATER RES MGMT IMPR (P127764)



        2. To improve water management in the project area in a sustainable and financially efficient manner.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had three components:

   Modernization of the Irrigation Network. Appraised cost was US$273 million (IDA: US$192.54 million,
   IBRD: US$14.81 million, recipient: US$66.5 million) with actual spending of US$154.47 million. The
   component invested in infrastructure to restore the irrigated area in South Karakalpakstan in a financially
   efficient manner. Activities included constructing and modernizing water control structures, lining canals,
   and shifting to a gravity-based system to minimize water loss and boost service efficiency. Additionally, it
   implemented a Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system for performance monitoring, and
   executed environmental and social management, as well as resettlement plans for safeguarding measures.

   Modernization of Agriculture. Appraised cost was US$55.43 million (IDA: US$43.04 million: IBRD:
   US$3.15 million: recipient: US$9.24 million) with actual spending of US$9.86 million. This component was
   designed to support improvements in agricultural production practices to better manage water resources.
   Activities included strengthening local institutions, supporting crop intensification and diversification,
   promoting mechanization for cotton harvesting, and land leveling, as well as communication campaigns to
   disseminate information effectively.

   Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation. Appraised cost was US$8.15 million (IDA: $6.92
   million, IBRD: $0.33 million, recipient: $0.9 million) with actual IDA spending of US$4.2 million. This
   component focused on enhancing the implementing agency’s capacity to manage the project effectively and
   perform monitoring and evaluation. The aim was to ensure robust project oversight, accurate data
   collection, and effective use of resources throughout the project duration.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project cost, inclusive of borrower contribution, was estimated at US$337.43 million at
   the time of appraisal. In June 2017, the project cancelled the undisbursed IBRD loan balance of US$18.22
   million and undisbursed IDA credit balance of $27.7 million. This was in response to the government’s
   request as it aimed to complete the works through its own resources. The actual project cost at completion
   was US$200.14 million.

   Financing: At the appraisal stage, sources of financing included an IBRD loan of US$18.29 million; and an
   IDA credit of US$242.5 million. Following the cancellation of some funds in 2017, the IBRD loan was
   revised to US$45,725 and the IDA credit to US$214,21 million. The actual disbursements included
   US$45,725 from the IBRD loan and US$168.48 million from the IDA credit.


                                                                                                  Page 2 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  S KARAKALPAKSTAN WATER RES MGMT IMPR (P127764)



Borrower Contribution: The borrower contribution at appraisal was US$76.64 million. The actual
contribution at the time of completion was US$31.6 million, which was allocated to component 1. The actual
contribution excludes government’s contribution in terms of taxes and duties forgone which was initially
included in the borrower contribution estimate.

Dates: The project was approved on June 12, 2014, and became effective nearly a year later on April 7,
2015. A mid-term review was carried out on October 26, 2018. The original project closing date was
September 30, 2021, which was extended by 22 months to July 31, 2023.

Project Restructuring and Additional Financing: The project was restructured four times.

First Restructuring (April 7, 2015). A level 2 restructuring was completed to waive one of five project
effectiveness conditions. The agreement required a signed agreement between the Ministry of Finance and
Uzpakhtasanoat to define the terms of providing cotton harvesting equipment and services and other
associated equipment to Uzpakhtasanoat for the purposes of cotton harvesting mechanization. The
condition was waived because the Government of Uzbekistan established the Uzbekistan Agricultural
Machinery company (UzAgMesh) to own and sub-lease cotton harvesters, while Uzpakhtasanoat was to
continue to manage cotton ginning and handle only pre-cleaning equipment to maintain the quality of
mechanically harvested cotton. At the time of restructuring, the Bank had not received a contract on
mechanization between MOF and the new entity, and it noted significant risks to waiving the condition due
to concerns about UzAgMesh’s organizational capacity Nonetheless, the waiver was completed to allow for
project activities to commence.

Second Restructuring (June 28, 2019). A Level 2 restructuring was completed to update the financing
agreement to reflect institutional and organizational changes, revise the results framework based on
updated information, and adjust the disbursement projections due to implementation delays. The legal
agreements were revised to reflect the new implementing agency, the Agency for Implementation of
Projects in the field of Agroindustry and Food Security (UZAIFA) due to a government restructuring that
divided the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources into two entities. Additionally, the deadline for
installing real-time flow measuring stations at the Amu Darya River intakes and escape canals was
extended from December 31, 2015, to September 1, 2021, due to contract award delays. In the revised
results framework, new intermediary indicators were incorporated, including the extent of canal construction
or rehabilitation, the number of civil work contracts, user satisfaction, the operational status of a grievance
redress mechanism, and the proportion of female staff in water consumer associations.

Third Restructuring (May 28, 2021). Due to delayed effectiveness and persistent procurement delays,
seven years after project approval, only six of the 14 civil contracts were on track for completion by the
original deadline. This was compounded by the COVID-19 pandemic which reduced labor availability and
impacted international staff and contractors. A Level 2 restructuring was therefore completed to extend the
project closing date by 15 months to December 31, 2022. Additionally, the target for irrigation
demonstrations was reduced from 245 to 25 due to the division of the Ministry of Agriculture and Water
Resources, with a new focus on demonstrations supported financially by the borrower's agricultural
modernization efforts.

Fourth Restructuring (October 19, 2022). A level 2 restructuring extended the project closing date by
seven months from December 31, 2022, to July 31, 2023. Eight years after project approval, only six of the
17 active civil works contracts were expected to be complete on time. This was due to delays in completing
government’s feasibility studies post-bank approval, slow government decision to sign the financing


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     S KARAKALPAKSTAN WATER RES MGMT IMPR (P127764)



   agreement, and protracted preparations of detailed designs and bidding documents. There were additional
   issues related to tendering, cost escalations, institutional reforms, and disruptions from the COVID-19
   pandemic and civil unrest in the project area, collectively setting the project back by 18-24 months.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context: Uzbekistan experienced rapid economic growth and declining poverty in 2012-13, yet
rural poverty remained high at 30%. Agriculture was dependent on an outdated irrigation network. Inefficient
water use, driven by deteriorating infrastructure, posed sustainability challenges, especially for cotton
production that was heavily reliant on water. Irrigation issues led to land salinization, food insecurity, and
forced migration. The government was working on agricultural modernization and reduction of forced labor.
Farmers were encouraged to form Water Consumer Associations (WCAs) to manage smaller canals and
pumping stations, while the public sector handled larger canals. However, high dependence on pumping
and costly operations undermined the WCAs' financial viability. Limited profits from cotton further hindered
farmers' ability to cover these high O&M costs.

Previous Bank experience in the sector/country: The World Bank supported water resource
management and horticultural diversification in Uzbekistan through policy dialogue, analytic work, and
investments like the Drainage, Irrigation and Wetlands Improvement Project (DIWIP), the Rural Enterprise
Support Project (RESP), and the Fergana Valley Water Resources Management Project. The former
projects rehabilitated the drainage system in drainage system in the South Karakalpakstan project area and
introduced gravity-based flow. The Project is more ambitious and builds on the results achieved through
DIWIP. While DIWIP managed to suspend two major pumping stations the project aimed to suspend three
additional major stations and more than 20 floating stations. It also introduced measures to end child labor.

The Bank worked closely with the Asian Development Bank to support the government to mechanize
agriculture, focusing on cotton. To tackle child and forced labor, the World Bank engaged in dialogue,
promoted cotton diversification and mechanization, strengthened project-level mitigation measures with
Third Party Monitoring and Feedback Mechanism, and supported crop diversification and agricultural
mechanization through various investment operations.

PDO alignment to Country Priorities: At the time of project appraisal, the government of Uzbekistan had
announced its plans to fully mechanize cotton harvesting by 2016. The Industrial Modernization and
Infrastructure Development Program (2011-15) highlighted four priority areas including a focus on efficient
irrigation infrastructure, competitive industries including agro-processing, and diversified economy. The
PDO was aligned with these objectives and remains relevant to the country’s current water strategy,
Development of Water Resources of the Republic of Uzbekistan for 2020–2030. The strategy emphasizes
the need to improve irrigation efficiency, increase water- and energy-efficient technologies, reduce in power
consumption by pumping stations (through conversion of electrically pumped networks into gravity fed
systems), and improve water monitoring and metering systems in real time.



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      S KARAKALPAKSTAN WATER RES MGMT IMPR (P127764)



               PDO alignment to World Bank Strategies: The Uzbekistan Country Partnership Strategy (CPS, 2012-
               2015) prioritized water resource management both at the regional and country levels. Under objective 1.2 of
               the pillar on sustainable infrastructure development, the CPS highlighted the Karakalpakstan Drainage
               Project in northwest Uzbekistan as a step to upgrading and improving the efficiency of the irrigation and
               drainage network in one of the country’s poorest regions. The latest World Bank Country Partnership
               Framework (CPF, 2022-2026) notes progress in ending systematic use of child labor in the agriculture
               sector. The CPF also aims to expand efforts in improving irrigation efficiency across the country based on
               lessons learned and progress made under this project.

               Level of the Project Development Objective (PDO): The PDO was formulated at the output and
               intermediate outcome levels of the results chain. “Restoring irrigation systems” was at the output level,
               while outcomes focused on financial efficiency, sustainability, and water resource management. Achieving
               the PDO was expected to lead to enhanced crop diversification, increased crop productivity, reduced
               maintenance costs, and higher income levels which would in turn lead to food security, climate change
               adaptation, and economic stability. The PDO was not appropriately pitched to the country’s institutional
               capacity as was evident from the long delay in effectiveness and the protracted procurement and other
               implementation delays. While the PDO’s strategy alignment is high, it was overly ambitious in the
               operational context of institutional capacity weaknesses.

               Overall, the relevance of project objectives is rated Substantial.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To restore irrigation in the project area in a sustainable and financially efficient manner.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change
                             Project activities included construction of the Bustan Canal, rehabilitation of existing canal systems including
                             90 main structures (control, cross-drainage, and bridges) and 20 distribution inter-farm canals, and installation
                             of a Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system. The expected outputs were: Bustan Canal
                             constructed, existing canal systems in the project area rehabilitated, and automated monitoring system
                             established. These outputs were to lead to reduced second-level pumping, systems developed for volumetric
                             measurement and management, improved irrigation efficiency, reduced greenhouse gas emissions, and
                             improved public information on water abstraction. In the long run, expected results included enhanced
                             agricultural productivity, sustainable water resource management, increased crop diversification, reduced

                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   S KARAKALPAKSTAN WATER RES MGMT IMPR (P127764)



operational costs, better resilience to climate change, and overall improved livelihoods for the farming
communities.

The theory of change had a logical flow and adequate causal links. The sequence from infrastructure
development to enhanced irrigation efficiency and water management was coherent. The construction and
rehabilitation efforts aimed to address immediate technical and operational challenges, while the installation
of SCADA facilitates advanced monitoring and management. These outputs would lead to reduced pumping
requirements, improved volumetric measurement, and better public information on water usage. However, the
success of these causal links relied heavily on key assumptions such as the availability of financial resources,
adoption by farmers, institutional capacity, and supportive policies. Some of these assumptions proved to be
critical barriers. For example, farmers did not adopt cotton harvesting mechanization approaches, and
institutional capacity often fell short in terms of procurement.

Outputs

      133 kms of main canals were rehabilitated (including reprofiling and water control structures),
         exceeding the target of 35kms which was introduced in 2019. This indicator was not part of the
         appraisal document but added later in 2019 restructuring.
        694 kms of secondary canals were rehabilitated exceeding the target of 300 kms that was
         introduced in 2019. This indicator was not included in the appraisal document but added in the 2019
         restructuring.
        19 civil works contracts were awarded under the project exceeding the target of 6 introduced in 2019.
        64,420 water users were provided with new/improved irrigation and drainage services exceeding the
         original target of 41,000. Of these users, 31,560 were female water users exceeding the original target
         of 27,000.
        Irrigation and drainage services were improved in 94,000 hectares of land, exceeding the original
         target of 75,000 hectares as well as the revised target of 89,000.
        By reducing the use of pumping stations, the decrease in energy consumption was 61,404 MW
         meeting the target of 60,000 MW.
        An irrigation water distribution schedule was prepared to formalize allocations to water users along the
         irrigation network.
        A dam safety plan for Tuyamuyun dam was prepared and submitted to the government

Outcomes

      Improved irrigation water delivery service (score of 2.5 achieved against original target of 2.5). Quality
       of irrigation service delivery was measured based on the Mapping System and Services for Canal
       Operation Techniques (MASSCOTE), a stepwise methodology to evaluate and analyze different
       components of an irrigation system.
      The WCAs demonstrated an increase in the collection of irrigation service fees from water users to
       cover O&M costs. The collection rate increased from a baseline of 36.4 percent in 2016 to over 55
       percent in 2021, thus exceeding the targeted 50 percent cost recovery.
      Annual public and WCA expenditures for pumping reduced by 78% nearly achieving the target of
       80%.




                                                                                                   Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   S KARAKALPAKSTAN WATER RES MGMT IMPR (P127764)



The project largely achieved its targets, exceeding goals for canal rehabilitation, civil works contracts, and the
number of water users receiving improved services. The quality of irrigation service was standardized using
the MASSCOTE index. Targets for hectares of land with improved irrigation were also surpassed. Reductions
in energy consumption and increased fee collection by WCAs indicated progress towards financial efficiency
and sustainability. According to government policy, WCAs were expected to cover 100% of rehabilitation
costs, with the government funding main and inter-farm system upgrades. While the project met its 50% cost
recovery target, this fell short of the government’s requirement. Factors such as climate change and droughts
may impact cost recovery. Despite this, it is anticipated that farmers can meet O&M fees, which are less than
2% of net farm income for private farms.

Overall, despite the extended implementation timeline and persistent delays in procurement, the project
managed to complete civil works at the time of completion and met or exceeded most of its targets. The
results were largely attributable to the project because the intervention included infrastructure rehabilitation
but also implementation of water management technologies, capacity building, and community-based
operational model. The project’s efficacy toward this objective is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve water management in the project area in a sustainable and financially efficient manner.

Rationale
Theory of Change

Project activities included conducting farmer field-schools and demonstrations, providing training and
technical support to farmers on credit access, providing modern tools and maintenance equipment to WCAs,
conducting a financial viability assessment of WCAs, preparing a business plan for WCAs, supporting
purchase of mechanized cotton harvesters, financing purchase of cleaning equipment for the ginneries to
maintain quality of mechanically harvested cotton fiber, capacity building for operation and maintenance of
the machinery, establishing quotas for women’s participation in WCAs, and conducting awareness campaigns
to inform farmers about the implications of cotton harvest mechanization in terms of crop husbandry methods.

Expected outputs included: farmers trained on non-cotton and non-wheat crops, awareness campaigns
completed, cotton harvesting mechanization equipment and cleaning equipment procured, trainings
completed, and business plans and assessments on WCAs completed.

In the medium term, the outputs were expected to lead to: child labor reduced or eliminated in the cotton
sector, agricultural practices improved (i.e., better use of scale up land leveling and deep dripping), irrigation
efficiency improved, cotton harvesting mechanized, crop diversification beyond cotton and wheat, crop
intensification, farm productivity increased, and financially viable business models adopted by WCAs. In the
long term, the project is expected to improve water management in a financially viable and sustainable



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   S KARAKALPAKSTAN WATER RES MGMT IMPR (P127764)



manner, enhance climate change adaptation among farmers in the project areas, improve food security and
increase income for project beneficiaries.

The theory of change relied on a few key assumptions. For example, willingness of farmers to adopt new
practices and their confidence in the benefits of diversification; reliable market access and supportive
government policies, adequate infrastructure for storage, transportation, and processing of alternative crops;
and economic viability of the new crops being introduced. Also training WCAs on available credit lines may
not necessarily lead to actual use of credit lines due to other factors such as interest rate affordability, credit
accessibility, collateral requirements, and the groups' financial literacy and risk aversion.

Overall, the causal links between the project activities, outputs, and outcomes were logical and valid. The
achievement of the project objectives can be attributed to the project's interventions, but critical assumptions
were overly optimistic. The project did not track most of these assumptions, making it unclear how
significantly they impacted the outcomes. For instance, while Water User Associations (WCAs) were trained
on credit options, there was no evidence that they pursued or secured formal loans and credit. Additionally,
market linkages, transport, and other related factors which affect farmers’ decisions regarding agricultural
practices and choice of crops were outside the project's scope and not covered in the monitoring reports.

Outputs

      34 operational WCAs were created and/or strengthened exceeding the original target of 25 but falling
       short of the revised target of 40. Institutional reforms in 2022 consolidated WCAs into Special Services
       units within district-level irrigation departments, making it impossible to monitor the number of
       strengthened WCAs. However, these Special Services units still benefited from the capacity-
       strengthening activities originally targeted at the WCA.
      798 staff of BVO, PAN-ISA, and LABAIS were trained, exceeding the target of 50.
      3,366 client days of training was delivered exceeding the original target of 600. Of this, 315 days were
       delivered to female participants against a target of 120. It is unclear how many participants were
       female as the number of training days for women is less than 10%.
      30 demonstrations were established, not meeting the original target of 245 but meeting the revised
       target of 25. The target was revised quite late in project implementation a year before project closing.
       The ICR notes (para 93) that this was due to the splitting of the original implementing agency, Ministry
       of Agriculture and Water Resources, into two separate ministries. As a consequence, demonstrations
       focused on water resource management were retained while the demonstrations focused on
       agricultural practices were cancelled.

Outcomes:

      28,172 hectares of land were producing non-cotton/non-wheat crops exceeding the target of 8,000.
      2.7% of cotton area was being harvested mechanically, not meeting the original target of 70% (nearly
       meeting the revised target of 3%).
      The WCAs demonstrated an increase in the collection of irrigation service fees from water users to
       cover O&M costs. The collection rate increased from a baseline of 36.4 percent in 2016 to over 55
       percent in 2021, thus exceeding the targeted 50 percent cost recovery.
      Annual public and WCA expenditures for pumping reduced by 78% nearly achieving the target of
       80%.


                                                                                                      Page 8 of 20
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               S KARAKALPAKSTAN WATER RES MGMT IMPR (P127764)



                            The project exceeded several targets, including the creation and strengthening of operational WCAs,
                            extensive training of staff from key organizations, training delivery. Additionally, a substantial amount of land
                            diversified crops away from cotton and wheat, and WCAs demonstrated improvements in fee collection rates.
                            Annual expenditures for pumping were also reduced close to the expected target.

                            However, the project faced challenges that impacted its overall effectiveness. The consolidation of WCAs into
                            Special Services units made it difficult to monitor the number of strengthened WCAs. Moreover, only 2.7% of
                            the cotton area was harvested mechanically, falling short of the original 70% target. It nearly met the revised
                            3% target, but that target was established a year before project closing. The number of demonstrations
                            established was far below the original target, meeting only the revised target set late in the project. These
                            indicators were important in measuring the achievement of the PDO.

                            The project's results in enhancing financial efficiency through WCA’s fee collection and expenditure reduction
                            was notable, but the full sustainability of these improvements remains uncertain as the WCAs no longer exist
                            and the operating model of the new entities is unknown. The assumptions discussed above also play a role in
                            sustainability. For example, the level of market demand and availability of storage infrastructure for alternative
                            crops would determine the sustainability of the farmer field-school results. The project fell short in achieving
                            cotton harvesting mechanization which was a key activity towards reduced the need for child labor.

                            Beyond the results framework, the project also carried out a beneficiary feedback survey in 2017 and 2023
                            covering 800 households. The survey showed an increase in income levels, water availability for households,
                            crop variety improved, and irrigation reliability also increased. Although the survey was based on beneficiary
                            perceptions which may be impacted by short-term factors, it was carried out at baseline and completions
                            stages and provided a useful measure of beneficiary perceptions.

                            Overall, the project made progress in certain areas but the inability to meet some key targets and the
                            challenges in monitoring and institutional reforms indicate that the objective of improving water management
                            in a sustainable and financially efficient manner was only partially achieved. Efficacy under this outcome
                            is rated Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project achieved substantial progress towards its first objective of restoring irrigation systems, and it
                            achieved modest progress towards its second objective of improving water management systems. The overall
                            efficacy is rate Substantial with significant shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating

                                                                                                                                Page 9 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      S KARAKALPAKSTAN WATER RES MGMT IMPR (P127764)



  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis: A “with project” and “without project” economic analysis was conducted at appraisal and
project closing. The analysis calculated economic benefits from expected production increases, cost savings,
employment, and income generation. The PAD analysis estimated agricultural benefits from crop and livestock
production increases, non-agricultural savings from reduced pumping and O&M costs, and the costs and
benefits of mechanized cotton harvesting. The ICR analysis drew on actual data from 2022 for both scenarios,
indicating that production in selected districts had increased by 87% between 2016 and 2022. Using the
Herfindahl-Index, the analysis also showed that crop diversity had increased in selected areas compared to
2016. On energy efficiency, it confirmed the PAD projection showing that energy consumption reduced between
2016 and 2022. One element that was missing from the ICR cost-benefit analysis was the expected
US$15million benefit from cotton harvesting mechanization. In terms of timeline, the PAD assessed project
benefits for a 30-year period, while the ICR used actual data between 2016 and 2022 and an adjusted set of
projections beyond the closing date.

While the Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) in the PAD and ICR were not directly comparable due to
differences in timeline and focus areas, the ICR’s EIRR of 15% was based on actual implementation results.

Administrative Efficiency: The project was initially planned for five years but was extended by two years.
Despite this, it experienced significant cost savings across its main components. The modernization of the
irrigation network was completed for US$186.08 million against an initial budget of US$273.85 million, benefiting
from competitive bidding and local currency devaluation. The second component cost US$9.86 million instead of
the projected US$55.43 million, primarily due to lower uptake of mechanized cotton harvesting. Project
management, monitoring, and evaluation costs were US$4.2 million, below the US$8.15 million budgeted.
Overall, the project was completed for approximately US$303 million, 10% below the estimated US$337 million,
with no significant cost overruns.

Overall, the project achieved a favorable EIRR, indicating significant economic benefits in terms of increased
agricultural productivity and reduced energy costs by shifting to gravity-fed irrigation. However, it did not fully
realize the expected benefits from the adoption of mechanized cotton harvesting. It also demonstrated cost
efficiency with actual completion cost being 10% under the original budget. This was largely due to competitive
bidding and currency devaluation rather than planned cost-saving measures. The project’s efficiency is rated
Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)


                                                                                                      Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      S KARAKALPAKSTAN WATER RES MGMT IMPR (P127764)



                                                                                       0
Appraisal                                                   16.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
ICR Estimate                                                15.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project was substantially relevant to the country context which faced significant water management and
irrigation related challenges. It was well aligned with both the government and World Bank sector strategies. It
achieved substantial progress towards its first objective of restoring irrigation systems, and it achieved modest
progress towards its second objective of improving water management systems. The project’s overall efficacy is
substantial, with significant shortcomings. The project was implemented in an efficient manner with cost-savings
and demonstrated economic gains for project beneficiaries. Following OPCS and IEG harmonized guidelines,
given the modest rating of one of the objectives, the overall outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical Risk: The project faced a low uptake of cotton harvesting mechanization due to farmers’
preference for existing approaches. There is a substantial risk that the project’s other innovative elements
i.e., crop diversification, laser land leveling, deep dripping techniques, and remote monitoring technology
may not be utilized to full potential and adequately maintained. Although the project delivered trainings on
these elements, there is no discussion in the ICR of how the technical knowhow will be maintained and
updated in the future.

Environmental Risk: As discussed in the PAD, Uzbekistan already faces water scarcity challenges, and
climate change is expected to exacerbate these issues. This can pose significant risks to irrigation systems
and rural water supply management, including increased temperatures, altered precipitation patterns, and
prolonged droughts, which could exacerbate water scarcity and disrupt irrigation schedules. Extreme
weather events can damage infrastructure. The project has taken steps toward enhancing water use
efficiency, investing in resilient infrastructure, and adopting sustainable practices. Continued efforts in these
areas are essential to mitigate climate impacts.

Governance Risk: The project experienced several institutional changes and restructurings during
implementation. First, the responsibilities for cotton mechanization procurement shifted from one entity,
Uzpakhtasanoat to another agency, UzAgMesh. The project’s legal covenant pertaining to procurement of
cotton harvesting equipment needed to be adjusted to reflect this. The implementing ministry was later split
into two ministries resulting in a restructuring to revise relevant targets. In the year before project closing,
the WCAs were dissolved and absorbed into new district level entities and a new operating model was



                                                                                                       Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      S KARAKALPAKSTAN WATER RES MGMT IMPR (P127764)



introduced. There is a substantial risk that continued institutional changes may affect project results
particularly the institutional development and regulatory support aspects.

Social Risk: In the context of Uzbekistan, where water is a scarce and valuable resource, there is a
substantial risk of elite capture in the community-based organizations (WCAs later merged into Special
Services Units). The project established a quota for women’s participation in the WCAs for gender inclusion.
However, studies have shown that setting participation quotas alone is not sufficient for ensuring voice,
representation, and decision-making power. Other vulnerable groups and minorities may also require more
intentional interventions for meaningful representation.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The timing of the project's preparation was strategic, immediately following the closure of the previous
  Drainage, Irrigation and Wetlands Improvement Project (DIWIP), which covered the same region. DIWIP
  activities resulted in suspension of two main pumping stations and redirecting saline drainage water to
  the Aral Sea. DIWIP introduced gravity-based drainage system and reduced high water tables and
  enhanced institutional capacities by establishing 21 WCAs, training 1,250 farmers and staff, and
  conducting 12 demonstrations. Following DIWIP, the project introduced more ambitious interventions to
  suspend three additional main pumps and 20 other pumps, improve institutional capacity, improve water
  management systems including through introduction of remote sensing technology, and address dam
  safety issues. The project’s focus on child labor was timely, although related activities were not fully
  elaborated at appraisal stage. The project area, the Karakalpakstan region, was a highly relevant choice
  due to its high degree of poverty and significant water security challenges.

  During preparation, client capacity assessments on safeguards and fiduciary aspects were carried out
  and action points were identified. The project activities and geographic scope was clear at the time of
  appraisal hence safeguards assessments and plans were completed for the key project sites, and
  detailed plans including environmental social management plans and resettlement action plans were
  prepared.

  The project had 21 legal covenants, which proved excessive and delayed its effectiveness. In addition to
  slowing project initiation, many covenants needed amendments during implementation due to unrealistic
  timelines or changing contexts, such as the covenant for cotton harvest mechanization, which faced low
  farmer acceptance.

  The FM assessment noted limited accounting technical capacity and considered the overall FM and
  control risks to be moderate. Audits of Bank projects were performed by private firms that met Bank’s
  eligibility criteria. The PIU had prior experience with DIWIP project. A few action points were identified in
  the PAD including updating the project operations manual’s FM section, modifying, and updating existing
  software, hiring/selecting an FM specialist to oversee the PIU’s financial activities. Procurement risks
  were considered high given the arduous contract registration processes, likelihood of political
  intervention, low competition levels due to high costs, and high perceived levels of corruption. The project



                                                                                                     Page 12 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     S KARAKALPAKSTAN WATER RES MGMT IMPR (P127764)



  prepared a procurement plan which included early preparation of tender documents, capacity building
  trainings for the PIU, and establishment of a complaint mechanism for bidders.

  The project’s M&E framework was practical and defined benchmarks to reflect the theory of change,
  although a few shortcomings remained in terms of assessing longer term outcomes to capture the
  project’s contribution toward gender, climate change, and citizen engagement.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The implementation arrangements were initially challenged by a lack of coordination across government
 ministries, leading to delays. However, the creation of a dedicated Ministry of Water Resources (MoW) in
 2018 improved implementation. The MoW became the key implementing partner.

 Some adjustments were made during the project to address emerging challenges. For instance, the project
 faced procurement delays and institutional changes, which were addressed by splitting large contracts and
 restructuring implementation arrangements. The Bank team was responsive to implementation realities.
 The mid-term review in 2018 produced a detailed assessment on the status of activities, bottlenecks, and
 measures required to accelerated implementation. This led to some changes at the restructuring carried
 out the following year. It reduced the target for number of demonstrations established in response to
 ministry restructuring and reduced the target for cotton harvesting mechanization although the 2019
 restructuring paper did not provide an explanation on the later change. The change in the status of WCAs
 was not reflected in the project activities or M&E framework.

 The task team supported trainings on implementation of environmental and social safeguards, occupational
 health and safety trainings for contractors. The project used independent consultants and agencies to
 conduct quality tests for construction works, monitor use of child labor, and implement measures to
 mitigate environmental impacts. This helped to address quality assurance aspects.

 Three task team leaders, based in the country office, oversaw project implementation throughout its
 lifecycle. This allowed for close supervision and continuous support. Some factors such as Covid-19
 impacts, currency depreciation, and delays caused by winter season were outside the control of the Bank
 and the borrower.

 Overall, the Bank team took sufficient measures during project preparation and implementation. Due
 to design-stage shortcomings such as inadequate community consultations on cotton
 mechanization, excessive legal covenants, initial coordination challenges, inadequate attention to social
 inclusion aspects Quality at Entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory, while Quality of Supervision is rated
 Satisfactory. According to ICR guidance, the lower of the two ratings (of Bank performance in ensuring
 quality at entry and Quality of supervision) determines the rating of overall Bank Performance.
 Therefore, the overall Bank Performance rating is Moderately Satisfactory.




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     S KARAKALPAKSTAN WATER RES MGMT IMPR (P127764)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PDO and results framework reflected both output and outcome level indicators and objectives. The
 PDO was compound and required multiple quantifiable indicators for tracking progress, and this was
 established to some extent. Some factors affecting the PDO were outside the project scope and influence
 for example climate change, beneficiary commitment to adopt new practices, and political influence in
 project interventions. Nonetheless, the M&E design captured the main contributions of the project toward
 the PDO.

 Innovative monitoring tools were introduced including use of the MASSCOTE methodology to assess
 quality of irrigation service delivery, with a focus on system capacity and behavior (sensitivity);
 perturbations; water networks and water balances, and the cost of operating the system. A third-party
 monitoring and beneficiary feedback mechanism was also planned at the time of appraisal although not
 fully developed yet.

 The results framework introduced sex-disaggregated data on water users to measure whether men and
 women users benefit from water management systems equally. While it included a quota for women’s
 participation in WCAs, this was not sufficient to track meaningful representation, voice, and decision-
 making power. Similarly, the project did not monitor representation of other vulnerable groups and
 minorities. Despite its strong focus on child labor and forced labor, it did not include indicators or data
 sources to measure the use of child labor, nor did it track generation of labor and changes in income levels.

 The project carried out a baseline survey during preparation. Despite this, baselines were missing for some
 indicators: water users provided with irrigation and drainage services, WCAs created/strengthened, area
 provided with improved irrigation services, and area of laser land leveling. Lack of baselines posed
 attribution challenges and limited the project’s ability to fully demonstrate and verify the achievements and
 effectiveness of the project initiatives in the mentioned areas. The project included an indicator on dam
 safety plan developed but without additional data points on implementation to verify whether the safety
 aspects were implemented.



b. M&E Implementation
  In 2022, WCAs ceased to exist, and their staff, functions, and assets were absorbed into the district-level
  Irrigation Departments. The newly centralized O&M functions within the district-level Irrigation
  Departments were to be financed by a water tax, set on a volumetric basis. Although this change took
  place quite late in project implementation, it posed monitoring challenges on the sustainability and
  financial efficiency of community-level water management. The project’s two outcome indicators focused
  on WCAs (WCA expenditures on pumping and WCA fee collection rate) were no longer relevant. The

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     S KARAKALPAKSTAN WATER RES MGMT IMPR (P127764)



  project assumed that the activities and results focused on WCAs would automatically transfer to the new
  structure, but this was not tracked through the results framework or data sources beyond the results
  framework.

  The project tracked sex-disaggregated data on water users to measure whether men and women users
  benefit from water management systems equally, but it remained short in monitoring diversity and
  inclusion aspects. On child labor, a third-party monitoring scheme was introduced in partnership with the
  International Labor Organization (ILO). A indicator was added in 2019 on availability of a grievance
  mechanism, which strengthened the project’s the citizen engagement monitoring though it did not track
  number of cases reported and resolved.

  The project carried out a beneficiary feedback survey in February 2017 and again in May 2023, covering
  800 households. Although the survey was based on beneficiary perceptions which may be impacted by
  short-term factors, it was carried out at baseline and completions stages and provided a useful measure
  of beneficiary perceptions. The survey was a useful complement to gather data on aspects of the theory
  of change that were not captured in the results framework.

  Most indicator targets remained unchanged, and a few were increased during implementation. One target
  was significantly reduced quite late in implementation: number of demonstrations established had a
  target of 245 which was reduced to 25 in 2022. Following the restructuring of ministries, the project could
  only implement demonstrations related to irrigation efficiency (such as laser land leveling, deep soil
  ripping techniques) and had to cancel demonstrations related to agricultural practices (such as seed
  sowing techniques). The indicator on percentage of cotton area harvested mechanically had a target of
  70% which was reduced to 3% in 2019 while the restructuring paper did not discuss the rationale for this
  at the time, the ICR pointed out that this was due to lack of uptake by farmers. The changes did not affect
  the PDO achievement and were responsive to the implementation realities.



c. M&E Utilization
  The project introduced innovative monitoring schemes including third-party monitoring to inform use of
  forced child labor complementing the related awareness campaigns. It also used a representative
  beneficiary feedback survey to demonstrate outcomes achieved in areas beyond the results framework,
  which further strengthened the evidence around the project’s theory of change. The M&E framework
  also informed the project’s citizen engagement and safeguards implementation by tracking grievances
  and their resolution.

  The M&E framework tracked outputs but also outcome level results including energy consumption,
  quality of irrigation systems, O&M fee rates, as well as beneficiary feedback on crop diversification,
  income levels, and irrigation water availability.

  The government restructurings and establishment of new ministries may pose challenges in retaining
  M&E capacity but since the PIU was involved in the previous water resource management project
  (DIWIP), it is likely that the project’s M&E systems will benefit future Bank and non-Bank projects.

  Overall, the M&E design and implementation was robust using relevant indicators at both output and
  outcome levels, introducing innovative tools, and triangulating multiple methods including third-party
  monitoring and beneficiary feedback surveys. However, monitoring of diversity and inclusion in WCAs


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     S KARAKALPAKSTAN WATER RES MGMT IMPR (P127764)



  was insufficient. Adjustments to indicator targets (on cotton mechanization and demonstrations) were
  significant and late. The project assumed that WCA activities and results would automatically transfer to
  the new structure without tracking this transition in the results framework and data sources.

  The M&E quality is rated Substantial with significant shortcomings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project triggered six World Bank safeguard policies: Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Natural
   Habitats (OP 4.04), Pest Management (OP 4.09), Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12), Safety of Dams (OP
   4.37), and Projects on International Waterways (OP 7.50).

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): Since the project aimed to aimed to rehabilitate existing
   irrigated areas, rather than expanding irrigation to new areas, limited adverse impacts were envisaged at
   the time of appraisal. The project was therefore classified as Category B. Environmental assessments
   indicated that improving water management would positively impact the lower Amu Darya basin and the
   environment without affecting the water needs of riparian countries or the Aral Sea. Project sites were
   identified during preparation which allowed Environmental Social Management Plans to be prepared for the
   16 sites. Although a grievance redress mechanism was established, the ICR did not report on the number of
   grievances received and resolved, number of households affected.

   Natural Habitats (OP 4.04): The canal needed for water supply had been developed under DIWIP, and the
   project needed to ensure adequacy of its water resource to support associated biodiversity. At the time of
   completion, the project reported that there were no additional abstractions of water attributable to the
   project, thus noting that it would not undermine the current water allocation in the lower Amu Darya. The
   project also planted 400,000 trees to replace those that were cut during construction.

   Pest Management (OP 4.09): The policy was triggered due to potential increases in pesticide use resulting
   from increased crop yield/agricultural productivity. There was a risk that this could cause pesticide residue
   build-up in the soil as well as in surface and ground water, which would disrupt agro-ecosystems and
   undermine sustainable agricultural production and pose human health risks. The project Environmental
   Social Management Plan included trainings targeted at WCAs and farmers.

   Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12): The policy was triggered due to land acquisition and resettlement
   anticipated in rehabilitation works associated with Bustan Canal and secondary canals. The project
   activities were expected to affect over 400 ha of agricultural land, some access roads, residential and small
   commercial properties. At the time of project completion, the total number of affected people and
   households was not reported but the ICR noted a total of US$2 million paid as compensation.

   Safety of Dams (OP 4.37): The policy was triggered because the project area is downstream of the
   Tuyamuyun Dam. The project conducted a dam safety assessment and established an emergency


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    S KARAKALPAKSTAN WATER RES MGMT IMPR (P127764)



  preparedness plan. Regular dam safety inspections and maintenance activities were carried out during
  implementation to ensure the structural integrity of the dam and the safety of downstream areas. Trainings
  on dam safety protocols were also conducted for relevant staff.

   Projects on International Waterways (OP 7.50): The project triggered this policy because it operated on
  the Amu Darya, a transboundary water body, and because the drainage resulting from project area returned
  to the Aral Sea. The switch from river pumping to gravity diversion through the construction of the Bustan
  Canal and remodeling of secondary canals was expected to result in bulk-water savings, eliminating the
  need for water releases from the Tuyamuyun dam for pumping stations and preserving the flow and quality
  of the Amu Darya and irrigation withdrawals by other Aral Sea riparian countries. The ICR noted that the
  project activities did not undermine the current water allocation in the lower Amu Darya.

  Grievance Redress Mechanism: A GRM was established in the early years of implementation. The 2019
  restructuring added an indicator in the results framework to verify this. Specific measures were undertaken
  for proper functioning of the mechanism, including trainings and grievance recording procedures. The ICR
  noted that some labor safety violations (such as lack of proper personal protective equipment, insufficient
  training, and unsafe machinery handling) were registered by the PIU, but contractors generally implemented
  corrective measures.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement: At the time of appraisal, procurement risks were considered high given the government’s
  arduous contract registration processes, likelihood of political intervention, low competition levels due to
  high costs, and high perceived levels of corruption. The project prepared a procurement plan which
  included early preparation of tender documents, capacity building trainings for the PIU, and establishment
  of a complaint mechanism for bidders. Despite delays in the early years of implementation, the project
  managed to complete the contracts in line with the World Bank Procurement and Consultant Guidelines.
  The ICR did not discuss any incidence of divergence from standards or outstanding procurement issues at
  the time of completion.

  Financial Management: Although FM risks were considered high during appraisal, the project reports did
  not record any major issues. FM ratings were mostly satisfactory throughout implementation. Interim
  Financial Report (IFR) submissions, the accounting system, and the flow of counterpart funds were
  considered satisfactory. External audits carried out by private firms were unqualified for all years.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None



d. Other
   ---


                                                                                                 Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     S KARAKALPAKSTAN WATER RES MGMT IMPR (P127764)



11. Ratings
                                                                             Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                      IEG
                                                                             Disagreements/Comment
                                                                             One of the two objectives is
                                                                             rated Modest for Efficacy.
                                                                             Overall Efficacy is rated
Outcome                       Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory   Substantial, with significant
                                                                             shortcomings. Following OPCS
                                                                             and IEG guidelines, the outcome
                                                                             rating is Moderately Satisfactory.
                                                                             There were a few shortcomings
                                                                             in gathering baselines for a
                                                                             number of indicators, reporting
                                                                             updates on the results
Bank Performance              Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory   framework and safeguards
                                                                             aspects, and reflecting the
                                                                             institutional changes i.e., WCAs
                                                                             dissolved in the monitoring
                                                                             framework.
                                                                             While rated substantial overall,
Quality of M&E                Substantial          Substantial               the significant shortcomings are
                                                                             noted in the M&E section.
Quality of ICR                ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The review has drawn three lessons from the project:

Stakeholder engagement and consultations with beneficiaries can inform realistic
intervention models. The project faced challenges in introducing mechanized cotton harvesting
due to low farmer acceptance. Recognizing cultural and institutional norms can be crucial in
balancing ambitious targets with practical considerations. Thorough stakeholder engagement and
realistic assessments of on-the-ground demand and capacity may enhance the effectiveness of
future projects.

When social inclusion measures in community development organizations are limited to
participation quotas, an incomplete understanding of actual inclusion can result. Although the
project established a quota for women’s participation in farmer field schools and WCAs, it was
unclear if this led to meaningful representation, voice, and decision-making role. When project
interventions and monitoring benchmarks are limited to tracking participation alone, the deeper
aspects of inclusion, such as agency, may be left unaddressed. This highlights the importance of
evaluating not just the presence but the active engagement and influence of marginalized groups
within these organizations.

Beneficiary surveys can serve as a valuable tool for triangulating evidence and
complementing the results framework. Projects have a limited number of results indicators to

                                                                                               Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       S KARAKALPAKSTAN WATER RES MGMT IMPR (P127764)



track both implementation progress and capture outcomes toward the achievement of the PDO.
Supplementing these indicators with additional sources of information, such as national data, impact
evaluations, and beneficiary surveys, can provide a more comprehensive understanding of project
impacts. In this project, beneficiary surveys were conducted at two critical points, covering a large
sample size, which provided valuable insights into outcomes such as income changes, crop
diversification uptake, water availability, and other aspects of the theory of change. This approach
enabled a deeper analysis of the project's effectiveness and helped to validate the reported results.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is comprehensive and well-written. It follows the Bank guidance and is concise. The reconstructed
theory of change in Figure 1 provides a comprehensive picture of the activities and expected results.

The ICR uses, to the extent possible, evidence from the project’s M&E framework, client reports, and
beneficiary surveys to demonstrate results. This robust use of data enhances the credibility of the results
presented.

However, the report discusses safeguards and fiduciary compliance during implementation at the level of an
overview, and is lacking information on the outcome of the risk mitigation measures. While it mentions the total
compensation provided to resettled households, it does not specify the number of affected households or the
types of compensation they received. It the report notes that safeguards trainings were conducted for the client,
contractors, and Water Consumer Associations (WCAs), but it does not clarify the frequency of these trainings.
Also, it was indicated that a grievance redress mechanism was established but information was missing on the
number of grievances received and resolved.

Consistency in information across the report is generally maintained, although there is a minor discrepancy
regarding the original target for the percentage of cotton area harvested mechanically. The ICR inaccurately
recorded the original target as 3% instead of the correct figure of 70%.

Overall, the ICR provides a solid foundation for assessing the project's achievements and areas for
improvement. The quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 20
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
S KARAKALPAKSTAN WATER RES MGMT IMPR (P127764)




                                                                              Page 20 of 20
