     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Togo Trade and Competitiveness (P158982)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0024123

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P158982                                   Togo Trade and Competitiveness

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Togo                                      Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-60310                                 30-Jun-2022                                         18,532,719.81

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 04-May-2017                               30-Sep-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            18,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                             18,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                         19,077,979.73                                             0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Antonio M. Ollero          Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective of the Republic of Togo Trade and Logistics Services Competitiveness
   Project was to improve the efficiency of trade logistics services.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
   Yes

                                                                                                 Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Togo Trade and Competitiveness (P158982)




  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had three components.

   Strengthening the Road Transport and Logistics Services Sector (US$10.7 million estimated at
   appraisal, US$12.8 million disbursed by closing) supported: (a) improving the legislative and regulatory
   framework for the transport and logistics services sector: (b) developing the capacity of trade logistics
   services professionals; and (c) improving conditions to modernize trucks.

   Improving Trade Facilitation (US4.8 million estimated at appraisal, US$2.7 million disbursed by closing)
   supported the: (a) implementation of the World Trade Organization (WTO) Trade Facilitation Agreement
   provisions for efficiency improvements in customs administration and adoption of performance monitoring
   tools; (b) implementation of the new Customs Code; (c) improvement of the risk management system; and
   (d) facilitation of regional dialogue for improved transit.

   Project Management (US$2.5 million estimated at appraisal, US$2.5 million disbursed by closing)
   supported the activities of the Project Coordination Unit.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. The project was estimated to cost Euro 17.0 million (US$18.0 million equivalent) at
   appraisal.

   Project Financing. The project was financed by an International Development Association (IDA) credit of
   Euro 17.0 million (US$18.0 million equivalent) to the Republic of Togo. The IDA credit was fully disbursed,
   with the final disbursed amount at US$19.08 million (the differences in the dollar amounts were due to
   changes in the Euro/US$ exchange rate).

   Dates. The project was approved on May 4, 2017, became effective on December 13, 2017, and closed on
   September 30, 2023, fifteen months after the original closing date of June 30, 2022.

   Restructuring. The project was restructured thrice (all were Level 2 restructurings). The project
   development objective remained unchanged.

         The first restructuring on July 6, 2020, with US10.13 million disbursed (54 percent of the final project
          cost), changed some project activities, changed the associated project component costs, clarified
          two outcome indicators, clarified two output indicators, and revised three output indicators (added
          one, and increased the target for another).
         The second restructuring on June 23, 2022, with US$16.01 million disbursed (83.9 percent of the
          final project cost) added three new output indicators and extended the project closing date by 12
          months.

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Togo Trade and Competitiveness (P158982)



         The third restructuring on June 25, 2023, with US$18.83 million disbursed (98.7 percent of the final
          project cost) extended the project closing date by another three months.

   Split Evaluation. Although the project development objective remained unchanged over three
   restructuring episodes, the outcome indicators were slightly refined in order to clarify the meaning. The PDO
   indicator “transit time” had its definition refined from “transit time from Port of Lomé to border crossing at
   Cinkanssé” to “time lapsed between the issuance of T1 declarations for shipments under the Port of Lomé
   transit regime and their clearance at Cinkanssé” A similar change was applied to the definition of PDO
   indicator “transit time predictability”, which is measured as a standard deviation over the same transit time
   measurements. The targets were not revised. There were some minor cancellation of activities under the
   second project component while adding technical assistance and studies related to the transport sector to
   the first project component as well as doing business reforms to the second component. The results
   framework was adjusted accordingly. Overall, the changes did not lead to a reduction in ambition or
   outcome targets of the project. So a split evaluation will not be conducted.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Strategically located in the coast of West Africa (with the Port of Lome as the deepest port in the coast),
Togo is well positioned to serve as a road transport and logistical services hub to its land-locked neighbors
in the Sahel. Despite the natural advantage, Togo's transport and logistics performance -- some 78 percent
of total traffic through the Port of Lome were in-transit shipments -- was hindered by inefficient low-quality
services: (a) the freight market was poorly regulated and saddled with pervasive informality; (b) the
workforce was low skilled; (c) the truck fleet was aging; and (d) gaps in trade facilitation hindered
competitiveness.

Binding Constraints to Development. The project objective to improve the efficiency of trade logistics
services was responsive to the binding constraints to development The Togo Systematic Country
Diagnostic 2016 (SCD) cited "distortions to private activities due to ... poor policy and regulatory
performance" and the "lack of infrastructure" as a binding constraint to growth. On transport services
(primarily road transport), the SCD asserted that: (a) "there are signs (higher traffic and worse road
conditions) that inadequate roads are at least moderately constraining"; and (b) "Togo could take further
advantage of its comparative advantage as a transport hub by improving regulation of trucking services,
enhancing port efficiency, and reducing unnecessary roadblocks." On logistics services (primarily
associated with international trade and including freight transportation, cargo handling, and storage), the
SCD found that: (a)"without continual improvement in logistics efficiency, moreover, Togo cannot be
guaranteed a competitive advantage as a transport hub for the region"; and (b) "quality of transport and
logistics services does not depend only on infrastructure, but also on the efficiency and cost of service at
the nation’s seaports, air terminals, and land borders, as well as the ease of passage on roads within the
country."

Country Priorities. The project objective was consistent with the country's development priorities
articulated in the Plan National de Développement 2018-2022 (PND). The project objective to improve the



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Togo Trade and Competitiveness (P158982)



               efficiency of trade logistics services was consistent with the second PND pillar -- Boost the productivity and
               competitiveness of growth sectors -- and the third PND pillar -- Strengthen infrastructure to support growth.

               Bank Group Strategy. The project development objective was aligned with the Bank Group country
               strategy in Togo at appraisal and at closing.

                                       The Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Togo for the Period FY17-FY20 (CPF)
                                        committed Bank Group support for the country's development strategy organized around three
                                        "focus areas": Private Sector Performance and Job Creation, Inclusive Public Service Delivery, and
                                        Environmental Sustainability and Resilience. The project objective to improve the efficiency of trade
                                        logistics services was aligned with the second CPF focus area, specifically with the CPF objective
                                        "to strengthen energy, ICT, and logistics services."
                                       A new Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Togo was being prepared at closing to
                                        cover the period FY25-FY29. In the absence of a final document, the alignment of the project
                                        objective to the new Bank country strategy in Togo can be gleaned from other materials. The Togo
                                        Country Economic Memorandum 2022: Toward Sustainable and Inclusive Growth makes
                                        specific reference to “reducing trade barriers for small scale cross border traders” and “adopting
                                        regulations that support greater competition in the logistics sector” as key to boost export growth
                                        and economic diversification. The Country Private Sector Diagnostic - Creating Markets in Togo
                                        (International Finance Corporation, 2023) and the Infrastructure Sector Assessment (InfraSAP) for
                                        Togo (2023) both underscore the relevance of improving trade and logistics as key to the country's
                                        competitiveness as a regional trade hub. The Systematic Country Diagnostic Update 2023 list two
                                        high-level objectives relevant to the project: (a) HLO3 "Increased Access to Quality and Affordable
                                        Infrastructure Services" - the project would directly contribute to "establishing conditions for healthy
                                        competition in freight management", and (b) HLO4 "Increased Quality Employment in the Private
                                        Sector" -- the project would address policy priorities for the transport and logistics
                                        sector's competitiveness.

               The PDO was pitched at an appropriate level given the country context. Given the PDO is well aligned with
               the country's development priorities and the Bank country strategy, the relevance of PDO is rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the efficiency of trade logistics services.

                             Rationale

                                                                                                                                      Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Togo Trade and Competitiveness (P158982)



Theory of Change. In the context of regional trade integration efforts in the Economic Community of West
African States and to support Togo's national aspiration to serve as a transit hub for its landlocked neighbors
in the Sahel, four reform measures would improve the efficiency of trade logistics services in Togo. First, the
legal and regulatory framework for road transport and logistic services would be strengthened. Second, the
institutional capacity of public agencies and private enterprises and professionals would be upgraded --
technical assistance, professional certification, and industry training would help establish a pool of better-
qualified and licensed transport and logistics professionals, truck drivers, freight forwarders, warehouse
pickers, and traffic planners, while retraining will assist workers displaced by the reforms. Third, the fleet of
trucks would be rationalized (reduced in number) and renewed -- a buyback scheme for old trucks, a leasing
scheme for new trucks, and the formation by micro-operators of business associations would result in fewer
but more modern and productive trucks. Fourth, trade facilitation would be intensified to reduce port dwell
time and transit time, cut truck idle time, and contain trade transaction costs. The sum of these reforms would
enable the sector to better serve rising freight volumes, increase the predictability of shipments, enhance the
quality of logistics services, and eventually lower the cost of arranging shipments for exports and imports and
for transit. The efficiency gains would be evidenced, at the outcome level, by a greater number of logistics
enterprises that complied with the Transport Orientation Law, a lower median transit time from the Port of
Lomé to the Cinkasee border, and a higher predictability (lower volatility) of this transit time.

Outputs.

      Certification programs for transport sector professionals were established, meeting the target. The
         programs were for the licensing of transport sector professionals.
        The number of trips per truck per year on Lomé-Ouagadougou Corridor rose from 1.7 in the baseline
         to 6 by closing, meeting both the original target of 4 and the revised target of 6.
        The number of companies officially registered as part of the "trusted traders program" ("program of
         companies worthy of confidence") reached 9 by closing, failing to meet the original target of 10 but
         exceeding the revised target of 8.
        The percentage of transport and logistics businesses reporting satisfaction with key aspects of
         consultation reached 90 by closing, exceeding the target of 80.
        The number of recommended laws/regulations/amendments/codes enacted, or government policies
         adopted - the target was four laws/regulations/amendments/codes. The indicator was revised to the
         number of new legal texts adopted in road transport, services, and leasing and reached 25 by closing,
         exceeding both the original target of four and the revised target of three. The result consisted of: (a)
         the framework law on transport -- the Transport Orientation Law; (b) three implementing decrees; (c)
         the National Customs Code; (d) the Community Customs Code; (e) 19 associated orders; and (f) the
         Law on Leasing.
        The number of people trained through the certification program established for road transport
         professionals reached 356 by closing, exceeding the target of 100. The number consisted of: (a) 183
         trained as road transport managers, freight forwarders, and freight brokers; (b) 151 as road drivers; (c)
         12 as trainers for the Certificate of Professional Capacity for Road Haulers; and (10 as trainers for the
         Certificate of Qualification for Professional Road Driving.
        The average time between the completion of offloading containers in transit and their departure from
         the port increased 14.2 days in the baseline to 16.1 days by closing, failing to achieve the target
         reduction to 13 days.
        The number of trucks scrapped per year - the target was 100 by closing. This indicator was dropped
         because the scope of Project support to the vehicle scrapping program was limited to diagnostic and


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 15
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Togo Trade and Competitiveness (P158982)



                                   preparatory studies. The actual implementation of such program was left for the subsequent LON
                                   Corridor Project.

                            There was no data to measure the achievement of three new output indicators added at the second
                            restructuring and retained through closing.

                                  The number of professionals trained in the Vocational Training Center for the Road Transport Sector -
                                   - that target was 250 by closing, from 45 in the baseline.
                                  The number of National Trade Facilitation Committee members trained on Trade Facilitation
                                   Agreement provisions -- the target was 50 by closing, from 30 in the baseline.
                                  The number of professionals registered in the Road Transport Information Registry -- the target was
                                   30 by closing.

                            Outcomes.

                                  The number of logistics businesses that were compliant with the reformed legal and regulatory
                                   environment reached 30 by closing, exceeding the target of 20. The 30 firms received their certificate
                                   of compliance with the Transport Orientation Law, which was approved in December 2022
                                  The median time elapsed between the issuance of T1 declarations for shipments under the Port of
                                   Lome transit regime and their clearance at Cinkanse was reduced from 8 days in the baseline to 5
                                   days by closing, exceeding the target reduction to 6 days.
                                  The predictability of the time elapsed between the issuance of T1 declarations for shipments under the
                                   Port of Lome transit regime and their clearance at Cinkanse was reduced from 28 days in the baseline
                                   to 3.2 days by closing, exceeding the target reduction to 20 days.

                            The overall efficacy is rated as Substantial. While the project achieved/exceeded the outcomes, there were
                            minor shortcomings in the achievement of some output indicators (i.e. average time between the completion
                            of offloading containers in transit and their departure from the port) and lack of data on outputs added during
                            the second restructuring.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy is rated as Substantial. The project achieved/ exceeded the outcomes and most of the
                            output indicators.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating


                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Togo Trade and Competitiveness (P158982)



  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency. The Project Appraisal Document estimated the economic rate of return (ERR) of the
project, ex-ante, at 36 percent over a ten-year horizon. The principal benefits included: (a) shorter time to import
and lower logistics costs for exporters in Togo; (b) less logistics uncertainty and lower hedging costs for traders
in Togo; and (c) less uncertainty costs for traders in Burkina Faso. Apart from the project investment, the
principal costs included: (a) wage losses from lower informal employment owing to changes in the trucking
market; and (b) reduced economic activity at the border crossing owing to faster processing times at the border.

Applying the same methodology as at appraisal, the ICR calculated the ERR, ex-post, at 19.7 percent. The ex-
post ERR was lower because the project: (a) failed to achieve the expected transport sector formalization
targets, and (b) exacted adverse, albeit small, distributional effects on border merchants and informal drivers.

Operational Efficiency. The project completed all planned activities, as restructured, and fully disbursed the
project funds. However, the project closed 15 months later than originally planned. The first extension (for 12
months) compensated for delays in the adoption of the legal texts and slippages with procurement, while the
second extension (for three months) allowed for the completion of critical activities.

Efficiency is rated modest because of the lower-than-expected ERR and the implementation delays during the
project.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      100.00
 Appraisal                                                  36.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      100.00
 ICR Estimate                                               19.70
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome




                                                                                                      Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Togo Trade and Competitiveness (P158982)



The relevance of objectives is rated as High. The efficacy is rated as Substantial. The project
achieved/exceeded the outcomes though there were minor shortcomings in the achievement of some output
indicators. Efficiency is rated as Modest. The outcome of the project is rated moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There are numerous risks to the sustainability of the development outcomes achieved by this project, the
severity of which range from moderate to substantial.

Togo’s strategy to function as a transit hub for its landlocked neighbors may be derailed if regional
integration is reversed and the Sahel countries exit from the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS). Togo derives significant economic benefits from serving as a hub for merchandise
transit to/from its larger landlocked neighbors -- some 39 percent of non-transshipment traffic through the
Port of Lomé consists of freight in transit, of which four-fifths run to/from Burkina Faso and another fifth
run to/from Niger. If the recent request (in February 2024) by Burkina Faso and Niger, along with Mali, to
withdraw from the ECOWAS results in trade barriers, the competitive advantage enjoyed by Togo from more
efficient logistics services in the Lomé-Ouagadougou Corridor will be diluted. Recent harmonization efforts –
such as the customs interconnection initiative funded by the Japan International Cooperation Agency, or the
harmonization of transport sector regulations supported by the Lomé-Ouagadougou Corridor Project –
will also be jeopardized.

Any political instability (the Bank considered Togo to be fragile as late as FY2019, with political and
governance rated high for this project), if it leads to a high turnover among civil service staff, could place at
risk the gains attained by this project in building the institutional capacity of agencies to improve trade
logistics services. A loss of trained staff would erode the institutional memory gained by the agencies from
numerous technical assistance delivered by this project to the agencies.

The facilities, equipment, and vehicles supplied by this project are continually at risk to
damage, obsolescence, and the lack of maintenance. Thin budgetary resources are bound to make
maintenance difficult. However, the relevant agencies -- the Directorate of Road and Rail Transport,
National Road Safety Office, Vehicle Inspection Center, Business Climate Unit, Togolese Revenue Office --
have committed to the upkeep of these assets, according to the Borrower Completion Report

The policy reforms with the transport sector, customs administration, the business climate, and leasing are
likely to endure given their strong alignment with the national aspiration for Togo to serve as a transit hub for
trade among its neighbors in the Sahel. Moreover, the implementation of the of the Lomé-Ouagadougou
Corridor Project will reinforce this vision and commitment to policy reform.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

                                                                                                        Page 8 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Togo Trade and Competitiveness (P158982)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  Analytical Underpinning. The project design was informed by numerous analytic work produced by the
  Bank, other development partners, consultants, and the Government -- the Project Appraisal Document
  (Annex 7) listed 18 materials. Among them were: Transport and Logistics Costs on the Lomé-
  Ouagadougou Corridor (U.S. Agency for International Development, 2012), Logistics Cost Study of
  Transport Corridors in Central and West Africa (Nathan Associates, 2013), Study on Customs
  Procedures and Operations of the Lomé-Ouagadougou Corridor (Japan International Cooperation
  Agency, 2014), Leasing Feasibility Study in Togo (International Finance Corporation, 2016), and Trucking
  Survey in Togo (World Bank, 2017).

  Lessons from Other Bank Operations. The project design incorporated lessons learned from related
  Bank operations: (a) stakeholder consultation in a reform program must be broad enough, according to
  the Togo Private Sector Development Support Project ; and (b) traditional financing instruments for fleet
  renewal typically draw little interest from financial institutions, hence leasing might be the better
  instrument, according to the Senegal Transport and Urban Mobility Project.

  Collaboration with Other Development Partners. The project was designed in close coordination with
  other development partners who also supported the transport and trade facilitation agenda in Togo: (a)
  the International Finance Corporation provided technical assistance to automate customs processes,
  streamline documentation, and improve risk management; (b) the European Union provided technical
  assistance to improve the governance system for road maintenance, upgrade corridor management,
  and set up a project preparation fund; (c) the Japan International Cooperation Agency extended technical
  assistance for corridor mapping, master planning, and interconnecting the customs systems of Togo and
  Burkina Faso; and (d) the African Development Bank supported and (iv) support the establishment of a
  joint border post at Cinkansé.

  Operational Risk and Mitigation Measures. The Bank assessed the risk to the project to be
  substantial, overall and in many risk categories. The mitigation measures appeared reasonable. With
  project design quite complex, technical design risk was substantial. Intra-Bank cooperation -- among
  the Trade and Competitiveness; Transport, Information and Communications Technology, and Fragility,
  Conflict and Violence staff -- would help mitigate the risk. Moreover, collaboration with the International
  Finance Corporation (through an advisory project) would provide support in areas where the Bank could
  not operate. Institutional capacity risk was substantial. To mitigate the risk, institutional capacity building
  and technical assistance would be central to the project design. Stakeholder risk was considered
  substantial since the reforms would affect vulnerable groups, including informal transport operators.
  The road transporters and the truck drivers unions had expressed support for the proposed reforms
  but insisted on compensating measures -- a reskilling program would help address this concern. Political
  and governance risk was rated high, with a Bank assessment indicating that political economy dynamics
  posed high barriers to reforms that aimed to open the economy and modernize public administration. To
  mitigate the risk, a consensual reform process would be employed during both preparation and
  implementation. Macroeconomic risk was rated high because of the vulnerable fiscal condition. The
  Bank would coordinate with the International Monetary Fund to monitor fiscal management.

  Implementation Arrangements. The project implementation arrangements were sound. The Ministry of
  Planning would act as implementing agency, create a Project Coordination Unit, and cooperate with the
  Ministry of Commerce and the Ministry of Transports. A Strategic Committee with the Ministers of
  Planning, Trade, Transports, and Finance, the Secretary General of the President's Office, and the

                                                                                                       Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Togo Trade and Competitiveness (P158982)



  General Commissioner of the Togolese Revenue Office would be responsible for project oversight. A
  Project Implementation Manual and Annual Work Plans, in forms and substance acceptable to the Bank,
  would govern project implementation.

  Shortcomings at Entry. According to the ICR (para 64), project design had some shortcomings, but
  these were minor: (a) the results framework, while defining an outcome indicator to measure the impact
  of regulatory reform, lacked stronger outcome indicator(s) to measure the contribution of trade facilitation
  toward the efficiency of trade logistics services; and (b) technical assistance to improve customs
  administration was uncoordinated; and (c) efforts to support the Togolese Revenue Office overlapped
  among cooperating development partners (and had to be subsequently restructured).

  Based on the foregoing, the quality at entry is rated satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision. The Bank supported and supervised the implementation of the project regularly, including
 during the COVID-19 pandemic, filing 12 Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) over the five-
 year life of the project, or over two-a-year, the average for Bank investment project financing
 operations. According to the ICR (para 65): (a) the Bank fielded a team of skilled experts for
 implementation support; (b) the course corrections were proactive; (c) the Bank intensified implementation
 support during the last year of implementation.

 Adaptation. The Bank adjusted the relative importance between the two components of the project at the
 first restructuring. It revised the results framework and the funding allocations accordingly. The Bank also
 extended the project duration at the second and third restructuring (see Section 2.E). According to the ICR
 (para 65), the restructuring were essential to completing the project and achieving the project objectives.

 Based on the foregoing, the quality of supervision is rated satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization




                                                                                                     Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Togo Trade and Competitiveness (P158982)



a. M&E Design
 The results framework at appraisal defined seven output indicators and three outcome indicators to
 measure the degree of achievement of the objective to improve the efficiency of trade logistics services.
 The results indicators were defined, measurable, and time bound. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
 plan also called for the Project Coordination Unit at the Ministry of Planning to perform the project M&E
 function. The Project Coordination Unit would prepare Project Reports, based on the results indicators,
 with each report covering a semester, and submit them to the Bank within a month from the end of each
 reporting period. According to the ICR, the project lacked stronger outcome indicator(s) to measure the
 contribution of trade facilitation toward the efficiency of trade logistics services.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Project Coordination Unit performed the project M&E function adequately. The strengths
  included: (a) data was collected regularly -- data on transit time, port dwell time, and the number of trips
  per truck were collected and reported bi-annually by the administrator of the Single Window for Trade
  (SEGUCE) and by the Ministry of Transport, while data on the number of people trained was collected
  regularly and reported by the Project Coordination Unit; (b) data analysis was methodical -- studies
  measured the impact of the project activities on various metrics of road transport and logistics; (c) the
  M&E function was adequately staffed, headed by a dedicated M&E specialist; (d) the Bank supported
  M&E well -- technical assistance helped develop monitoring capacities, as reflected by the ready
  adoption by the customs administration of the time release studies method (TRS) to quantify bottlenecks
  in the customs clearance and release process; and (e) the results framework was updated as required --
  the restructuring added or deleted results indicators to reflect changes in the project components and
  activities.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data (on the pace of project implementation, on disbursement rates, and on progress with the
  results indicators) informed the decisions by the Bank and the Government to restructure the project
  (reallocate the funding between project components, update the results framework, and extend the
  project closing date), according to the ICR (page 27). M&E was rated satisfactory throughout project
  implementation including in the last ISR of October 2023.

  Overall, the M&E quality is rated as Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards. The project was classified as an environmental assessment category B
   project at appraisal ("some type of environmental assessment/review/plan is required, but limited in scope

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Togo Trade and Competitiveness (P158982)



  and flexible in structure, reflecting the limited environmental impacts of the project and the anticipated
  relatively straightforward mitigation") and triggered safeguards policies OP/BP 4.01 - Environmental
  Assessment and OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement. The Government prepared and published an
  Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
  for the project and planned to use simplified Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA)
  and Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) to manage any adverse impacts from the project
  activities.

  The ICR (page 28) reported that the project: (a) included environmental and social clauses in all tender
  documents and contracts; (b) outlined safeguards and corrective measures in the mandates for all suppliers
  and service providers; (c) prepared ESMPs, Special Waste Management and Disposal Plans, Special
  Safety and Health Protection Plans, and Environmental Insurance Plans for each construction/rehabilitation
  activity, all of which were acceptable to the Bank; and (d) effectively implemented the ESMPs for the
  construction of the Vocational Training Center, the construction of the offices of the Directorate of Road and
  Rail Transport, the rehabilitation of the building for the National Road Safety Office, and the equipping of
  the vehicle center for technical control.

  Social Safeguards. The project established a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) to better manage
  grievances, claims, and complaints from stakeholders, including workers at construction sites. According to
  the ICR (page 28), all six complaints and two grievances that were registered with the GRM
  were addressed adequately.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement. The contract of the United Nations Office of Project Services (UNOPS) for equipment
  procurement could have been managed more efficiently, according to the ICR (page 29). Problems with
  this contract prompted two project closing date extensions. Contract management issues also plagued
  some construction and rehabilitation works, resulting in lengthy contract extensions or late contract
  terminations. Procurement was rated moderately satisfactory throughout most of project implementation,
  albeit satisfactory in the last ISR of October 2023.

  Financial Management. Financial management was rated satisfactory beginning in mid-2021 and
  through closing, including in the last ISR of October 2023, but only moderately satisfactory before
  then. The project submitted the required interim financial reports (IFRs) and audited annual financial
  statements to the Bank regularly and on time. The reports and the audits found no significant issues with
  financial management. The ICR (page 28) cited shortcomings however: (a) a consultant was hired (on
  a competitive basis) to perform the internal audit functions for the project because the General
  Inspectorate of Finance failed to perform this duty; and (b) the project lacked a dedicated financial
  management staff to handle all the financial aspects of the operation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  ---


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Togo Trade and Competitiveness (P158982)



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 Efficacy is rated as Substantial
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory   and Efficiency is rated as
                                                                                 Modest.
Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

Three lessons are drawn from the ICR, with some adaptation.

An inclusive participatory process and a strong emphasis on capacity building involving
private stakeholders (and not just government agencies) are vital to the success of a reform
program. In this project, it was recognized at the outset that the rationalization of the road transport
service industry under the proposed Transport Orientation Law would produce winners and
losers. The Government launched an early and extensive consultation with stakeholders, most
importantly truck driver unions and carrier associations, to more transparently communicate the net
benefits of the project to the stakeholders and to effectively build consensus around the
reform measures. To address stakeholder concerns, the project included a comprehensive
reskilling program for transport and logistics workers who would be displaced by the reform
measures. The reskilling conveyed the Government's commitment to address and mitigate the
costs of the project to affected stakeholders.

Complex projects in low-capacity environments may need to draw on the expertise of
specialized partners to efficiently implement select project activities. This operation selected
the International Road Union (IRU) -- the international association of non-profit organizations in the
road and transport sector -- to act as the technical assistance partner for capacity building in the
trucking industry. The IRU Academy recommended improvements to the legal and
regulatory framework for the transport sector, designed the certification system and the training
curriculum, ran the capacity-building program, supported the training center, and helped design and
implement the industry formalization plan. This operation also selected the International Motor
Vehicle Inspection Committee (CITA) -- the international association of vehicle inspection companies
-- to serve as the technical assistance partner for the capacity building activities for vehicle
inspection instruments. The CITA collaborated with the Bank-managed Global Road Safety Fund to
assess the country's regulatory framework for vehicle inspections, worked with the Ministry
of Transport during the start-up phase of the project, ran the capacity-building program, and
supported the design and implementation of vehicle inspection schemes and
mechanisms. Additionally, the Project Coordination Unit enlisted the support of United Nations


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Togo Trade and Competitiveness (P158982)



Office of Project Services (UNOPS) to manage the procurement of a large lot of equipment for the
project. The participation of the UNOPS enabled the completion of much-delayed project activities
before the closing date.

Maintaining a constant policy dialogue with country authorities over several years is critical
for ramping-up investment in trade and logistics services. This project, which aimed to improve
the efficiency of trade logistics services in Togo, paved the way for the more ambitious Lomé-
Ouagadougou-Niamey Corridor Project for Burkina Faso, Niger, and Togo, which aimed to improve
regional connectivity and infrastructure along the corridor between the capital cities of Togo, Burkina
Faso, Niger, and Togo. The preparation, approval, and implementation of this three-country , five-
component regional investment in a most vital transit corridor for the three nations would not have
been feasible without the long-running policy dialogue conducted by the Bank with Togo to reform
trade and logistics services in the country.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is consistent with OPCS guidelines on ICRs for investment project financing operations. Considering
three episodes of changes to the project activities, the output and outcome indicators, the project cost and
financing, and the project schedule, the ICR presents a detailed account of the evolution of the project. The
efficacy assessment is outcome-oriented and based on the degree of achievement of the results targets. The
efficiency assessment is fair. The ICR presents ample evidence to support its assessment of the Bank’s
performance at design and implementation, including the analytic underpinnings of the project and the extent of
collaboration with other development partners. The ICR draws lessons that would be valuable to parallel
problems in similar settings.

Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated as Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 15
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Togo Trade and Competitiveness (P158982)




                                                                        Page 15 of 15
