     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FATA Governance and Policy (P156412)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023977

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P156412                                    FATA Governance and Policy

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Pakistan                                   Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A3301                                   30-Jun-2020                                           4,949,862.94

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 02-Dec-2016                                30-Jun-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           14,000,000.00                                    14,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             5,000,000.00                                     5,000,000.00

 Actual                                         4,949,862.94                                     4,949,862.94




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Gloria Carolina           Vandana Chandra                Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC (Unit 1)
 Gutierrez Tejada




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP)/ Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA)/ Balochistan Multi-
   Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) Grant Agreement (GA) dated January 18, 2017 (p. 5), the Project Development
   Objective (PDO) was:




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 24
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        FATA Governance and Policy (P156412)



   “To increase transparency and effectiveness in public resource management and strengthen
   accountability of public service delivery in the agriculture sector of the Federally Administered
   Tribal Areas.” The PDO was the same in the GA stated the same objective in (GA p.5, Schedule 1).

   On June 27, 2019, the PDO was revised as follows under a first restructuring with cost reduction (RES 36311
   on 1st restructuring, p. 7):

   “To strengthen the capacity of staff in the Merged Areas (MA) to manage public resources, and
   improved accountability in the delivery of public services.”

   On June 23, 2020 (RES 41845 on 2nd restructuring, p. 4) and June 29, 2022 (RES 51325 on 3rd
   restructuring, p. 5), the closing date was extended under two additional restructurings with no cost extension.

   For the purposes of this review, the PDO has been reformulated as follows:

          1. To strengthen staff capacity in the MA to manage public resources.
          2. To improve accountability in the delivery of public services.

   The revised PDO had a narrower scope to align the project with the adjusted needs resulting from the merger
   of the districts of the FATA with the province of KP. The activities and size of the project were adjusted during
   the first restructuring to support this administrative transition. The ambition of the project was not diminished
   but rather resized to focus on a smaller sub-set of activities in FATA while allowing for the reallocation of most
   of the project funds to the KP Governance and Policy Project (GPP KP). In addition, the portion of the PDO
   that was dropped was not related with the achievement of any significant activities prior to restructuring.
   Therefore, this ICRR will not undertake a split PDO evaluation. It will assess the project based on the revised
   PDO and indicators/ targets.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  ---

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Original project

   Originally the project had three components. The estimated total cost of the project was US$14 million at
   approval. At the time of the first restructuring, the financing was reduced from US$14 million to US$5
   million. The actual cost was US$4.92 million (ICR, Annex 3). The original components/subcomponents (GA,
   p. 5; Combined Project Information Document/ Integrated Safeguards (PID/ISD), p. 5) were:

   Component 1. Increasing transparency and accountability in the use of public resources (Cost at
   approval: US$5.5 million). This component aimed to support priority PFM reforms based on the findings of

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  FATA Governance and Policy (P156412)



the recent PEFA accountability assessment, and to improve budget transparency and public procurement.
There were two subcomponents:

    1. Budget credibility, transparency, and accountability.
    2. Strengthening public procurement.

Component 2. Improving public investment management and service delivery (Cost at approval:
US$5.7 million). This component aimed to strengthen and institutionalize mechanisms for systematic
performance monitoring, citizen facilitation and engagement in improving public services, private sector
participation in service delivery, and effective grievance redress with a focus on agricultural services. There
were two subcomponents:

    1. Strengthening public investment management (PIM).
    2. Improving service delivery through citizen engagement and performance management.

Component 3: Ensuring effective support for the coordination of governance reforms and the
operational management of the Project. This component aimed to support the government’s capacity to
coordinate governance reforms and implement GPP financed activities. There were two subcomponents:

    1. Coordination support for governance reforms.
    2. Implementation support for the Project.

Revised project

Following a restructuring in 2019, names of Components 1 and 2 were revised. However, there are
inconsistencies in the first restructuring document and between that document and the ICR. The first
restructuring document notes the project “retained its three components” with revised activities, but shows
revised C1 and C2 (RES 36311, para 10 vs. p. 11). The ICR says only C1 was revised, but also presents a
revised name for C2 (Table 1, Annex 3).

Likewise, there are inconsistencies in the amount of project costs. The first restructuring document (RES
36311, p. 11) notes that total cost at approval was US$16.5 million (instead of US$14.0 million) and costs
per C1, C2 and C3 were US$6.5 million (instead of US$5.5 million); US$7.0 million (instead of US$5.7
million); and US$3.0 million (instead of US$2.8 million), respectively. The amounts differ from the amounts
listed in the GA (p. 12) and the ICR (Annex 3).

The first restructuring included revisions of the PDO, C1 and C2 (out of 3 original components), and the
Results Framework (RF). This ICRR will consider C2 unchanged as the ICR did, as the components’ scope
and concept did not change. Activities were revised, some indicators were dropped to be aligned with the
adjusted activities, other indicators were added, and cost allocations were revised. A split evaluation is not
undertaken as there were no new components.

Component 1: Strengthening capacity for management of public resources (Cost at approval: US$5.5
million. Revised cost after restructuring: US$2.05 million. Actual cost: US$1.96 million). This component
aimed to strengthen capacity of government officials in managing public resources in the MA of FATA and
KP (ICR, p. 15). No subcomponents are mentioned in the ICR or the restructuring document.




                                                                                                  Page 3 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    FATA Governance and Policy (P156412)



Component 2: Improving accountability for public investment management and service delivery
(Cost at approval: US$5.7 million. Revised cost after restructuring: US$1.91 million. Actual cost: US$1.58
million). This component aimed to strengthen PIM and accountability for service delivery by supporting geo-
tagging of public assets in merged areas of FATA and KP, extension of RTSC’s services to MA, and
implementation of grievance redressal systems (ICR, p. 15). No subcomponents are mentioned in the ICR
or the restructuring document.

Component 3: Ensuring effective support for the coordination of governance reforms and the
operational management of the project (Cost at approval: US$2.8 million. Revised cost after
restructuring: US$1.04 million. Actual cost: US$0.91 million). This component aimed to ensure coordination
for governance reforms in MA of FATA and KP and ensure smooth delivery and operational management of
the project's components. No subcomponents are mentioned in the ICR or the restructuring document.

There were unallocated project funds of US$0.47 million.

Significant changes during implementation

Restructuring No. 1: A first restructuring was approved on June 27, 2019, to address governance and
administrative challenges resulting from the merger of Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) with
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP), broadening the project’s scope to cover all sectors of service delivery, instead of
agriculture only, and focusing project activities in MA (ICR, para. 14-16).

It reduced project funds by US$9 million to a net fund commitment of US$5 million. It included revisions of
the PDO, Component 1 and the Results Framework (RF). Project activities were revised along with
corresponding indicators and targets. Funds were reallocated between disbursement categories, and there
were changes in implementation arrangements. There were no changes to the procurement, Financial
Management, safeguards arrangements and risks. The cancelled funds were transferred to KP GPP.

The following changes were made to the Results Framework (RF) during the restructuring in 2019 (ICR,
Table 1):



       Original indicators                             Revised indicators
       Original PDO: to increase transparency and      Revised PDO: to strengthen the capacity of staff
       effectiveness in public resource management and in the MA to manage public resources and
       strengthen accountability of public service     improve accountability in the delivery of public
       delivery in the agriculture sector of FATA.     service.
       PDO indicators                                  Revised PDO indicators
       Improved reporting of transactions through the
       extension of the Financial Management
1                                                      Staff of MA Secretariat reporting improvements
       Information System (FMIS) at the level of
                                                       in on-job performance after participating in
       agencies and frontier regions.
                                                       training (new indicator).
       (Removed; former FATA administrative setup).
2      Timely disclosure of key budget documentation    Public assets in the MA that are geotagged
       and dissemination through public hearings.       (new indicator).


                                                                                               Page 4 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    FATA Governance and Policy (P156412)



       (Removed; former FATA administrative setup)
       Increased share of procurements conducted
       through competitive selection and published
                                                            Complaints from citizens of MA not resolved
       notices.
3                                                           within stipulated timelines for services under the
                                                            RTS Act (new indicator).
       (Removed; FATA procurement merged with KP
       government procurement)
       Increased citizen engagement in monitoring
       service delivery and regular collection of citizen
       feedback in the agriculture sector–including
4      feedback from women.

       (Removed; scope of project broadened than
       focusing on only agriculture sector)
       Increased number of cases resolved by the FATA
       Tribunal.
5
       (Removed; FATA tribunal no longer exists)
       Intermediate indicators                              Revised intermediate indicators
       Component 1: Increasing transparency and
                                                            Component 1: Strengthening capacity for
       accountability in the use of public resources
                                                            management of public resources.
       (Revised).
       Reduction in the number of in-year re-
                                                            Provincial Government employees in MA who
       appropriations of budget allocations.
1                                                           completed Procurement training –including
                                                            women (new indicator).
       (Removed)
       Establishment of internal audit function.
2                                                           Number of internal audits conducted.
       (Retained and shifted to KP FD)
                                                      Provincial Government employees in MA who
                                                      completed, at least, the certificate level of the
3
                                                      PFM accreditation program –including women
                                                      (new indicator).
                                                      Districts in MA submitting monthly Budget
4                                                     Execution Reports to FD, within 45 days of end
                                                      of quarter (new indicator).
                                                      Component 2: Improving capacity for public
       Component 2: Improving public investment
                                                      investment management and accountability
       management and service delivery (Retained).
                                                      for service delivery.
       Increase in the share of development budget
       allocations to agencies and FRs that are based
       on improved, publicly disclosed formula        Citizens reporting satisfaction with notified
1
       methodology.                                   services under the RTS Act (new indicator).

       (Removed)



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    FATA Governance and Policy (P156412)



       Agencies/frontier regions where infrastructure
       assets for agriculture, irrigation, and livestock
                                                            Districts in MA where integration of geotagged
       have been geotagged.
2                                                           data into GIS Decision Support System
                                                            completed (new indicator).
       (Revised to cover all public investment projects
       in MA)
                                                            Provincial Government employees in MA who
3                                                           completed Monitoring and Evaluation training –
                                                            including women (new indicator).
                                                            Provincial Government employees in MA who
                                                            completed sectoral planning training (new
4                                                           indicator).


                                                            Provincial Government employees in MA who
                                                            completed Project Management training (new
5                                                           indicator).


                                                            Provincial Government employees from MA who
6                                                           have participated in gender awareness sessions
                                                            (new indicator).
                                                            Citizens registered in IGRS to give feedback on
7
                                                            government services (new indicator).
       Component 3: Ensuring effective support for
                                                            Component 3: Ensuring effective support for
       the coordination of governance reforms and
                                                            the coordination of governance reforms and
       the operational management of the GPP
                                                            the operational management of the GPP.
       (retained).
       Number of officials (including women) with
       certification in procurement, project preparation,
       project management, M&E, management &                Progress Report no later than 45 days after end
1
       leadership.                                          of reporting period (new indicator).

       (Revised and moved under Component 2)

Restructuring No. 2: A second restructuring on June 23, 2020, extended the project’s closing date from
June 30, 2020, to June 30, 2022, to allow for the completion of activities delayed by administrative and
capacity challenges associated with the merger of the former FATA and KP provinces and by the onset of
the COVID 19 pandemic. The new date would also allow to align the project’s end date with a proposed
extension of the Trust Fund (RES41845, 2nd restructuring, p. 3-4). The ICR dates the second restructuring
on June 3 instead of June 23 (ICR, para 14a; RES41845, 3rd restructuring, para 4) and does not mention
the reason for the extension of the closing date (ICR, para 14a).

Restructuring No. 3: A third restructuring on June 29, 2022, further extended the closing date from June
30, 2022, to June 30, 2023, to allow for the completion of activities interrupted by the pandemic and to align




                                                                                                  Page 6 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FATA Governance and Policy (P156412)



   the closing date with the extended disbursement end date of the Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) (RES
   51325, third restructuring, para 5; ICR, para 19).

   The project restructuring was a strategic response to the evolving administrative and political landscape
   following the merger of FATA with KP province in 2018. Key administrative changes included expansion of
   public services and government laws to MA; the merging of the FATA secretariat and departments with
   those of GovKP; the renaming of the frontier regions and agencies to ‘merged districts’; and the approval of
   the development budget of the MA as part of the KP budget. Therefore, in a changing environment, the
   restructuring and project period extension was in alignment with the broader changing mandate of the
   GoKP as well as the goal to maintain a sustained focus on the development of the newly merged districts.

   In response to the government’s request, the changes to the project were aimed at maximizing fund
   utilization within a refined scope of activities and by avoiding overlaps with GPP KP. The capacity
   challenges in MA across all sectors were larger than the rest of the province – especially in FM, sectoral
   planning, procurement, and M&E. In the restructured project, the focus shifted from agriculture sector to
   strengthening capacity of the government staff in merged areas to manage public resources and improve
   accountability in the delivery of public services (revised PDO). Since implementing entities also changed, it
   required changes in whole results framework and revise linked activities, while keeping support for priority
   interventions intact. Key to this restructuring was the integration of the project's objectives with the region’s
   development priorities outlined in Tribal Decade Strategy (2020-2030) of GovKP.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project cost at appraisal was US$14 million. The revised cost after fund cancellation and
   restructuring was US$5 million. The actual cost was US$4.92 million.

   Financing: The project was financed by an IBRD/IDA grant of US$14 million acting as administrator of the
   KP/ FATA/ Balochistan Trust Fund. The total amount disbursed was US$4.92 million.

   Borrower Contribution: The Islamic Republic of Pakistan did not provide any counterpart funding.

   Dates: The Bank approved the project on January 18, 2017, and the project became effective on February
   23, 2017, with an original closing date of June 30, 2020. The project was restructured three times.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context. Pakistan, a lower-middle-income country had made considerable progress in reducing
poverty and improving shared prosperity in the two decades prior to the project’s approval. However, due to
weak recovery from the 2008–09 financial crisis, nearly three-quarters of the population were still either
poor or vulnerable and performance on human development and Millennium Development Goals (MDG)


                                                                                                       Page 7 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FATA Governance and Policy (P156412)



targets was one of the weakest in South Asia. Service delivery in Pakistan was affected by a frail private
sector environment and weak public sector management and implementation capacity (PAD, p. 2).

FATA is one of the most underdeveloped, isolated, and conflict-affected regions in Pakistan with income
generation limited to subsistence agriculture and informal cross-border trade with Afghanistan. Human
development outcomes were poor. The region hosted many internally displaced persons and refugees
from Afghanistan. Extremist violence and natural disasters created security challenges (ICR, para 2).

In addition, federal laws did not apply to FATA because of its legal status as a tribal area. State institutions
played a diminished role in development. The budget relied on federal grants and the region had no legal
authority to raise own source revenues. This had severe implications for the delivery of public services and
investments and reduced society’s trust in state institutions.

On 24 May 2018, the National Assembly of Pakistan passed a bill to merge FATA with the KP province
under 25th Amendment to the Constitution of Pakistan.

The weak institutional capacity and the challenges in service delivery arising from the new institutional and
administrative changes support PDO 1 on the need to strengthen the capacity of staff in the MA to manage
public resources. These challenges along with society’s mistrust of public institutions further support PDO 2
to address weaknesses in accountability in the delivery of public services.

Bank strategy. The project’s PDO was well-aligned with the World Bank Group’s (WBG) Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY15-19. Results area 4 of the CPS prioritized service delivery, specifically,
outcomes 4.1 and 4.4 on Improved Public Resources Management (para 59) and Adoption of Performance
and Transparency Mechanisms in Selected Institutions (para 62). The CPS noted that governance and
constitutional reforms were crucial for development in FATA (CPS, para. 32) and included other priority
governance themes such as gender, fragility, and conflict, and more and better jobs (CPS, para 35). A
cross-cutting theme of the CPS was deepening engagement at the province level, and it also emphasized
support for crisis-affected regions. The PDO prioritized the region affected by the conflict.

Through the restructuring process, the Project was aligned with the WBG COVID-19 Crisis Response
Approach Paper, Pillar 4 on Strengthening Policies, Institutions and Investments for Rebuilding Better (ICR,
para 21c).

The PDO was also aligned with the MDTF objectives and governance outcomes targeted by the Results
Framework of the MDTF Round II. Specifically, these outcomes supported: (a) improved transparency and
accountability of government services through citizen engagement in the delivery of selected services; and
(b) capacity building of the public administration through improved management, training, and strengthening
of systems used by government institutions (CPS, para 22).

The project’s PDOs 1 and 2 were clearly aligned with the World Bank’s strategy for improving resource
management, transparency, and accountability for strengthening service delivery in the MA through greater
citizen engagement and capacity building in the public administration. The additional priority themes in the
CPS were aligned with the project’s need to systematically identify ways to enhance accountability and
transparency.




                                                                                                       Page 8 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FATA Governance and Policy (P156412)



At Project closing, the PDO was aligned with WBG’s Report Pakistan @ 100: Shaping the Future,
(published in 2019) and contributed to two reform focus areas: reform focus 7 (transparency), and reform
focus 8 (accountability) (ICR, para 21d).

Government strategy. The PDO was aligned with the government’s economic agenda which included
ambitious goals on the human development side including increasing resources for basic services such as
education and health (CPS, para 25).

The PDO was also aligned with the government’s five-year development vision. Pillar VII on Institutional
and Governance Reforms focused on strengthening democratic governance through institutional reforms;
ensuring community participation and transparency; and improving management and accountability in State
Owned Enterprises (SOEs) (CPS, Annex VI).

At the provincial level, the project’s PDO responded to FATA’s Return and Rehabilitation Strategy 2015 and
FATA’s long-term Governance Action Plan (2015-2021) The Rehabilitation Strategy included strengthening
internal audit and institutional capacity for public expenditure and investment management through citizen
engagement. The Governance Action Plan focused on strengthening accountability and grievance redress
institutions under the institutional reforms pillar. After the merger of FATA with KP, the necessitated revision
of the PDO resonated with the new administrative realities and aligned with the government’s Tribal Decade
Strategy 2020-2030 that aimed to mainstream development for tribal communities. The project supported
the strategy’s priority areas of building responsible and accountable institutions for service delivery in
MA and focus on gender. In addition, at the time of project’s restructuring, KP’s other strategies also
became relevant for MA, including KP’s integrated development strategy (2014-2018), KP’s PFM reforms
strategy (2017-2020), and Good Governance Strategy 2019 – which had five elements supported by the
project: (i) Open Government and Transparency, (ii) Public Service Delivery, (iii) Citizen Participation, (iv)
Performance and Accountability, and (v) Ideas, Innovation and Technology.

The PDO was in line with the request of the FATA Secretariat for continued Bank support with governance
reforms. Key expected outcomes were: (i) strengthen public financial management based on the findings of
the PEFA assessment; and (ii) increase accountability in public services through citizen engagement. The
project supported the government's objective of building public trust in state institutions. By backing
initiatives like the expansion of services of Right to Public Services Commission (RTSC) and Right to
Information Commission RTIC to MA, the Grievance Redressal Mechanism (GRM), and community/citizen
involvement in monitoring public services, the project contributed to better public services. This alignment
was crucial in a region undergoing significant political and administrative transformation.

The government’s strategy to strengthen institutional capacity for public expenditure and investment
management was aligned with PDO 1 on strengthening the capacity of staff to manage public resources.
Likewise, the government’s economic agenda to increase resources for the provision of education and
health and its plans to increase citizen engagement and improve accountability were aligned with PDO 2 on
strengthening accountability in the delivery of public services.

Level of ambition of the project. The overall level of ambition of the project was appropriate. The original
and revised PDOs were clear and highly relevant to the government and WB strategies for Pakistan.

The revised PDO aligned the project with the needs resulting from the merger of FATA and KP. The
ambition of the project was resized to focus on a smaller group of activities in the MA, broaden the focus
from the agricultural sector to all public services and allow for the reallocation of funds to GPP KP. Adjusted


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 24
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      FATA Governance and Policy (P156412)



               activities and indicators/ targets were responsive to changing needs of FATA while keeping objectives fully
               relevant. The overall relevance of the PDO is rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Strengthen the capacity of staff in the MA to manage public resources.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). The project activities aimed to develop capacity for management of public
                             resources with a focus on the MA. The causal links between project activities (inputs), outputs and outcomes
                             were logical.

                             The outputs of activities such as training of KP FD on internal audit (IA) and operationalizing IA unit; district
                             staff procurement training; preparation of PFM accreditation program, and training; extension of Integrated
                             Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) to merged areas; office equipment and IT infrastructure
                             for FD and district office were likely to help develop capacity for management of public resources (ICR, p. 45
                             ToC post-restructuring).

                             The intended outcomes were monitorable. However, the indicators could have been designed to better
                             capture the project results. One of the outcome indicators required provincial government employees in
                             Merged Areas to complete, at least, the certificate level of the PFM accreditation program. The project did not
                             achieve the target because the governments of KP and Balochistan allowed for flexibility in course delivery
                             and training started in June 2023, when the project ended. The project was unable to capture the substantial
                             efforts made to deliver this outcome, such as 60 government officials selected for the course, course modules
                             ready, and a short course on PFM for senior officials delivered and finished, but without a PFM certificate
                             level, before project end (ICR, p. 36).

                             Another outcome required districts in Merged Areas to submit monthly Budget Execution Reports to FD,
                             within 45 days of end of quarter. To achieve the target, the project supported the extension of the Integrated
                             Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) to Merged Areas which included the
                             Information Technology (IT) equipment, provisions for the establishment/renovations (non-civil work) of
                             offices, training on the use of IFMIS, institutional capacity assessment, and a gap analysis to roll-out IFMIS in
                             phase-II. All these activities required substantial efforts that could have been captured by including additional
                             Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs).




                                                                                                                                Page 10 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   FATA Governance and Policy (P156412)



As the ICR does not offer an objectives-focused discussion of Efficacy, IEG has assigned some of the
indicators listed in Annex 1 to PDOs 1 – 3 to evaluate Efficacy.

Outputs (ICR, p. 43; p. 45)

      Provincial internal audit cell established in the Finance Department of GovKP, and internal audits
       conducted in 15 departments.
      IFMIS rolled out to all seven districts of merged areas and the Finance & Planning Offices from those
       districts regularly submitted monthly budget execution reports to FD.
      Training provided to government officials in the following
       areas:
            o   Procurement and contract management (total 229 government officials; women 23)
            o   PFM training certificate level. The course is ongoing.
            o   Executive course on PFM (30 officials; women 4).
            o   Additional trainings provided to (1) Drawing & Disbursement Officers (total 500, female 101) in
                financial rules, treasury regulations, accounting models, and other finance functions; (2) District
                Accounts Offices' staff (total 256, female 12) on IFMIS functionalities and government
                accounting system; and (3) internal audit (total 186, female 27).

Outcomes

The outputs listed above were expected to contribute to the desired outcome of staff of MA Secretariat
reporting improvement in on-job performance after participating in training. Achievement of PDO 1 is going to
be assessed by the following indicators (ICR, Annex 1):

      Staff of MA Secretariat reporting improvements in on-job performance after participating in
       training. Baseline: 0% in 2016. Target: 75%. Actual: 100% of the participants in 2023 responded
       that training met their expectations; training material/contents were relevant to their needs; and that
       learning had a clear relevance in terms of its applicability. The project exceeded the target.

While useful, the main PDO-1 outcome indicator could have also measured the impact of the training instead
of relying on the trainee’s opinion. Given the underlying conditions in FATA, one would expect that any
training offered to government officials would be welcomed and appreciated.

There were also Intermediate Outcome Indicators (IOI) that informed the achievement of PDO-1 (ICR,
Annex 1, also in p. 43):

      IOI-1: Internal audits conducted. Baseline: 0 in 2016. Target: 10. Actual: 15 in 2023. The project
       exceeded the target.
      IOI-2: Provincial Government employees in MA who completed Procurement training. Baseline:
       0 in 2016. Target: 60. Actual: 229 in 2023. The project exceeded the target.
            o Of which women: Baseline: 0 in 2016. Target: 30. Actual: 23 in 2023. The project did not
              achieve the target for female participation.

      IOI-3: Provincial Government employees in MA who completed, at least, the certificate level of
       the PFM accreditation program. Baseline: 0 in 2016. Target: 60. Actual: 0 in 2023. The project did
       not achieve the target.

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   FATA Governance and Policy (P156412)



              o Of which women: Baseline: 0 in 2016. Target: 30. Actual: 0 in 2023. The project did not
                achieve the target for female participation.
      IOI-4: Districts in MA submitting monthly Budget Execution Reports to FD, within 45 days of end
       of quarter. Baseline: 0 in 2016. Target: 5. Actual: 7 in 2023. The project exceeded the target.

The project did not achieve the target on the PFM accreditation program because the course started in June
2023, when the project ended, but more than 60 government officials from KP province (including merged
areas) had been selected and started the course. In addition, the indicator does not capture 30 senior
officials, including 4 females, that attended a short course on PFM, but without a certificate level program.
The Finance Department also worked with Pakistan Audit & Accounts Academy to design another short
course for junior government officers.

Overall, the project exceeded the target for the main Outcome-level indicator, and three of the four
intermediate outcome indicators. The project did not achieve the target for female participation.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve accountability in the delivery of public services.

Rationale
ToC. The project activities aimed to improve accountability in the delivery of public services with a focus on
the MA. The causal links between project activities (inputs), outputs and outcomes were logical.

The outputs of activities such as increasing citizen awareness including engagement of local media networks;
the provision of IT equipment & consultants; the engagement with Khpal wazir-e-ala complaint cell; and
training on sectoral planning, project management, and gender awareness were likely to help improve
accountability in the delivery of public services (ICR, p. 45 ToC post-restructuring) (Some of the PIM related
indicators: “Support to RTPS commission for the extension of services to MA by establishing office in merged
districts”; “Establishment of GIS hub in P&D department” etc. were excluded).

The intended outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs (ICR, p. 44; p. 45)

      Line departments and district administration in the MA received 463,802 service requests during 2019-
       2023, of which only 6.6% experienced a delay (as per timeline in RTS Act) due to the complexity of
       the cases. Communication and awareness activities conducted for RTS.
      About 81% of citizens reported satisfaction with notified services under the RTS Act, against the target
       of 75%.
      Registered citizens in IGRS increased from 437 in June 2022 to 737 in June 2023 who give feedback
       on government services.


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   FATA Governance and Policy (P156412)




      Communication and outreach activities conducted for the RTIC and functionalized three divisional
       offices of RTI with human resource and infrastructure support.
      Trainings provided to officials serving in MA in following areas:
             o M&E (total 75; women 16), sectorial planning (total 50; women 7), project management (total
               90; women 22), and gender awareness sessions (total 100; women 38).
      Training provided in other areas included:
             o RTS training (total 440; women 12); and leadership training (total 52; women 20).

Outcomes

The outputs listed above were expected to contribute to the desired outcome of complaints from citizens of
Merged Areas not resolved within stipulated timelines for services under the RTS Act. Achievement of PDO 2
is assessed by the following indicators (ICR, Annex 1).

      Complaints from citizens of MA not resolved within stipulated timelines for services under the
       RTS Act. Baseline: 0% in 2016. Target: 20%. Actual: 4.6% complaints experienced a delay in
       resolving in stipulated timelines as per Right to Public Services (RTPS) Act. The project exceeded the
       target.

The PDO indicator as written is misleading as it assumes all complaints were resolved instead of being
reformulated in two: “Percentage of complaints resolved with delay according to stipulated timelines” and
“Percentage of complaints not resolved.” This would have better measured improvement in accountability in
the delivery of public services. There could also have been an indicator that measured how many new
households or individuals obtained access to new basic services. Just measuring the quality-of-service
delivery to existing users assumes that all eligible users have access, and the issues are related with the
quality.

The number of complaints that were resolved with a delay have decreased. Total 55,912 service requests
were received during FY23 from Merged Areas, out of which, only 2,596 (4.64%) experienced a delay in
resolving within stipulated timelines as per the Right to Public Services (RTPS) Act. The performance has
improved overtime: about 45.5% of complaints were resolved with delay in FY19, 13% in FY20, 4.4% in
FY21, and 6.9% in FY22, as reported by the KP RTPS.

There were also IOIs that informed the achievement of PDO 2 (ICR, Annex 1, also in p. 44):

      IOI-5: Provincial Government employees in MA who completed Monitoring and Evaluation
       training. Baseline: 0% in 2016. Target: 75%. Actual: 75%. The project achieved the target.
             o Of which are women. Baseline: 0% in 2016. Target: 30%. Actual: 16%. The project did not
               achieve the target for women.
      IOI-6: Citizens reporting satisfaction with notified services under the KP Right to Public
       Services (RTPS) Act. Baseline: 0% in 2016. Target: 75% in 2016. Actual: 81% of respondents
       confirmed satisfaction with the selected public services. The project exceeded the target.
      IOI-7: Provincial Government employees in MA who completed sectoral planning training.
       Baseline: 0 in 2016. Target: 50. Actual: 50 (43 males and 7 females) employees completed the
       training. The project achieved the target.



                                                                                               Page 13 of 24
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                FATA Governance and Policy (P156412)




                                   IOI-8: Provincial Government employees in MA who completed Project Management training.
                                    Baseline: 0 in 2016. Target: 75. Actual: 90 (68 males and 22 females) employees completed the
                                    training. The project exceeded the target.
                                   IOI-9: Provincial Government employees from MA who have participated in gender awareness
                                    sessions. Baseline: 0 in 2016. Target: 100. Actual: 100 (62 males and 38 females) employees
                                    completed the training. The project achieved the target.
                                   IOI-10: Citizens registered in IGRS to give feedback on government services. Baseline: 0 in
                                    2016. Target: 1000. Actual: 737. The project did not achieve the target.

                            The main outcome indicator and five of the 6 IOIs achieved or exceeded their targets. The project did not
                            achieve the target for women.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is rated as Substantial, given that the main and IOIs were achieved or exceeded in most
                            cases.

                            In accordance with OPCS-IEG guidance this ICR Review focuses only on the efficacy of two PDOs. It
                            selectively uses the outcome and IOIs in the RM to assess the efficacy of the two PDOs in Section 4
                            above. However, IEG acknowledges that the project made contributions to several other areas related to
                            governance, and PIM. Of note is the achievements related to geotagging of public assets in 7 districts of
                            MA.

                            The ICR reports that post-restructuring, the project made a solid contribution in strengthening staff capacity in
                            merged areas in public resource management, with substantial strides in improving accountability for delivery
                            of public services. Overall, the establishment and reinforcement of the Right to Public Services Commission
                            and Right to Information Commission acts in the merged areas were foundational, marking a shift towards
                            greater transparency and state-citizen trust. These measures, along with the Integrated Grievance Redressal
                            System (IGRS) and expansion of IFMIS system to merged areas, highlight the contribution of accountable,
                            and responsive systems that were introduced for the first time.

                            There is room for improvement in obtaining feedback from more citizens, and in evaluating accountability in
                            service delivery by evaluating whether citizens who were previously excluded received access to services.
                            Providing certificate level PFM accreditation training to the government officials, and capacity building of
                            female officials in merged areas are two important areas that need to be improved. Overall, the project
                            interventions made a valuable contribution while effectively navigating the complexities of the KP-FATA
                            merger.



                                                                                                                               Page 14 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      FATA Governance and Policy (P156412)



  The ICR (para 27) based the assessment of the achievement of objectives around the project’s components:
  (i) strengthening capacity for management of public resources; (ii) improving PIM and service delivery; and
  (iii) ensuring effective support for the coordination of governance reforms and the operational management of
  the GPP. It also applied the scale for rating “overall outcome” to rating “efficacy/achievement of objectives”.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency: There was no economic cost-benefit analysis prepared either at the time of appraisal or
in the context of the project’s restructuring. The ICR attempted to assess efficiency gains with respect to
operational costs (Annex 4) by linking project activities to medium and long-term gains in development. For
example, improved public trust coming from improvement in expenditure reporting through the rollout of IFMIS to
merged areas and capacity building; and from improved accountability in the use of public resources through
strengthened internal audit capacity; improved governance and citizen-state trust coming from initiatives
implemented to enhance access to public services and information through efforts to roll out the Right to Public
Services Commission and Right to Information Commission in the merged areas; and improved public service
delivery and resource management coming from specialized training programs and improved leadership skills
and gender awareness.

The ICR does not provide sufficient information to allow for an assessment of cost-benefit analysis.
Assessments of project benefits were largely qualitative. The majority of the project’s interventions involved
activities geared at strengthening capacity and improving accountability as well as the extension of
administrative systems to the merged areas. However, training plans on PFM not achieved within the project’s
timeframe were some of the risks to the effectiveness of project interventions.

Operational Efficiency: The duration of the project was from 2016 (2017) to 2023 and its overall financing was
reduced from US$14 million to US$5 million. It was restructured three times. By the closing date, 99% of the
approved allocation was utilized with 8.4 percent for operational management.

There was good value for money invested, given the merger of FATA and KP provinces, the implementation
delays due to the pandemic, and the political, economic, and social country context.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FATA Governance and Policy (P156412)



                                                                                       0
Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The PDO was Highly relevant to the Government strategy and the Bank strategy for Pakistan and the FATA
region before and after the merger. Overall Efficacy is rated as Substantial, given that outcomes for both PDO1
and PDO2 had only moderate shortcomings and the operation almost fully achieved its objectives or is likely to
do so (as is the case of the PFM accreditation training program for a large number of government officials (60)
that started when the project ended). Overall Efficiency is rated as Substantial, given that the project
demonstrated expected economic and operational efficiency for the sector and had good value for money
despite the fragile country context, the impact of the pandemic, and the merger of FATA and KP. The overall
outcome of the project is rated as Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to the sustainability of the development outcome is assessed as Moderate. The project secured
strong progress, but it needed to be sustained, consolidated, and built upon. Development outcomes could
be constrained by the following factors (ICR, para 74).

Technical risk

      While some of the activities have already been institutionalized, technical challenges could affect
       sustainability. There is a risk to the continuity of several activities such as: staff training in different
       technical areas; support for RTSC and RTIC (communication and awareness activities, citizens
       satisfaction surveys) which has been instrumental in building state-citizen trust; and continuous use of
       CIFs and IGRS.

Financial risk

      The deterioration in the fiscal situation after the COVID-19 pandemic could undermine sustainability
       or the continuation of activities such as annual trainings and functioning of accountability institutions.

Social risk




                                                                                                       Page 16 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      FATA Governance and Policy (P156412)



      The deterioration of state-citizen trust due to shortage of funds for accountability institutions such as
       RTIC and RTSC would prevent the continuation of communication and awareness activities and
       citizens satisfaction surveys central to citizen engagement.
      The shortage of funds for staffing and trainings financed under the project pose a social risk.

Political risk

      Risks associated with the change in government and geo-political conflict could lead to political and
       social instability and economic disruptions leading to a deterioration in public service delivery and
       citizens trust in public institutions.
      Other risks the ICR failed to mention are risks associated with natural disasters (earthquakes and
       floods) to which FATA is vulnerable and for which it would need emergency funding. This eventuality
       could further reduce the fiscal space for financing project activities.

      The ICR failed to mention risks related to the sustainability of the decentralization reforms beyond the
       electoral momentum. Additional administrative and political challenges could arise if the merger of
       FATA and KP is not sustained.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design was relevant to the government’s strategy and responded to the specific governance
  and service delivery needs of the FATA region before and after the merger with KP. The design benefited
  from previous World Bank technical and analytical work, including the MDTF- financed Governance
  Support Projects (GSP) which supported an initial set of reforms; a previous Public Expenditure and
  Financial Accountability (PEFA) framework; the analysis on Strengthening Anticorruption Institutions in
  Pakistan: FATA and KP-2014; the PCNA Implementation Monitoring second report: Mapping PCNA
  Investments in FATA (2013-14); and, the Bank’s global experience in governance and use of ICT
  innovations for accountability in Fragility and Conflict-affected Situation (FCS) regions.

  Government ownership and coordination was very strong due to the incorporation of lessons; building on
  achievements from these previous Bank operations; a consultative process approach with government
  authorities and stakeholders; and the project’s strategic alignment with the Gov KP’s broader initiatives
  (ICR, para 58).

  Nonetheless, there were shortcomings in the quality at entry. The original project design was ambitious
  for a low capacity and conflict affected context. The project included indicators which were either beyond
  the control of the project or difficult to implement. The project’s risk assessment (political and
  governance) failed to include FATA’s possible merger with KP or its administrative uncertainty. In
  addition, a high turnover for the position of Project Coordinator increased the risk of achievement of
  project objectives (ICR, p. 28-29).

  Mitigation measures were generally appropriate and implemented in a timely restructuring after FATA’s
  merger with KP. The ICR also mentions that high turnover of the Project Coordinators (four in three

                                                                                                      Page 17 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FATA Governance and Policy (P156412)



  years) seriously affected proper design of annual work plan and project implementation in the initial
  period. Eight out of 10 indicators were lagging their targets and only 8% of resources had been
  disbursed. The project was rated unsatisfactory and was on the verge of being cancelled.

  While the design of the post-restructuring outcome indicators was appropriate for the low capacity and
  conflict affected context, the design could have added at least one indicator that measured the impact of
  the trainings offered to build staff capacity or improve accountability of service delivery. A three-to-four-
  year lifespan of the project allowed sufficient time for the project-financed trainings’ effects to be
  evaluated. For example, an indicator that measured how many new households or individuals obtained
  access to basic services would have been a good complement to the project outcome indicator assessing
  the quality-of-service delivery to existing users. The latter outcome indicator assumes that all eligible
  users have access, and the issues are related to quality for which the surveys are a good measure of
  accountability.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank’s team conducted implementation support missions, provided regular technical advice to
 implementing agencies, encouraged inter-project coordination (FATA, KP and Balochistan) and peer
 learning, and regularly sought management support for areas the required attention (ICR, para 72).
 Implementation support for the project was provided by two units: an Operations Support Unit (OSU) and a
 Governance Reforms Support Unit (GRSU).

 The supervision of the project was satisfactory due to: (i) consistent engagement with the client and regular
 supervision missions; (ii) adequate documentation of supervision missions according to Bank procedures;
 (iii) timely reporting of progress against project targets based on information provided by the implementing
 agencies; (iv) periodic rating of the project’s performance and highlighting areas of attention through
 Implementation Status and Results Reports, aide-memoires and management letters; (v) timely
 coordination and suggestions for solutions to new challenges such as the expansion of the project’s scope
 and revision of the results framework after FATA’s merger with KP; (v) support for project coordination and
 peer learning for improved performance between GPP KP, GPP FATA and GPP Balochistan; and (vi)
 responsiveness to new challenges such as FATA’s merger which led to the expansion of the project’s
 scope, and the pandemic which led to the extension of the project’s closing date to allow for the
 completion of some activities.

 The ICR does not note any post-restructuring shortcomings. There were, however, four changes in TTLs
 during the lifetime of the project after restructuring, which may have contributed to reducing the
 effectiveness in supervision. The ICR noted (para 73) that despite these changes, the project turned
 around the quality of the Bank’s supervision from unsatisfactory to satisfactory post-restructuring.

 The project disbursed fully and achieved targets with minimal impact.




                                                                                                    Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FATA Governance and Policy (P156412)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The original results framework had a few shortcomings mentioned in the quality-at-entry section related to
 the original indicators that were either out of the project’s control (for example, reducing the number of in-
 year re-appropriations of budget allocations to < 100 from a baseline of >200) or difficult to implement (for
 example, increasing public procurements conducted through competitive selection from a baseline of 25%
 to 75%). The original project design was also ambitious for a low capacity and conflict affected context. At
 the time of project restructuring, however, most of these shortcomings were resolved, and the project’s
 scope was adjusted to respond to the new challenges of the post-merger situation of FATA and KP.

 The theory of change post-restructuring (p. 45) is clear in articulating the causal links between project
 activities, outputs, and outcomes. However, there was no consistency with the real development objectives,
 except for PDO1 which was the same as the first project component.

 In addition, while the PDO statement (“to strengthen the capacity of staff in the merged areas to manage
 public resources, and improved accountability in the delivery of public services”) included two explicit
 objectives, the ICR (p. 15) incorrectly based its evaluation on the three post-restructuring project
 components (ICR, Table 1). Assessment of the outcome and intermediate indicators for these three PDOs
 was incorrectly considered by the ICR to provide a comprehensive picture of the efficacy of the project
 resulting in disconnected objectives from the PDO statement. However, since Component 1 was almost
 identical to the first PDO, assessment of Component 1 was useful for measuring the efficacy of the project.

 The PAD did not provide a theory of change (ToC) as it was not required at the time of project approval. A
 retroactively designed theory of change is presented in Figure 1 of the ICR (p. 9).



b. M&E Implementation
  Project M&E institutional arrangements (PIDISD, p. 10) were adequate and the M&E framework was also
  used for monitoring utilization of funds. M&E data helped to inform project decision-making, such as the
  three restructurings and the mitigation of delays related to the COVID-19 pandemic, which extended the
  project’s closing date to complete the implementation of ongoing project activities.

  Daily management and coordination of the project, including monitoring results and generating
  performance and financial reports on implementation, was adequately supported through an Operations
  Support Unit (OSU) and a Governance Reforms Support Unit (GRSU). The OSU was headed by a
  Project Coordinator who reported to the Director-General for Projects in the Department of Planning and




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FATA Governance and Policy (P156412)



  Development (P&DD). GRSU was headed by three advisors who also reported to the Director-General
  for Projects in the Department of P&DD.

  The OSU had a position of M&E specialist to regularly monitor progress against project targets (ICR, para
  61).



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data on performance and progress against the project’s targets were satisfactorily used to
  inform strategic project direction, resource reallocation, monitoring utilization of funds, project
  management, and decision-making. Correct utilization of project data enhanced project effectiveness
  and ensured adaptability. After the restructuring of the project, potential overlap in activities with KP
  GPP was avoided by regular monitoring of the project funds and coordination between the OSUs of KP
  and FATA GPPs.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards: The project was classified under Category C (partial assessment
   project) at appraisal as it did not include any activities that involved environmental or social risks, primarily
   because no construction or civil works were envisaged.

   Although at appraisal, the Project Information Document/Integrated Systematic Development Strategy rated
   the environmental and social risks as “significant” as the region’s security situation and vulnerability to
   natural disasters could have resulted in social or economic disruptions, Category C was maintained during
   implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. Throughout implementation, the project’s fiduciary risk remained high due to
   residual risk (frequent transfer of officers). The project effectively complied with the FA covenants and
   although initially implementation of FM arrangements was not adequate, during implementation these
   issues were addressed by the project. The project submitted regular Financial Reports and audited Annual
   Financial Statements. These reports were unqualified without any major issue.

   The ICR notes that the performance of the overall FM function was moderately satisfactory (ICR, para 65).

   Procurement. Procurement was carried out in accordance with Bank’s procedures, but some weaknesses
   were identified. After the resignation of the procurement specialist at the time of FATA’s merger, there

                                                                                                      Page 20 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     FATA Governance and Policy (P156412)



   were delays in implementation of the online procurement system and Bank’s guidelines were not followed
   in the selection of individual consultants, among other procurement activities (ICR, p. 67).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were unintended positive impacts that contributed to the overall PDOs (p. 21-22). The project
   activities supported gender inclusivity and awareness through capacity building and training, although
   targets for female participation were not achieved. Activities also helped strengthening institutional
   structures within the newly merged areas, including capacity building, technical assistance, and
   infrastructure support. Last, the initiatives inherently contributed to poverty reduction and shared prosperity
   through improvement in public resource management and accountability in service delivery.



d. Other
   The ICR raised no other issues.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory
                                                                                  Overall ICR rating is inconsistent
                                                                                  with individual ratings for Quality
                                                                                  at entry (MS) and Quality of
Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                  supervision (S). The ICR Rating
                                                                                  should be MS, thus there is no
                                                                                  downgrade in Bank Performance
Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Modest


12. Lessons

The following lessons are some of the most relevant and informed by the project’s ICR (p. 30).

To properly implement governance reforms and related projects, political ownership is
important. In Pakistan’s FATA Governance and Policy project, the government’s request to
restructure the project’s design and results framework to support the newly merged areas of FATA
and KP was fundamental to the project’s ownership. In addition, the project’s strategy gave
implementing agencies key decision-making competences in the project’s design and
implementation of activities to achieve the project’s objectives. The fact that the Additional Chief


                                                                                                     Page 21 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       FATA Governance and Policy (P156412)



Secretary of GovKP was chair of the project’s Steering Committee also contributed to strong political
ownership of the project.

For efficient service delivery and transparency, technological interventions should be made a
part of the proposed solutions. Pakistan’s FATA Governance and Policy project the use of
innovative technology was supported by the project. Examples include regular reporting of budget
execution by using IFMIS or geotagging public assets in merged areas through GIS and MIS
technology. In addition, technology also supported continuous capacity building through virtual
trainings and helped increase the project’s cost-effectiveness. However, the project’s experience
shows that the success of technological interventions also depends on their institutionalization.
Strong political leadership and the government’s ability to hire and retain quality ICT professionals
was fundamental to the efficient delivery of technological solutions.

Improved government policies for gender inclusion and high-level monitoring of their
implementation are needed for low-capacity and fragile country/provincial project settings
such as FATA. Female participation was low in capacity building activities supported by the project
in the merged areas (13% of total trainees). There were several reasons for this outcome that could
have been addressed by improved government policies. Mobility issues could have been solved by
offering virtual participation or providing training closer to the place of duty/residence or by improving
transportation. Introducing incentives in hiring departments (or hiring managers) to ensure higher
female employee participation in trainings or making relevant training such as PFM,
procurement, sectoral planning, and project management and M&E, mandatory for promotion in
certain job descriptions are other policies that can foster gender inclusion.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR presented a clear and coherent narrative to the background of the project, including the administrative
and governance challenges arising from FATA’s merger with KP which led to the first restructuring with a
substantial reduction in the project’s budget and an adjustment of the project’s scope to focus on the merged
areas.

However, contrary to its claim, the ICR did not follow the ICR guidelines that require the discussion to be
focused on the objectives of the project. Instead, the discussion in the ICR, especially the Efficacy and
Efficiency sections that are central to the overall Outcome rating, is focused on the components of the project
(ICR, para 27): (i) strengthening capacity for management of public resources; (ii) improving PIM and service
delivery; and (iii) ensuring effective support for the coordination of governance reforms and the operational
management of the GPP. The first component overlapped with the first PDO, so the discussion was pertinent to
PDO1, but the second and third components had nothing in common with PDO2. As a result, IEG


                                                                                                      Page 22 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      FATA Governance and Policy (P156412)



reformulated the PDO into two objectives or PDOs and selected pertinent indicators listed in Annex 1 to
evaluate the project’s performance and outcome.

There are minor shortcomings in the ICR related to clarity and consistency. The ICR is not clear on the purpose
of each of the first two restructurings (para 14). The document summarizes the revisions made to the project’s
design in both restructurings without noting that all changes, except the change in the project’s closing date,
were made in the first restructuring.

There are inconsistencies on the revised components between the first restructuring document and the ICR.
The first restructuring document notes the project “retained its three components” with revised activities (RES
36311, p. 7 para 10), but shows revised Components 1 and 2 (RES 3631, p. 11). The ICR says only
Component 1 was revised, but also presents a revised name for Component 2 (Table 1 and Annex 3).

The ICR is not consistent about the title/name of Component 2 after restructuring, mixing the original and
revised names for this component:

      paragraph 27: “Improving PIM and service delivery”;
      paragraph 33: “Improving capacity for PIM and accountability for service delivery”;
      Annex 3: “Improving accountability for PIM and service delivery”.

According to the GA (p. 6) and PID/ ISDS (p. 7), the original Component 2 was: “Improving PIM and service
delivery.” According to the restructuring document (RES 36311, p. 11), the revised version of Component 2
was: “Improving accountability for PIM and service delivery.”

The ICR notes the date of the project’s second restructuring as June 3 instead of June 23 (ICR, para 14a;
RES41845, third restructuring, para 4). The ICR does not mention the reason for the first extension of the
closing date (ICR, para 14a).

The ICR applied the scale for rating the project’s overall outcome to the rating of the achievement of objectives
(efficacy section) where the scale used should have been high, substantial, modest, and negligible.

The ICR rates overall Bank Performance as Satisfactory despite rating Quality at Entry as Moderately
Satisfactory and Quality of Supervision as Satisfactory. This would be inconsistent as the average of a high and
low rating cannot be equal to the higher rating.

Lessons. The lessons learned were clear, comprehensive, and on target, but missed potentially important
lessons in the political economy context. They logically flow from the data and analysis provided in the ICR.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                    Page 23 of 24
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
FATA Governance and Policy (P156412)




                                                                    Page 24 of 24
