     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gov & Policy Project for Balochistan (P156411)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023976

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P156411                                     Gov & Policy Project for Balochistan

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Pakistan                                    Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A3352                                    30-Jun-2020                                         16,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Dec-2016                                 30-Jun-2023

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             16,000,000.00                                   16,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              16,000,000.00                                   16,000,000.00

 Actual                                          16,000,000.00                                   16,000,000.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Gloria Carolina             Vandana Chandra               Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC (Unit 1)
 Gutierrez Tejada




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 6), the Project Development Objective (PDO) at the
   time of project approval on December 28, 2016, was:

   “To strengthen the capacity for Sales Tax on Services collection and improve accountability in public
   financial management and public service delivery in the education and irrigation sectors in
   Balochistan.”


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 20
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Gov & Policy Project for Balochistan (P156411)



   On June 9, 2020, the PDO was revised as follows under a first restructuring with no Additional Financing (AF)
   (Report No. RES 37106, Restructuring paper on a proposed project restructuring on Governance and Policy
   Program for Balochistan, Table 1 p. 3; ICR, p. 1):

   “To strengthen the capacity for revenue mobilization and improve public financial management and
   accountability for public service delivery in Balochistan.”

   For the purpose of this review, the PDO has been parsed as follows:

            PDO1: To strengthen the capacity for revenue mobilization.
            PDO2: To improve public financial management (PFM) for public service delivery.
            PDO3: To improve accountability for public service delivery.

   Since the revised PDO had a wider scope to capture the results in revenue collection beyond Sales Tax on
   Services (STS) and service delivery beyond the education and irrigation sectors, and the portion of the PDO
   that was dropped was not related with the achievement of any significant activities prior to restructuring, this
   ICR Review will not undertake a split evaluation. It will assess the project based on the revised and expanded
   PDO and indicators/ targets.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  ---

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were four components under the first restructuring of the project. These were not changed during the
   second restructuring.

   The estimated total cost of the project was US$16 million at approval. There was no AF at the time of both
   restructurings. The actual cost was US$15.95 million (ICR, p. 50).

   Component 1: Strengthening capacity for provincial revenue mobilization and federal receipts
   management (Cost at approval: US$4.50 million. Actual cost: US$1.48 million). This component aimed to
   strengthen capacity for provincial revenue mobilization of tax sources beyond the STS, non-tax sources and
   federal receipts in line with the 18th Amendment to the Constitution that gave provinces exclusive
   competences in several areas and the 7th National Finance Commission (NFC) Award of 2009 that
   increased the provinces revenues (PAD, para 5, ICR para 4). There were two subcomponents:

           i. increasing the effectiveness of collection of provincial tax and non-tax; and
          ii. improving management of federal receipts.



                                                                                                       Page 2 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Gov & Policy Project for Balochistan (P156411)



Component 2: Strengthening public financial and risk management (Cost at approval: US$4.00 million.
Actual cost: US$5.13 million). This component aimed to strengthen PFM in the budget process and
prioritize improved management of fiscal risks. There were two subcomponents:

     i. improving budget formulation and management; and
    ii. improving management of fiscal risks.

Component 3: Improving public investment management (PIM) and accountability in public services
(Cost at approval: US$5.00 million. Actual cost: US$6.18 million). This component aimed to strengthen PIM
and public service delivery by using technology and improving accountability. There were two
subcomponents:

     i. strengthening public investment management; and
    ii. technology, efficiency, and accountability in public services.

Component 4: Ensuring effective support for the coordination of governance reforms and the
operational management of the GPP (Cost at approval: US$2.50 million. Actual cost: US$3.16 million).
This component aimed to support the GoB in achieving the outcomes and targets of the project. There were
no subcomponents.

Significant changes during implementation

Restructuring No. 1: A first restructuring was approved on June 9, 2020, to address governance
challenges resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and focus on broader areas of governance where
service delivery was being affected. This restructuring did not provide AF, but led to the revision of the PDO,
expansion of the scope of two project components and adjustment of the Results Framework (RF). The
scope of the PDO was expanded from revenue mobilization originally focused on STS collection to include
provincial taxes, non-taxes, and federal receipts, and from accountability originally focused on the irrigation
and education sectors to include all sectors that impact service delivery. Project indicators, targets and
activities were revised, disbursement categories were changed, and the closing date was extended from
June 2020 to June 2022.

Two project components were modified (ICR, p. 10). Component 1 was expanded to include STS collection
as well as other sources of provincial revenue, and management of federal receipts. Component 2 was
expanded to include PFM and risk management. Two sub-components were added to Component 3 to
clarify how PIM and accountability would be improved. Component 4 remained unchanged.

The following changes were made to the project components, indicators, and Intermediate indicators in the
RF during the restructuring in 2020 (Components from RES 37106, p. 8; Indicators from ICR, Table 1 p.
11):



Components                           Action                               Revised component
Increasing effectiveness of sales    Revised                              Strengthening capacity for

tax collection.                                                           provincial revenue mobilization


                                                                                                 Page 3 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Gov & Policy Project for Balochistan (P156411)



                                                                            and federal receipts

                                                                            management.
Strengthening accountability in
                                                                            Strengthening public financial
                                     Revised
public financial management
                                                                            and risk management.
(PFM).
Improving public investment                                                 Improving public investment

management and accountability        No change                              management (PIM) and

in public services.                                                         accountability in public services.
                                                                            Ensuring effective support for
Ensuring effective support for
                                                                            the coordination of governance
the coordination of governance
                                     No change
                                                                            reforms and the operational
reforms and the operational
management of the GPP.
                                                                            management of the GPP.


Indicators                           Action                                 Revised indicator
                                     Revised to cover all revenues.         Increased collection of the
Increased collection of the Sales
Tax on Services (STS)
                                                                            province’s tax revenues.
Increased average appropriation Dropped
per project included in the PSDP in
education and irrigation sectors
                                                                            All public investment assets
Increased number of public
investment projects/ assets in       Revised to cover all sectors.          in seven divisions of the
education and irrigation that have
been geomapped and published                                                province are geo mapped
online.
                                                                            and published online
                                                                            Complaints resolved by the
                                    Revised to include all cases
Increase in the cases related to
                                    handled by the Ombudsman
education resolved by the office of                                         Office of the Balochistan
Balochistan Ombudsman.
                                                                            Ombudsman (Percentage)
Increased number of officials with Dropped as PDO indicator;
certification in FM, procurement,  included as revised intermediate
project preparation, project       indicator to measure trainings.
management, M&E, management
& leadership




                                                                                                    Page 4 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Gov & Policy Project for Balochistan (P156411)



Increased number of women         Dropped as PDO indicator;
certified in procurement, project included as revised intermediate
preparation, project management, indicator to measure trainings.

M&E, management & leadership


Intermediate indicators              Action                          Revised Intermediate indicator
                                                                     Registered Sales Tax on Services
Number of STS taxpayers that filed
                                   Revised                           (STS) payers who filed returns in
tax returns (percentage).
                                                                     the previous year (%).
Number of internal audits
                                       Dropped
conducted.
Number of districts where schools
and irrigation facilities are
monitored with regular beneficiary Dropped
feedback; (including women among
feedback providers).
Number of schools and irrigation
facilities for which follow up actions Dropped
are taken.
                                                                     Enhanced human resource
                                     Added
                                                                     capacity for tax administration.
                                                                     Implementation of Balochistan
                                                                     Revenue Mobilization Strategy
                                     Added                           (BRMS), and improved
                                                                     transparency of revenue
                                                                     performance.
                                                                     Strengthened institutional
                                     Added                           framework for investment
                                                                     promotion.
                                                                     Operationalization of the
                                     Added
                                                                     established PFM reform units.
                                                                     Improved budget formulation and
                                     Added
                                                                     management process.
                                                                     Departments publishing
                                     Added
                                                                     procurement plans online.
                                                                     Public sector planning function
                                     Added
                                                                     strengthened.
                                                                     Strengthened institutional
                                     Added                           framework for accountability and
                                                                     integrity.
                                                                     Public officials participating in
                                                                     project financed training activities
                                     Added
                                                                     (number) (and % of which are
                                                                     women).


                                                                                              Page 5 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gov & Policy Project for Balochistan (P156411)




   The ICR (Table 1) combined the last two indicators on certification in FM as one: “Increased number of
   officials (including women) with certification in financial management, procurement, project management,
   M&E, management and leadership” while the first restructuring report (RES 37106, p. 10) had them as
   presented above.

   Restructuring No. 2: A second restructuring in 2022 extended the project’s closing date from June 30,
   2022, to June 30, 2023, following the extension of the MDTF EDD to December 31, 2023, to allow for
   completion of activities interrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project cost at appraisal was US$16 million. The actual cost was US$15.95 million.

   Financing: The project was financed by an IBRD/IDA grant of US$16 million through the Multi-Donor Trust
   Fund (MDTF) for Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP), Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA), and Balochistan.
   The total amount disbursed was US$15.95 million.

   Borrower Contribution: The Islamic Republic of Pakistan provided counterpart funding of US$3 million to
   finance project expenditures, such as salaries of government servants, operations and maintenance, office
   buildings, and utilities.

   Dates: The Bank approved the project on December 28, 2016, and the project became effective on May 6,
   2017, with an original closing date of June 30, 2020. The project was restructured twice and closed on June
   30, 2023, three years after the planned closing, (ICR, p. 9).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Pakistan, a lower-middle-income country had made considerable progress in reducing
poverty and improving shared prosperity in the two decades prior to the project’s approval. However, nearly
three-quarters of the population were still either poor or vulnerable and the performance in regard to human
development and Millennium Development Goals (MDG) was one of the weakest in South Asia. At the
same time, service delivery was affected by frail private sector environment and weak public sector
management and implementation capacity. The security situation was challenging due to rising violence,
crime, and uncertainty about geo-political tensions. All of this undermined the country’s law and order
situation (CPS, p. 1, 6).

Two key political changes were taking place. First, elections in May 2013 brought a new democratic federal
government with a strong reform mandate. Second, devolution of power and resources to the provincial
level become a priority, in line with the 18th Constitutional Amendment and the 7th National Finance
Commission (NFC) Award of 2010. This included the collection of the STS by the provinces (CPS, p.1).



                                                                                                  Page 6 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gov & Policy Project for Balochistan (P156411)



The province of Balochistan is the largest of the country’s four provinces but had the lowest per capita
income. Approximately 70 percent of the population lived in rural areas with poor access to public services
and about three-quarters of the rural residents lived in poverty. Despite the province’s gas and mineral
resources, growth rates and social indicators lagged the rest of the country and gender disparities were the
widest (PAD, p.1).

Balochistan also required improvements in the security situation. It suffered from ethnic and sectarian
violence as well as rising crime and uncertainty. These limited people’s mobility and economic activity,
particularly job creation (PAD, p.15).

Balochistan was the first province to hold local government elections. A local government was important to
articulate demands for improvement in local services and public infrastructure (PAD, p. 2).

The state of service delivery in Balochistan supported PDO2’s relevance as it focused on enhancing the
efficiency of PFM for public service delivery. It also supported PDO3’s relevance as it sought to
address weaknesses in the accountability of public service delivery. The new institutional and political
changes that gave more taxing powers to the provinces and promoted greater resource decentralization
supported the relevance of PDO1 on the need to strengthen the capacity for revenue mobilization.

Bank strategy. The project’s PDO was well-aligned with the World Bank Group’s (WBG) Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY15-19. The CPS (CPS, para 34) prioritized public sector development,
inclusion, and service delivery as three of its four strategic areas. It was premised on the devolution of more
responsibilities to the provinces and had direct implications for governance and service delivery. The CPS
also focused on other high priority governance themes for Pakistan which included gender and the need to
address sources of fragility and conflict by emphasizing restoration of trust between citizens and the
Governments of KP, FATA and Balochistan (para 35).

The project’s PDO was aligned with the governance outcomes targeted by the RF of the Multi-Donor Trust
Fund (MDTF). Specifically, these outcomes supported: (a) improved transparency and accountability of
government services through citizen engagement in the delivery of selected services; and (b) capacity
building of the public administration through improved management, training, and strengthening of systems
used by government institutions.

PDO2 and PDO3 were aligned with the World Bank’s strategy for improving transparency and
accountability of government services through greater citizen engagement in service delivery and capacity
building in the public administration. PDO1 was aligned with the World Bank’s strategy on the need to help
the government mobilize revenue to create fiscal space (CPS, para 59).

 At Project closing, the PDO was aligned with WBG’s Report Pakistan @ 100: Shaping the Future (2047).
The report contributed to three out of the eight reform focus areas: tax revenues, transparency, and
accountability (ICR, p. 13).

The project was informed by previous and ongoing analytical work conducted by the World Bank, such as
the 2007 Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) Assessment (ICR, para 11) that identified
the weaknesses in the provincial PFM system and the WBG’s DPC on Fiscally Sustainable and Inclusive
Growth that supported the government’s national tax reform agenda. At the subnational level, ongoing work
on PERs, PEFAs, and DSA in KPK, Balochistan, Punjab, and Sindh aimed to support provincial tax reforms
and inform the project. Finally, the Punjab and Sindh Public Management Improvement Program would also


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Gov & Policy Project for Balochistan (P156411)



               support more efficient use of public resources, while subnational PEFAs aimed to support expenditure
               reform focusing on improvements in the efficiency of provincial departments (CPS para 59).

               Government strategy. The PDO was aligned with the pillars of the government’s tax reform covering tax
               policy, measures to increase the tax base, and improved tax administration. It was also aligned with the
               government’s plan to enhance revenue administration for sales tax, excise, and customs that was launched
               in December 2013. Finally, it was aligned with the government’s five-year development vision and the long-
               term Vision 2025 (CPS, p.10-11).

               At the provincial level, the PDO responded to the reforms proposed in Balochistan’ s Comprehensive
               Development Strategy (2013-20). The reforms included: (i) strengthening PFM and introducing results-
               oriented budgeting to improve planning and service delivery; (ii) improving public procurement; (iii)
               expanding the use of information and communication technology (ICT) in business processes and access
               to information, with a focus on tax administration; (iv) strengthening monitoring and evaluation (M&E) in
               public services through ICT-enabled reporting of real-time data and external evaluations; and (v) developing
               the capacity of public officials in core functions (ICR, para 15). The government’s reforms to strengthen
               PFM and service delivery, improve public procurement, and expand the use of ICT with a focus on tax
               administration were aligned with PDO2 to improve PFM for public service delivery. PDOs 1 and 3 were
               consistent with the government’s priorities on strengthening monitoring and evaluation in public services
               and capacity development.

               Level of ambition of the project. The overall level of ambition of the project was appropriate. The original
               and revised PDOs were clear and highly relevant to the government and World Bank strategies for
               Pakistan. The PDO was broadened in a timely manner from focusing on improving collection of STS to
               collection of all tax, non-tax and transfer revenues and from service delivery in the education and irrigation
               sectors to service delivery in all sectors, with the corresponding adjustment of the RF. Adjusted activities
               and indicators/ targets were responsive to the changing needs of Balochistan while keeping objectives fully
               relevant. The overall relevance of the PDO is rated as High.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Strengthen the capacity for revenue mobilization.

                             Rationale


                                                                                                                     Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Gov & Policy Project for Balochistan (P156411)



Theory of Change (ToC). The project activities aimed to develop capacity for provincial revenue mobilization
of tax and non-tax sources, including the STS, as well as management of federal receipts. The causal links
between project activities (inputs), outputs and outcomes were logical.

The outputs of activities such as providing technical support to the government in designing tax and non-tax
revenue mobilization strategies for the province; establishing the provincial revenue management unit
Balochistan Revenue Authority (BRA); providing technical review of revenue mobilization related proposals;
designing e-stamp system (electronic system to issue stamp papers) and e-payment for taxes; and
conducting training needs assessments for tax authorities; and providing HR, infrastructure, communication
and training for revenue authorities would help to increase the collection of tax and non-tax revenue (ICR p.
46).

The intended outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs (ICR, p. 45)

      Total province’s tax revenue collection increased by more than 250 percent in four years.
      Capacity needs assessment of the BRA, Board of Revenue (BoR), and Excise, Taxation, and
       Antinarcotics Department (ETAD) completed; Trainings provided to 35% of professional staff of three
       revenue authorities.
      Balochistan Revenue Mobilizaiton Strategy (BRMS) and implementation plan developed. Non-tax
       revenue strategy prepared.
      Provincial revenue management unit established.
      E-Stamp system designed; and e-payment system launched for STS.

Outcomes

The outputs listed above were expected to contribute to the outcome of increasing revenue mobilization,
including the collection of STS. Achievement of PDO 1 was to be assessed by the following indicator (ICR,
Annex 1):

      Increase collection of the province’s tax revenues. Baseline: PKR 8.437 billion total provincial revenue
       collected in FY 2018-19. Target: At least PKR 12 billion total provincial revenue collected. Actual: PKR
       29.8 billion in FY23 from which about 65% was collected from Service Sales Tax. The project
       exceeded the target by 148 percent. Achieved.

The targets for the previous years were also achieved: PKR16.44 billion in FY20; PKR21.8 billion in FY21;
and PKR23.5 billion in FY22.

There were also Intermediate Outcome Indicators (IOI) that informed the achievement of PDO 1:

      IOI1: Registered Sales Tax on Services (STS) payers who filed returns in the previous year.
       Baseline: 43% of registered STS payers filed returns in FY20. Target: 60% of registered STS payers
       filed returns in the previous year. Actual: 68% of registered STS payers (8166 taxpayers) filed returns
       in FY23 and 73% (6916 taxpayers) in FY22. The target was exceeded. Achieved.
      IOI2: Enhanced human resource capacity for tax. Baseline: HR/staffing and training plans are not
       available in FY20. Target: (i) Staffing and training plans are approved for implementation. (ii) Training

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Gov & Policy Project for Balochistan (P156411)



       provided by BRA to, at least, 45% of the professional staff (including women) of three tax agencies.
       Actual: Staffing plan available in the form of a list of sanctioned and filled positions, but an approved
       training plan is not available. A capacity needs assessment was completed for three tax authorities
       and trainings were provided to around 35% of their professional staff. Approximately 99 professional
       staff from three tax authorities of Balochistan were trained, with 10% of participants being women. For
       the Balochistan Revenue Authority, 35 staff members were trained, (of which 17% were women). The
       target was partially achieved. Partially Achieved.
      IOI3: Implementation of Balochistan Revenue Mobilization Strategy (BRMS), and improved
       transparency of revenue performance. Baseline: BRMS and implementation plan being prepared.
       Revenue performance related report/s not available in FY20. Target: FD publishes an annual progress
       report on the implementation of the BRM plan, including provincial revenue performance (tax and
       nontax collections and federal transfers data). Actual: BRMS and implementation plan was developed.
       The annual progress reports on the implementation of the BRM plan was not published. GoB
       published provincial revenue performance in annual budget documents - which is published on the
       website but sometimes delayed (ICR p. 35). The project partially achieved the target. Partially
       Achieved.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve public financial management (PFM) for public service delivery.



Rationale
ToC. The project activities aimed to strengthen PFM for public service delivery. The causal links between
project activities (inputs), outputs and outcomes were logical. The outputs of activities such as sector profiling
and regulatory mapping of five sectors; preparing a debt database and publishing a debt bulletin; preparing a
fiscal framework (approved by the Provincial Cabinet); publishing Department procurement plans;
establishing a Provincial Revenue Management unit (PRMU), Debt, Risk and Investment Management Unit
(DRIMU), and Internal Audit Unit at the Finance Department FD; establishing an Ease of Doing Business Cell
in BBOIT which drafted an investment policy (draft was not approved by the Cabinet by project closing);
providing IT infrastructure, HR and capacity building support - including development of a learning
management system (LMS) for online procurement certification - and local and international trainings would
contribute to improved PFM operations in their respective departments and improve overall PFM efficiency
over time (ICR, p. 46).

The intended outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs (ICR, p. 45)

      PRMU, DRIMU, and internal audit unit established in FD. PFM Act approved.

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Gov & Policy Project for Balochistan (P156411)




        Debt database established, and debt bulletin published (bi-annual and annual report FY23).
        Fiscal framework prepared and approved.
        PIM: Sector profiling and regulatory mapping of five productive sectors completed.
        GoB’s first investment policy drafted.
        Ease of Doing Business cell established in BBOIT.
        Procurement plans of 30 departments published online.

Outcomes

The outputs listed above would contribute to the desired outcome of improving PFM for public service
delivery. Achievement of PDO 2 was to be assessed by the following indicator (ICR, Annex 1):

      All public investment assets in 7 out of 8 divisions of the province were to be geomapped and
         published online. Baseline: No division had public investment assets geo-mapped in FY20. Target:
         Public investment assets in four divisions geo-mapped and published online. Actual: 34,169 assets
         geo-tagged in 8 divisions (33 districts) of the province, but not published online. The project partially
         achieved the target. (This indicator also contributed to PDO3 on accountability). Partially Achieved.

There were also Intermediate Outcome Indicators (IOI) that informed the achievement of PDO2:

      IOI4: Strengthened institutional framework for investment promotion. Baseline: There is no
       investment profile and no investment policy for Balochistan in FY20. Target: Investment policy
       developed and approved by the Cabinet. Actual: A draft investment policy was available but was not
       approved by the Cabinet in FY23 by the time of project closing. Partially Achieved.
      IOI5: Operationalization of the established PFM reform units. Baseline: Various units are under
       establishment in the FD, but incomplete. Target: (a) Fiscal Management Unit established and has
       produced at least two quarterly debt bulletins. (b) First draft of the Medium-Term Fiscal Framework
       (MTFF) prepared for FY22. Actual: Specialized units to support revenue, fiscal and debt management
       were established and formalized under the PFM Act. Bi-annual and annual debt bulletins were
       published. The Fiscal Framework was approved in FY23. Achieved.
      IOI6: Improved budget formulation and management process. Baseline: Existing budget
       formulation process is characterized by informality. Target: Medium Term Fiscal Framework
       developed. Actual: The fiscal framework was approved by the provincial cabinet in FY23, however, the
       budget law was not approved. Partially Achieved. As per GOB, in the presence of a comprehensive
       PFM law, a separate budget law is not required, however, financial rules will be required. The final ISR
       noted that a draft budget manual was available. A committee was formed in December 2023 to review
       available drafts before presenting them to the Cabinet for approval.
      IOI7: Departments publishing procurement plans online. Baseline: 0 procurement plans online in
       FY20. Target: 5 procurement plans online. Actual: 30 procurement plans online in FY23. Achieved.



Rating
Modest




                                                                                                    Page 11 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Gov & Policy Project for Balochistan (P156411)




OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve accountability for public service delivery.


Rationale
ToC. The project activities aimed to strengthen accountability for public service delivery. The causal links
between project activities (inputs), outputs and outcomes were logical. The outputs of activities such as
supporting automation of the Public Sector Development Plan (PSDP) and public assets geo-mapping;
developing a PAC information system; arranging trainings, exposure visits, communications and awareness
activities; establishing a PPP Unit, Strategic Planning and Reforms Cell in P&D; and establishing a Center of
Excellence and Results Based Management (CERBM) in the University of Balochistan to function as a local
think tank and provide analytical support; and providing HR, infrastructure and technical support to PAC were
likely to help improve accountability for public service delivery (ICR, p. 46).

The outputs of activities such as supporting the Ombudsman office through HR, training, exposure visits (peer
learning), communication to increase citizens’ awareness about its functions and services, development of its
website, and dissemination of results through annual reports were likely to help improve accountability for
public service delivery (ICR, p. 32).

The intended outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs (ICR, p. 45)

      Assets of eight divisions and 33 districts are geo-tagged.
      The PIM framework and action plan developed; PIMIS and PSDP system automation developed.
      Integrity risk audits conducted in five of the highest spending departments; three pending audit reports
       reviewed by PAC.
      Deployed PAC information system and training conducted.
      78% of registered cases disposed of by the Ombudsman.
      Establishment of PPP unit and strategic planning and reforms cell.

Outcomes

The outputs listed above were expected to contribute to the desired outcome of improving accountability for
public service delivery. Achievement of PDO3 was to be assessed by the following indicator (ICR, Annex 1):

      Complaints resolved by the Office of the Balochistan Ombudsman the premier accountability
       institution in Balochistan. Baseline: 55% of registered cases resolved in FY19. Target: 70% of
       registered cases resolved. Actual: 78% of registered cases (1,124 cases disposed of, out of total
       1,450 cases registered) in FY23. The project exceeded the target. Achieved.
      All public investment assets in 7 out of 8 divisions of the province were to be geomapped and
       published online. Baseline: No division had public investment assets geo-mapped in FY20. Target:
       Public investment assets in four divisions geo-mapped and published online. Actual: 34,169 assets
       geo-tagged in 8 divisions (33 districts) of the province, but not published online. The project partially
       achieved the target. (This indicator also contributed to PDO2 on PFM). Partially Achieved.


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Gov & Policy Project for Balochistan (P156411)



                            There were also Intermediate Outcome Indicators (IOI) that informed the achievement of PDO3:

                                  IOI8: Strengthened institutional framework for accountability and integrity. Baseline: Legal rules
                                    for the Anti-Corruption Establishment of Balochistan Act developed in FY20. Target: Integrity risk
                                    audits conducted in five of the highest spending departments. Actual: Integrity risk audits were
                                    conducted for five high spending departments in FY23. The project achieved the target; however, the
                                    previous year target was not achieved. The Project’s target of resolving 75 percent of pending audit
                                    reports was not achieved. The indicator is therefore partially achieved. Partially Achieved.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall project efficacy under the revised objectives is rated as Substantial. The efficacy rating for PDO1 and
                            PDO3 is Substantial, the project fell short of achieving PDO2 - rated Modest. A Medium-Term Fiscal
                            Framework was approved but the budget law was not approved by the Provincial Cabinet. In the case of
                            PDO3, integrity risk audits were conducted for five high spending departments in FY23, and while the
                            previous year target with 75 percent of pending audits was not achieved, there is sufficient progress to rate
                            PDO3 Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency: The Economic Rate of Return (ERR) was calculated at appraisal, but not updated during
   implementation or following restructuring. At appraisal, the ERR was based on sales tax increase (doubling of
   sales tax to US$21 million, corresponding to an ERR of 21%). The ICR attempted to assess efficiency gains with
   respect to operational costs by linking project activities to medium and long-term gains on development (Annex
   4). For example, by increasing the province’s own-source tax revenues, the project expanded fiscal space for
   financing future public services and by improving PFM, the project will have an impact on future financial and
   efficiency gains. Better PFM is also likely to improve accountability and transparency.

   The ICR does not provide sufficient information to allow for an assessment of the cost-benefit analysis.
   Assessments of project benefits were largely qualitative. Most of the project’s interventions involved activities
   geared at increasing capacity building and accountability as well as the establishment of specialized units and
   support for the legal framework. However, project interventions did not result in the Cabinet’s approval of a PIM
   framework and action plan, budget law and budget manual for improved budget formulation and management,

                                                                                                                              Page 13 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Gov & Policy Project for Balochistan (P156411)



and Balochistan’ s investment policy. Project interventions did not result in publication of geo-mapped data of
public investment assets and availability of training plans for three tax authorities. These were some of the risks
to the effectiveness of project interventions.

Operational Efficiency: The duration of the project was from 2017 to 2023 and its overall financing remained
unchanged at US$16 million. It was restructured twice. By the closing date, 99.7% of the approved allocation
was utilized with 19.5% of funds used for operation management (OSU cost).

There was good value for money invested, given the political, economic, and social country context due to a
new government mandate, the instability derived from geopolitical tensions, and the interruption of activities due
to the pandemic. The project’s implementation yielded some positive outcomes, and the actual cost remained
the same as appraisal, despite the broader scope after restructuring.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The PDO was Highly Relevant to the Government strategy and the Bank strategy for Pakistan and the province
of Balochistan. Overall efficacy is rated as Substantial. In most cases, important laws or legislative frameworks
were prepared but were pending approval by the Provincial Cabinet. Overall efficiency is rated as Substantial
given that the project demonstrated operational efficiency despite shortcomings in achieving improved PFM and
accountability and despite its good value for money in a fragile country context. The overall outcome of the
project is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


                                                                                                      Page 14 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Gov & Policy Project for Balochistan (P156411)



The risk to the sustainability of the development outcome is assessed as Moderate. The project secured
strong progress, but it needed to be sustained, consolidated, and built upon. Development outcomes could
be constrained by the following factors (ICR, para 89).

Technical risk

      The continuation of the pending audits by Public Accounts Committee, delays in the regular
       publication of debt bulletin, regular capacity building of officials, implementation of the investment
       policy, etc., that carry substantial risks of being ignored after the project closure.

Financial risk

      The deterioration of the fiscal situation after the COVID-19 could undermine the continuation of some
       interventions or the implementation of the sustainability plan.



Social risk

      Risks associated with inadequate public support for sustaining accountability and transparency
       reforms due to limited media coverage, low investment and little institutionalization of citizen
       awareness and engagement mechanisms.

Political risk

      Risks associated with the loss of government commitment to the completion of the Balochistan
       Assembly's five-year term in August 2023 and the establishment of a caretaker government until
       elections in February 2024. This transition poses a risk of losing reform momentum and ownership of
       the project-related reforms. Budget reductions and personnel turnover could further weaken new
       initiatives.

Other risks not noted in the ICR are associated with the sustainability of the decentralization reforms and the
new sources of own tax and non-tax revenues at the provincial level. Both could imply a reduction in the
resources available at the provincial level for continuation of the reforms.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design was relevant to the government strategy and responded to the specific governance
  and service delivery needs of the Balochistan province. However, the Bank may have been
  overambitious with the original Project timeline, given the capacity constraints of the GoB.

  The design benefited from previous World Bank technical and analytical work, including the World Bank’s
  CPS for Pakistan (2015–2020); the MDTF- financed Governance Support Projects (GSP); the 2007


                                                                                                      Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gov & Policy Project for Balochistan (P156411)



  Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA); and the Bank’s experience in the use of ICT
  innovations for accountability and governance reforms in regions with fragility, conflict, and violence (ICR,
  para 84).

  Government ownership and coordination was strong due to incorporation of lessons from previous Bank
  operations together with the strong partnership with the GoB forged under the MDTF-financed GSP. The
  ICR does not mention the Assessment and the Post-Conflict Needs Assessment (PCNA) of 2010 which
  should have also informed the project design.

  Nonetheless, there were moderate shortcomings in the quality at entry. The original RF had indicators
  that were out of the project’s control such as the approval of the Fiscal Framework or the Investment Law
  in the national Cabinet.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The supervision of the project was moderately satisfactory. The Bank’s team was active and engaged
 throughout the project, but access to the client and the project was impacted by the country’s FCV
 condition and the COVID-19 pandemic which led the team to implement virtual communication and extend
 the project’s end date to allow for the completion of some activities. In addition, there were also multiple
 Task Team Leaders during the project’s lifetime which may have contributed to shortcomings in
 supervision and continuity of institutional advice. (ICR, p. 86). The quality of supervision and
 implementation support provided by the Bank was slow during the first half of the project but improved
 notably after restructuring. This was reflected in an acceleration of the pace of implementation and the
 achievement of most project targets.

 There is lack of information on the number of supervision missions and documentation of supervision
 missions according to Bank procedures, such as information on whether timely reporting of progress
 against project targets was done or timely coordination and suggestions for solutions to new challenges
 was implemented.

 There was some optimism in the September 2019 ISR in that the Project was rated Satisfactory and on
 track to disburse the remaining 66% within the remaining nine months of the Project. At that point, five
 results indicators showed achievement of results at 50% or less. The project was restructured shortly after
 in 2020, with several revisions as described in Section D (Restructuring No. 1) above, inclusive of a two-
 year extension to 2022, and a change in the implementation schedule. The pace of disbursements
 increased after the easing of the pandemic and the project’s restructuring in 2020 (ICR p. 24). Despite the
 challenges and delays, the project was able to disburse fully and the impact on the targets was minimal.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


                                                                                                    Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gov & Policy Project for Balochistan (P156411)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The original RF had a few shortcomings mentioned in quality-at-entry (ICR, p. 24) related to indicators
 either out of the project’s control or difficult to measure or unrealistic to achieve given the lack of capacity-
 building experience of the GoB. The PDO and the majority of its indicators were revised during the
 restructuring process.

 Post restructuring, the design of M&E was comprehensive, but discrepancies existed. A consistent
 component title was not used for some PDO and intermediate indicators – for example, 'strengthening
 capacity for provincial revenue mobilization and federal receipts management’ was used for relevant PDO
 indicators, and ‘increased effectiveness of collection of provincial tax and non-tax revenues’ was used for
 relevant intermediate indicators.

 The ToC is clear in articulating the causal links between project activities, intermediate outcomes/outputs,
 and outcomes. The activities financed under Technical Assistance (TA) were mostly aligned with Project
 results. However, the ICR based its evaluation on the project components instead of the three objectives
 from the PDO statement.



b. M&E Implementation
  Project M&E data helped to inform project decision-making, such as the first restructuring and the
  mitigation of delays related to the COVID-19 pandemic, which introduced remote working tools and
  extended the project’s closing date to complete the implementation of ongoing project activities.

  Daily management and coordination of the project, including monitoring results and generating
  Implementation Status Reports (ISRs) was adequately supported through an Operational Support Unit
  (OSU). There were also regular supervision missions, consultations, and meetings with other provincial
  governments. In addition, TA activities were aligned with Project’s objectives and reviewed and approved
  by the Bank. Their design and implementation were led by the relevant departments, and they were
  monitored through an annual work plan that was cleared by the Project’s Steering Committee and
  approved by the Bank (ICR, p. 76).



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data on performance and progress against the project’s targets were satisfactorily used to
  inform strategic project direction, resource reallocation, monitoring utilization of funds, project
  management, and decision-making.




                                                                                                        Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gov & Policy Project for Balochistan (P156411)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards: The project was classified under Category C (partial assessment
   project) at appraisal as it did not include any activities that involved environmental or social risks, primarily
   because no construction or major civil works were envisaged. Although at appraisal the Project Information
   Document Rated E&S risk as “Moderate,” during implementation E&S risk was adjusted to “Low.” The
   Project continuously built capacity of the Balochistan Ombudsman for citizen engagement
   and grievance redress. The e-complaint module/ mobile application of the Balochistan Ombudsman
   enabled citizens to launch complaints online. The Project also trained government functionaries on
   grievance redress techniques. Category C was maintained during implementation (ICR, para 79-80).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. Throughout implementation, the project effectively complied with the financing
   agreement covenants and Financial Management was consistently rated as Satisfactory. The project
   submitted the Annual Financial Statements satisfactory to the Bank. The External and Internal Audit
   reports prepared by the Director General Audit Balochistan and an external firm, respectively, showed
   satisfactory performance of the overall FM function (ICR, para 82).

   Procurement. Procurement was carried out in accordance with Bank’s procedures, but some weaknesses
   were identified. Hiring processes for staff and procurement procedures were not carried out as the Bank’s
   guidelines mandated. During 2021, it was determined that fiduciary staff had provided themselves
   generous increases in remuneration. During 2021, the Bank team undertook a detailed fiduciary review,
   and it was determined that fiduciary staff had provided themselves generous increases in remuneration,
   ICR p. 26). The review found that there was selective interpretation for deciding on contract management
   approaches for individual consultants (ICR p. 26). The Bank subsequently proposed a better control
   regime through a mandatory fiduciary review to be taken within 12 months of Project effectiveness to set
   the tone for compliance and avoid such issues in future projects (ICR p.26).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were no unintended impacts.



d. Other
    ---


                                                                                                      Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Gov & Policy Project for Balochistan (P156411)



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                   IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                  Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
                                                                                  No Difference, the ICR is
Bank Performance                  Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                  Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                  No Difference, the ICR is
Quality of M&E                    Modest                Substantial
                                                                                  Substantial
Quality of ICR                    ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following three main lessons from the experience of implementing this project
(ICR, p. 28-29).

Ownership is needed to sustain momentum in governance reforms and ensure successful
implementation of project activities. A significant factor contributing to the success of the
Governance and Policy Project for Balochistan was its strong alignment with the government’s
priority areas and reforms defined under the Balochistan Comprehensive Development Strategy
2013–2020 and its responsiveness to the governance challenges that appeared during project
implementation.

There is a need to enhance focus on gender issues. The Governance and Policy Project for
Balochistan had limited focus on gender issues. Before restructuring, the Project had a PDO level
indicator on women officers’ participation in trainings, and an intermediate indicator on women
feedback providers on school and irrigation facilities. After restructuring, the Project monitored
women’s participation in training, and supported trainings in gender responsive budgeting, gender
audit, and anti-harassment of women at workplace. But the Project did not monitor gender
disaggregated data for complaints resolved by the Balochistan Ombudsman, thereby missing an
opportunity for insight on women beneficiaries of government services.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR presented a clear and coherent narrative on the background of the project. However, the ICR did not
follow the ICR guideline that requires the discussion to be focused on the objectives of the project. Instead, the
discussion in the ICR, especially the Efficacy, Efficiency and Results Matrix in Annex 1 - central to the overall
Outcome rating - is focused on the components of the project. As a result, IEG reformulated the PDO into three

                                                                                                    Page 19 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Gov & Policy Project for Balochistan (P156411)



objectives or PDOs and selected some of the indicators listed in Annex 1 to evaluate the project’s performance
and outcome.

The ICR uses the 4-point scale: High, Substantial, Modest, or Negligible (Manual for IEG ICR Reviewers) for
rating the Relevance of objectives. However, for Efficacy, it switches to a 6-point scale for individual efficacy
ratings and averages across them to report an Overall Efficacy rating using the 4-point scale. The Overall
Efficacy rating is incorrectly averaged in the ICR even with 6-point scale.

The ICR also rates Bank Performance and M&E inconsistently. There is a difference in the Bank Performance
rating on page 2 of the ICR template (rating of S) and page 27 of the ICR (assigned rating of MS). A similar
difference is noted with respect to the M&E rating. IEG recommends that the Region correct these differences
in the Operations Portal.

The lessons learned were clear, comprehensive, and on target, but missed potential lessons in the political
economy context. They logically flow from the data and analysis provided in the ICR.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                      Page 20 of 20
