     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GY Secondary Education Improvement (P147924)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0023904

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P147924                                  GY Secondary Education Improvement

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Guyana                                   Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-54730,IDA-68250                      31-Mar-2020                                         21,345,509.82

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 04-Jun-2014                              30-Jun-2023

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           10,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                            23,500,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                        21,347,117.04                                             0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Shahrzad Mobasher          Salim J. Habayeb            Susan Ann Caceres              IEGHC (Unit 2)
 Fard




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to p. 4 of the Financing Agreement dated October 10, 2014, the Project Development Objective
   (PDO) was to: “(i) strengthen the capacity of secondary school mathematics teachers nationwide; and (ii)
   increase enrollment in General Secondary Schools in targeted regions.”

   During implementation, one associated outcome target was revised upward.



                                                                                                Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GY Secondary Education Improvement (P147924)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project comprised four components:

   Component 1: Strengthen the Capacity of Secondary School Mathematics Teachers Nationwide
   (approved amount: US$1.8 million; revised amount: US$3.6 million (including US$1.8 million from
   additional financing); actual amount at project closing: US$7.81 million)

   The component aimed to improve the content knowledge and instructional skills of secondary school
   mathematics teachers, through:

        1. In-service mathematics teacher training and upgrading: Carrying out the following activities: (i) a
           diagnostic assessment of mathematics teachers; (ii) training and workshops for master trainers to
           deliver in-service training to all public secondary school mathematics teachers; (iii) design,
           development and provision of modular, iterative, competency-based training for all secondary school
           mathematics teachers; (iv) distribution of mathematics teaching aids in all public secondary schools
           to promote the application of training in the classroom and improved student learning; and (v)
           development of comprehensive website for an on-line community of practice for mathematics
           teachers in the Recipient's territory.
        2. Revising public secondary school teachers’ appraisal instruments: Improve mathematics instruction
           through: (i) the development of specific standards for mathematics instruction; (ii) the revision of the
           appraisal system for secondary school teachers and school principals; and (iii) the provision of
           training for secondary school principals, deputy principals, and master trainers in the use of the
           revised teacher appraisal instruments.
        3. Technology-assisted learning in mathematics: Carrying out the following activities: (i) improvement
           of mathematics instruction and learning through use of innovative technology, on a pilot basis; and
           (ii) an independent evaluation process to assess the effectiveness of different packages of tablets
           and on-line mathematics learning management systems for improving student learning outcomes in
           mathematics.

   Component 2: Expansion of General Secondary School Facilities (approved amount: US$7.15
   million; revised amount: US$18.25 million (including US$11.1 million in additional financing); actual
   amount at project closing: US$12.01 million)

   The component aimed to expand access to General Secondary School (GSS) services in underserved
   areas of Regions 3 and 4 of the Recipient, through:

        1. New school construction: Construction of three new GSS (one in Region 3 and two in Region 4),
          pursuant to the specifications set forth in the Project Operations Manual.

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GY Secondary Education Improvement (P147924)



      2. Provision of furniture and equipment for the facilities referred to in Sub-component 2.1 above.

  Component 3: Strengthen Institutional Capacity and Project Management (approved amount:
  US$1.05 million; revised amount: US$1.65 million (including 0.6 million in additional financing);
  actual amount at project closing: US$1.52 million)

      1. Design, develop and implement a new education management information system (EMIS) to
         increase efficiency in education sector data management and information use for planning
         and policymaking.
      2. Carrying out project management, monitoring and evaluation activities, including project audits.

  Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response Component (approved amount: n.a.; revised
  amount: nil; actual amount at project closing: nil)



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The parent project was approved for an amount of US$10 million. The additional
  financing was approved for an amount of US$13.5 million as part of the fourth restructuring on January 25,
  2021. The actual amount disbursed by the project closing date was US$21.3 million. The difference
  between the approved amount and the actual amount disbursed is explained by fluctuations of the Special
  Drawing Rights (SDR) exchange rate against the U.S. dollar.

  Financing. The parent project was financed through an International Development Association (IDA) credit
  of US$10 million (IDA-54730). The additional financing was financed through another IDA credit of US$13.5
  million (IDA-68250).

  Dates. The project was approved on June 4, 2014, and became effective on November 24, 2014. A mid-
  term review was held on June 12, 2017. The project closed on June 30, 2023, more than three years
  beyond the original closing date of March 31, 2020.

  The project underwent five level 2 restructurings (including one additional financing) on May 11, 2018,
  February 13, 2020, September 25, 2020, January 25, 2021, and December 23, 2022:

        The first restructuring led to a change in the results framework, which included, notably, the
         reduction in the number of GSS being constructed and furnished under the project.
        The second and third restructurings led to a change in the loan closing dates, first from March 31,
         2020, to September 30, 2020, and subsequently from September 30, 2020, to March 30, 2021.
         Changes in the loan closing dates were required to (i) complete the construction of the two new GSS
         and allow for the delivery of furniture and equipment, (ii) complete the teacher training in
         mathematics and administration of the final exam, (iii) accommodate the preparation of the
         additional financing requested by the government on June 26, 2019 (second restructuring), and (iv)
         allow more time to achieve the PDO and accommodate the preparation of the additional financing.
        The fourth restructuring resulted in an additional financing, a change in results framework, change in
         funding in components and cost, and other changes. The additional financing incorporated the
         following changes: (i) increased the credit amount to cover the financial gap for the construction of
         the two GSS due to high inflation and the depreciation of the SDR; (ii) reintegrated the construction
         of the third GSS and expanded the EdTech pilot for adaptive learning on tablets and introduced a

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GY Secondary Education Improvement (P147924)



          new EdTech pilot using an innovation approach to teaching and learning through smart classrooms;
          (iii) added a Contingent Emergency Response Component; (iv) revised the results framework,
          adding new indicators to reflect corporate priorities; and (v) extended the project closing date from
          March 30, 2021, to June 30, 2023, to allow completion of project activities .
         The fifth restructuring led to a change in the results framework and to changes in funding in
          components and costs.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The PDO addressed Guyana's priority constraints in the education sector, including, notably, a
greater demand for secondary level education (comprised of grades 7 to 11) than the country's public
sector provision through its 110 General Secondary Schools (GSS). This resulted in the creation of 175
Secondary Departments (SD) at primary schools offering grade 7-9 level education as a temporary solution.
Eighty-nine percent of secondary school students were enrolled in GSS, with the remaining 11 percent
enrolled in SD. The GSS were large (600-1,000 students, on average), urban-based, staffed with trained
teachers, and able to offer the full secondary school curriculum. In contrast, SD had fewer than 100
students enrolled at a SD at primary school, on average, and they could not deliver the full curriculum as
they lacked qualified teachers and did not have laboratories or specialty rooms. There was a high school
dropout rate in SD after the completion of grade 9 due to lack of continuity for enrolled students. Additional
GSS needed to be established, particularly in regions 3 and 4, which encompassed 30 percent of the
country’s secondary school population and accounted for 40 percent of the country’s population living in
poverty. Further, there was a lack of capacity for teaching mathematics.

The PDO was aligned with the government's development priorities and the World Bank Group’s
strategy. One of the key priorities of the government’s Education Strategic Plan (ESP) 2008-13 consisted
in the attainment of universal secondary education, which was also subsequently reflected in the
government’s ESP 2014-18. The Guyana Country Engagement Note FY16-18 included a strategic pillar on
improving education quality and social safety nets, and an underlying objective to improve the quality of
education through the reform of teacher education and better service delivery. The Country Partnership
Framework for Guyana for the period FY23-26 included a High-Level Outcome on improved human capital
and an underlying objective of increased access to quality secondary education and TVET. The additional
financing addressed the needs under the government’s COVID-19 Strategic Preparedness and Response
Plan, with the promotion of children’s learning through online and in-classroom modalities through the
provision of teacher training and technology, as well as additional facilities for the full return of students to
school, identified as a key priority.

The project complemented other World Bank engagements in the education sector in Guyana.
Complementary engagements included: (i) the Guyana Education Sector Improvement Project (P159519,
FY17), which supported the revision of the curriculum across all grade levels, including the Grade 7
mathematics curriculum, which was relevant to this project; (ii) the Guyana Education Sector Program
Project (P174244, FY21), which provided tablets and smart classrooms at the primary level and improved
the transition for students from primary to the secondary level; and (iii) Education Public Expenditure
Review which was intended to inform the Bank’s future engagements in the education sector.


                                                                                                       Page 4 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      GY Secondary Education Improvement (P147924)




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Strengthen the capacity of secondary school mathematics teachers nationwide.

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change held that problems with the low quality of secondary level mathematics education due
                             to the low capacity of teachers and the lack of quality of learning materials would be addressed through
                             continuous professional development of mathematics teachers and their assessment, and the provision of
                             teaching and learning materials. Further, weak sector planning capacity which affect the quality of education
                             would be addressed through the development of an open EMIS.

                             Outputs and intermediate outcomes.

                             Continuous professional development.

                                        By June 30, 2023, 681 teachers completed at least one training course designed under the project,
                                         surpassing the target of 600 teachers. According to p. 18 of the PAD, courses would range between 4-
                                         12 days per year (up to 36 days over a three-year period) and teachers would be assessed at the end
                                         of each course. P. 15 of the ICR stated that the teachers found that the training had impressed upon
                                         them the importance of upgrading their knowledge of content and methodological approaches, leading
                                         several mathematics teachers to upgrade their qualifications at the Teaching College. The in-service
                                         teacher training supported by the project distinguished itself from the previous in-service training by: (i)
                                         developing a teacher training module that complemented teachers’ pre-service and existing in-service
                                         training, offering new pedagogical tools for teaching mathematics; (ii) improved the assessment of
                                         teachers, including through the development of standards in mathematics teaching; (iii) financed
                                         mathematics teaching aids to support teaching; and (iv) created a community of practice for all
                                         mathematics teachers in the country.
                                        By June 30, 2023, 681 secondary mathematics teachers were observed in the classroom by master
                                         trainers and received expert feedback at least once during the project's lifetime, surpassing the target
                                         of 600 teachers. As planned (PAD, p. 18), this was based on the systematic use of a standardized
                                         classroom observation instrument, with accompanying feedback report, with the activity being
                                         conducted at a central hub.
                                        417 secondary mathematics teachers were registered in the Guyanese mathematics teacher
                                         website/community of practice by September 12, 2023, falling short of the target of 600 (70 percent
                                         achievement). The website enabled mathematics teachers to access online instructional resources,
                                         share lesson plans, and exchange experiences.

                                                                                                                                       Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GY Secondary Education Improvement (P147924)




      The appraisal of secondary school teachers and principals was revised by March 1, 2023, as
       targeted. As planned (PAD, p. 19), this included the hiring of a consultant to provide technical
       assistance to the Ministry of Education (MOE) to revise the appraisal of teachers and principals, with
       the new design being shared with the Bank for comments.
      Standards of practice for mathematics teachers were developed by March 1, 2023, as targeted (100
       percent achievement). This included the hiring of a consultant to provide technical assistance to MOE
       to revise the appraisal of teachers and principals, with the new design being shared with the Bank for
       comments.
      137 secondary school mathematics teachers were trained in using the EdTech (tablets) in pilot
       schools by June 30, 2023, surpassing the original and revised targets of 24 teachers and 50 teachers,
       respectively. As planned (PAD, p. 20), hands-on training in ICT and on how to use the different
       resources/devices was provided under the pilot. The target for this indicator was revised upwards with
       the additional financing resulting in an increase in the number of tablets and the introduction of smart
       classrooms, both of which necessitated a revision in the target for teachers trained.

Provision of learning kits.

      250 secondary schools received mathematics teaching and learning kits by March 1, 2023, as
       targeted (100 percent achievement). According to p. 19 of the PAD, every school would receive a
       learning kit covering the mathematics curriculum for grades 7-11.
      There were 146,237 science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) textbooks procured by June
       30, 2023, surpassing the target of 100,000 textbooks.

Institutional capacity

      A secondary EMIS was designed, developed, piloted, revised and rolled out by September 12, 2023,
       as targeted. P. 37 of the ICR states that the national pilot for the EMIS for primary and secondary
       schools was rolled out during May-September 2023, and that the EMIS was scaled up to at least 100
       secondary schools. The EMIS which existed prior to the introduction of an open EMIS was paper-
       based and provided limited information to MOE for evidence-based policymaking. The open EMIS
       allowed the collection of secondary school data through tablets, facilitating the collection and reporting
       of data, and allowing MOE to use it more systematically for evidence-based policymaking. Further, p.
       18 of the ICR states that the creation of an open EMIS supported the creation of a national EMIS
       policy, master implementation plan, and a structured EMIS eco-system, harmonizing data collection
       efforts of all arms and branches of MOE including those of school administrations.

Outcomes.

 86.5 percent of secondary school mathematics teachers passed the examinations of the targeted training
courses designed under the project by September 9, 2022, surpassing the target of 60 percent. Secondary
school mathematics teachers were assessed at the end of each training course through examinations,
classroom observations, portfolios, microteaching, etc. Teachers obtaining 60 percent or more in the
summative evaluation for each course were considered passed.



Rating

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               GY Secondary Education Improvement (P147924)



                            Substantial


                            OBJECTIVE 2
                            Objective
                            Increase enrollment in general secondary schools in targeted regions.

                            Rationale
                            The theory of change held that the problem pertaining to the limited and inequitable access to quality
                            secondary education would be addressed through the construction of GSS, providing more places for
                            students, along with improved learning environment. Further, weak sector planning capacity which affect
                            education access would be addressed through the development of an open EMIS.

                            Outputs and intermediate outcomes.

                            Physical infrastructure. Two GSS were constructed and furnished by June 30, 2023, falling short of the
                            original target of three, but meeting the revised target of two schools. P. 11 of the ICR indicates that the
                            downward revision in the target was needed due to (i) construction cost inflation, (ii) the depreciation of the
                            Bank’s SDR exchange rate against the U.S. dollar, (iii) MOE capacity constraints pertaining to the design and
                            the construction of the GSS.

                            Some 1,800 student places were created in GSS in Regions 3 and 4 by June 30, 2023, falling short of the
                            target of 2,600 (69 percent achievement). This achievement captures the impact of the two new GSS which
                            were constructed and furnished under the project.

                            Institutional capacity. A secondary EMIS was designed, developed, piloted, revised and rolled out by
                            September 12, 2023, as targeted. P. 37 of the ICR states that the national pilot for the EMIS for primary and
                            secondary schools was rolled out during May-September 2023, and that the EMIS was scaled up to at least
                            100 secondary schools. P. 18 of the ICR states that the creation of an open EMIS supported the creation of a
                            national EMIS policy, master implementation plan, and a structured EMIS eco-system, harmonizing data
                            collection efforts of all arms and branches of MOE including those of school administrations.

                            Outcomes.

                            The enrolment rate of secondary students in GSS in Regions 3 and 4 increased from a baseline of 87 percent
                            on March 31, 2014, to 94 percent by June 30, 2023, surpassing the original target of 92 percent and meeting
                            the revised target 94 percent.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                                                                                                                              Page 7 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GY Secondary Education Improvement (P147924)



  Overall efficacy is rated Substantial, with efficacy on Objective 1 (Strengthen the capacity of secondary
  school mathematics teachers nationwide) rated Substantial and efficacy on Objective 2 (Increase enrollment
  in General Secondary Schools in targeted regions) rated Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency. The economic analysis performed at appraisal estimated the net present value (NPV) of
the project at US$6.7 million using a discount rate of 5 percent and the internal rate of return (IRR) at 9 percent.
The economic analysis performed at project closing considered a different set of assumptions than the ones
relied upon at appraisal with (i) the total capital cost of the project and the additional financing to be equivalent to
US$22.0 million, (ii) the project implementation period to be nine rather than five years, (iii) the revised number
of high school and university graduates attributable to the project, and (iv) revised project maintenance costs.
The results of the economic analysis performed at project closing revealed a NPV of US$6.59 million and an
IRR of 2.58 percent, which is below the social discount rate of 5 percent.

Implementation efficiency. There were considerable cost overruns in construction and significant delays
related to the teacher professional development initiatives under Component 1, as well as procedures for
reviewing and revising the new GSS design and in procurement under Component 2. These delays limited the
amount of project financing within the context of the depreciating exchange rate of the SDR against the U.S. and
inflationary pressures on the economy, ultimately leading to an additional financing being approved. The
COVID-19 pandemic and its associated shutdowns constrained project implementation, resulting in reduced
ambitiousness in the civil works which were planned for the construction of a third GSS.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         0
 Appraisal                                                    9.00
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         0
 ICR Estimate                                                 2.58
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


                                                                                                          Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GY Secondary Education Improvement (P147924)



6. Outcome

Outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory, with the relevance of the PDO rated High, efficacy rated Substantial
and efficiency rated Modest.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR states that the risks to sustaining development outcomes are considered low, with each project
components supporting institutional strengthening. Component 1 activities supported the development of
instruments, approaches, cohorts of teacher trainers, regulatory bodies, and policy, and the provision of
teaching and learning materials that continue to be used today. Component 2 activities supported the
construction of two GSSs providing access to 1,800 school students and the design of a third GSS, with the
ICR stating that design consideration pertaining to facilities, amenities, accessibility and environmental
resilience now serving as a model for future construction initiated by the MOE. Component 3 activities
supported the creation of an EMIUS policy, master implementation plan, and a structured EMIS eco-system
harmonizing data collection efforts across the MOE and school administrations.

The key risks to sustaining development outcomes consist of teacher assessments not being adequately
used to improve teacher performance, which may undermine the sustainability of development outcomes.
Further, the gender strategy adopted at the additional financing stage may not adequately address the much
lower secondary school enrollment rate of male students compared to their female counterparts, which may
undermine the sustainability of Objective 2 (Increase enrollment in general secondary schools in targeted
regions).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The PDO was of strategic relevance to the country and sectoral contexts, being aligned with the
  government's ESP and the Bank-supported strategy. The design approach was also appropriate as it
  was based on good practices of in-service teacher training and incorporated pilots to test new ideas
  (such as the ICT-assisted learning). Implementation and M&E arrangements were adequate.

  The MOE was identified as the implementing agency for the project, with the ministry encompassing
  significant experience implementing externally financed projects by the World Bank, the Inter-American
  Development and Education for All Fast Track Initiative. The Chief Education Officer of the MOE was
  charged with the technical responsibilities for implementation. The Planning Unit of the Ministry of
  Education was charged with the fiduciary responsibilities of the project, with the Unit already handling all
  financial management and procurement related matters pertaining to the Improving Teacher Education


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GY Secondary Education Improvement (P147924)



  Project and the University of Guyana Science and Technology Support Project (P125288) which was still
  being delivered at the time of appraisal.

  A Project Coordinator was hired and stationed at the MOE’s Planning Unit. The core responsibilities of
  the Project Coordinator consisted of: (i) managing, monitoring, and coordinating project implementation,
  including work planning, procurement, accounting, disbursement, and financial management; (ii)
  reporting on project implementation progress to the MOE’s Chief Planning Officer; (iii) supervising agreed
  work plans with the technical leads for each subcomponent; and (iv) coordinating implementation across
  MOE departments. The Project Coordinator was also charged with preparing/consolidating information
  for Quarterly and Annual Progress Reports. The existing fiduciary staff in the MOE Planning Unit
  managing other Bank-financed projects were also charged with similar responsibilities linked to this
  project. One project engineer was also hired to enhance the technical capacity of the MOE to supervise
  the design, implementation and supervision of civil works activities.

  There were moderate shortcomings in the quality-at-entry. The ICR (p. 23) reported that there was
  inadequate preparation of some activities, such as for the construction of GSS and training design which
  subsequently resulted in delays, and also resulted in other implementation challenges, particularly with
  the EdTech pilot. The ICR reported issues with PIU staffing readiness. Concerning risks, the ICR
  reported that, while the overall risk assessment was generally adequate, the risk analysis in the PAD
  understated the risks associated with procurement processes and procedures involved in civil works and
  the construction of GSSs under the project (ICR, p. 22).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank provided adequate supervision of the project, with supervision missions being held every six
 months, which identified and resolved problems and which were well documented through Implementation
 Supervision Reports and aide-memoires. The posting of a Resident Representative in Guyana since 2022
 also supported Bank supervision.

 The depreciation of the SDR against the U.S. dollar and COVID-19 pandemic-related shutdowns resulted
 in a financing gap which needed to be financed through additional financing, as well as implementation
 delays. A number of implementation challenges faced by the project and subsequent delays could have
 been prevented by proactive supervision and had the project closed as originally planned in March 2020,
 COVID-19 related issues would have been avoided.

 There were minor shortcomings in quality of supervision. The Bank Team did not illustrate a theory of
 change in the additional financing. While a new gender indicator was incorporated at the additional
 financing stage to monitor progress in gender inequity in secondary school enrollment, the gender strategy
 could have been better documented and expanded upon. The Bank later clarified that competing priorities
 related to the COVID-19 pandemic and construction delays limited the development of gender strategies at
 the regional level to increase boys’ school enrollment. And while some school directors developed gender
 strategies which they applied to their respective schools, this experience could have been better
 documented by the Project Implementation Unit and the Bank such that lessons learned may be applied to

                                                                                                 Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GY Secondary Education Improvement (P147924)



 other schools. The Bank further added that re-enrollment efforts following the COVID-19 pandemic were
 not gender-specific and that in hindsight, the Bank may have supported a gender enrollment strategy, as
 well as the need of making context specific efforts to increase enrollment. This lesson was reflected in the
 Human Capital Project (P177741), which specifically addresses demand-side constraints to male student
 participation.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objectives were clearly stated. The indicators in the results framework adequately measured progress
 toward the achievement of the PDO, with results indicators being well defined, having clear baselines and
 targets, being guided by a sound measurement methodology, data source, and frequency, and with the
 entity charged with the collection responsibility being identified at appraisal. The theory of change was not
 presented in the PAD as this was not a requirement at the time of appraisal. P. 7 of the ICR, however,
 constructed the theory of change implicit in the project (ICR, p. 7).

 The results framework was appropriately revised to reflect changes induced by the additional financing at
 the fourth restructuring. Data gaps related to Bank corporate concerns related to climate change, gender,
 citizen engagement and the corporate results indicator on the number of students benefiting from direct
 interventions to enhance learning (including gender-disaggregated data) were incorporated at the fourth
 restructuring, resulting in five new indicators being added to the results framework.



b. M&E Implementation
  The MOE’s Planning Unit was charged with the M&E implementation. Quarterly and annual progress
  reports were shared with the Bank which, in addition to monitoring progress on results framework
  indicators, also reported on Grade 9 and Caribbean Secondary Examinations Certificate Mathematics
  exam results and dropout rates. Progress toward the achievement of project outcomes was also
  assessed during implementation supervisions missions which included the Bank supervision team and
  the MOE’s Planning Unit, with the results being reported in the 17 Implementation Status and Results
  Reports and interim aide-memoires. The roll-out of the open EMIS at the end of the project supported the
  Planning Unit’s M&E capacity.



c. M&E Utilization


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GY Secondary Education Improvement (P147924)



  The project’s results measured through the M&E framework supported project management and
  evidence-based policymaking. The pilot EMIS deployed in some schools allowed corrective measures to
  be undertaken with, for example, the additional financing leading to the procurement of STEM textbooks
  such that students could continue to learn independently from home in the aftermath of the COVID-19
  pandemic given that a significant portion of students lacked access to IT equipment and connectivity at
  home. P. 25 of the ICR states that the first phase of the national rollout of the open EMIS was underway
  at project closing.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category B for Environmental Assessment. The project triggered
   environmental safeguard OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) due to the construction of GSS under
   Component 2 activities. The environmental assessment revealed that environmental impacts would be
   relatively minor and localized, and that they could be mitigated using standard methods. The additional
   financing resulted in additional safeguards indicators being added to meet Gender and Citizen Engagement
   requirements.

   Problems pertaining to social safeguards were observed, with one of the two GSS contractors (i.e., the
   Good Hope contractor) failing to develop an action plan to improve safety on school construction sites,
   resulting in workers incurring foot injuries and a fractured arm at the Good Hope site. Further, neither one of
   the sites complied with COVID-19 health and safety requirements, such as providing protective equipment.
   The government ultimately terminated the contract with the contractor at the Good Hope site due to its
   failure to maintain a security review and delays in the construction process. All of the ISRs rated overall
   safeguards in the satisfactory range, except for the February 16, 2021, ISR which rated it Moderately
   Unsatisfactory. The overall ISR rating for safeguards as recorded in the Operations Portal was Moderately
   Satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Annual audit reports, which were released on time, did not reveal any significant irregularities. Reporting
   standards and protocols were considered adequate, and interim unqualified financial reports were
   submitted to the Bank promptly and followed the prescribed procedures.

   There were delays in procurement processes in the early stages of implementation despite the fact that p.
   26 of the ICR noted that the PIU procurement staff were competent and followed the Bank's procurement
   procedures. The Periodic Procurement Risk Assessments conducted by the Bank did not flag any non-
   compliance issues necessitating the Bank's intervention. ISRs rated performance on financial management
   and procurement in the satisfactory range during the project implementation period.


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GY Secondary Education Improvement (P147924)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None noted.



d. Other
   None noted.



11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
                              Moderately
Outcome                                             Moderately Satisfactory
                              Satisfactory
                                                                              Moderate shortcomings on
                                                                              quality-at-entry and
                                                                              implementation pertaining to the
                                                                              lack of preparation of some
                                                                              project activities, the inadequate
                                                                              assessment of some risks, and
                                                                              the lack of a gender and context-
Bank Performance              Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   specific strategy to increase
                                                                              boys’ school enrollment. A
                                                                              number of the implementation
                                                                              challenges faced by the project
                                                                              and subsequent delays could
                                                                              have been prevented by
                                                                              proactive supervision by the
                                                                              Bank.
Quality of M&E                Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 28-30) offered several lessons and recommendations, including the following lessons
restated by this ICR Review:

    1. Project implementation that is guided by a clearly defined theory of change and measurable
       PDO level indicators and intermediate results indicators can support progress toward the
       achievement of objectives.



                                                                                                  Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GY Secondary Education Improvement (P147924)



     2. Project implementation can be supported by the various stakeholders agreeing on project
        requirements prior to project effectiveness. In this project, delays in approving revisions to
        training modules and revisions to school designs led to delays in the initial stages of
        implementation; and
     3. Close collaboration between the Bank and client countries on addressing challenges
        pertaining to civil works can allow implementation challenges to be resolved expeditiously
        such that the implementation calendar is respected. In this project, construction delays led to
        significant cost overruns, which limited the amount of financing available.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The quality of analysis was good, with activities linked to outputs and outcomes through a credible theory of
change, supporting the ICR’s results orientation quality. Lessons were based on evidence and analysis,
appropriately responding to the specific experiences and findings of the project. The ICR did not report whether
the project complied with the Bank's safeguards and fiduciary policies.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 14
