     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SRB CCA & Strategic Plan Implementation (P131323)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0024096

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P131323                                      SRB CCA & Strategic Plan Implementation

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Western and Central Africa                   Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)             Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53210,IDA-53220,IDA-53230,IDA-           30-Jun-2021                                      195,559,306.36
 53660

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 05-Dec-2013                                  29-Jun-2023

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                   Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            212,500,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                             212,500,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                         181,968,895.72                                             0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator       Group
 Chikako Miwa                 Vibecke Dixon                 Ramachandra Jammi            IEGSD (Unit 4)




 P131353_TBL
 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P131353                                      SRB CCA & Strategic Plan Implementation ( P131353 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)             Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                  14151600.32

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SRB CCA & Strategic Plan Implementation (P131323)



 05-Dec-2013

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                     0.00                                  16,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                      0.00                                  16,000,000.00

 Actual                                                  0.00                                  14,151,600.32




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Senegal River Basin Multipurpose Water Resources
   Development Project 2 (MWRD/PGIRE 2) was "to improve coordinated management of water resources
   for socially, environmentally and economically sustainable development in the Senegal River Basin"
   (Financing Agreement between Islamic Republic of Mauritania and International Development Association
   (IDA) dated February 26, 2014, Schedule 1, page 6). The PDO statement was the same in the ones in the
   PAD (para 43) and the IDA’s Financing Agreements with: Republic of Mali dated February 27, 2014
   (Schedule 1, page 6), Republic of Guinea dated March 3, 2014 (Schedule 1, page 6), and Republic of
   Senegal dated March 28, 2014 (Schedule 1, page 6), listed in chronological order.

   The overall Program Development Objective was “to enhance regional integration among the riparian
   countries of the Senegal River Basin through OMVS for multi-purpose water resources development
   to foster improved community livelihoods” (PAD, para 42). OMVS is an acronym for the Organization for
   the Development of the Senegal River (Organisation pour la Mise en Valeur du fleuve Sénégal).

   The Global Environmental Objective (GEO) was “to strengthen trans-boundary water resources
   management in the Senegal River Basin including climate change adaptation and implementation of
   priority actions of the Strategic Action Plan” (PAD, para 44).

   In 2019, both the PDO and the GEO were revised. The revised PDO statement was “to improve
   coordinated management of water resources in the Senegal River Basin” (First Amendment to Financing
   Agreement between Islamic Republic of Mali and IDA dated October 28, 2019, page 1). The same revision
   was made to the PDO statements in the IDA’s First Amendment to Financing Agreements with Republic of
   Mauritania dated November 26, 2019 (page 1), Republic of Senegal dated December 13, 2019 (page 1), and
   Republic of Guinea dated December 20, 2019 (page 1), listed in chronological order. The PDO was revised to
   improve the alignment of the PDO and the indicators of the project-funded activities that the project could be
   accountable for (Restructuring Paper 2019, page 7). The revised GEO statement was “to strengthen OMVS
   capacity to integrate climate change into the coordinated management of water resources in the
   Senegal Basin” (Restructuring Paper 2019, page 7). The Restructuring Paper 2019 (page 13) clarified the
   definition of “coordinated management” in the PDO and the GEO. The definition was the concerted
   development of water uses in the basin between OMVS member states, which was ensured through two main



                                                                                                  Page 2 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SRB CCA & Strategic Plan Implementation (P131323)



   mechanisms: (i) the Senegal River Basin Master Plan, approved by the Council of Ministers of the four
   member states in 2011, and which defined all activities financed by the project; and (ii) the Regional

   Project Steering Committee (Comité Regional du Pilotage du PGIRE), comprised of representatives from the
   four member states, which approved the project annual implementation plan and budget.

   The overall Program Development Objective was not revised throughout the project implementation. This ICR
   Review assesses the PDO (Objective 1 and Objective 1 Revision 1) and the Program Development Objective
   (Objective 2 and Objective 2 Revision 1) before and after the restructuring in 2019:

   Objective 1. To improve coordinated management of water resources for socially, environmentally and
   economically sustainable development in the Senegal River Basin.

   Objective 1 Revision 1. To improve coordinated management of water resources in the Senegal River Basin.

   Objective 2. To enhance regional integration among the riparian countries of the Senegal River Basin through
   the Organization for the Development of the Senegal River for multi-purpose water resources development to
   foster improved community livelihoods.

   Objective 2 Revision 1. Same as Objective 2.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  18-Sep-2019

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The estimates of the following project component costs are based on the PAD (paras 57-71). The appraisal
   estimates for the components exclude contingencies. The actuals are based on the ICR (table 1, page 9).

   Component 1: Institutional Development (Estimate: US$19.11 million, Actual: US$18.38 million)

   This component aimed at building capacity for OMVS and Member States to implement cooperative
   management and support institutional strengthening and project implementation. The component financed
   the following sub-components: (i) Updating the Inclusive Framework and strengthening the role of Guinea
   within OMVS (Sub-component 1.1, GEF-funded); (ii) Modernizing and reinforcing the institutional capacities
   of OMVS and related agencies (Sub-component 1.2); (iii) Strengthening the capacity of OMVS and
   agencies in the riparian states to lead climate adaptation efforts in the region (Sub-component 1.3, GEF-
   funded); and (iv) Supporting strategic management of the project such as providing funding to the Project

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SRB CCA & Strategic Plan Implementation (P131323)



  Coordination Unit (PCU) to manage the project and conduct Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) and
  safeguards activities (Sub-component 1.4).

  Component 2: Multi-Purpose Water Resources Development (Estimate: US$174.23 million, Actual:
  US$145.85 million)

  This component aimed to promote income-generating activities and to improve livelihoods for the basin
  population by providing funding to national agencies of each Member State to invest in irrigation, water
  resources protection, sustainable fisheries management, and aquaculture (Sub-components 2.1 and 2.2).
  This component also included health activities to address water-related diseases and improve people's well-
  being (Sub-component 2.3) and pilot approaches to improve climate resilience (Sub-component 2.4, LDCF
  funded).

  Component 3: Infrastructure Management and Planning (Estimate: US$29.62 million, Actual: US$24.99
  million)

  This component funded sub-components to support OMVS to improve climate resilient water resources
  planning and development in the river basin, including: (i) Dam management and hydropower development
  (Sub-component 3.1); (ii) Planning for climate resilience (Sub-component 3.2); and (iii) Development of
  navigation along the Senegal River Basin (Sub-component 3.3). The component also covered expenses for
  capacity building activities and program management support (ICR, para 12). During the 2019 restructuring,
  the project dropped activities related to the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment of the
  Koukoutamba hydropower dam that were originally included in Sub-component 3.1 at appraisal (ICR, paras
  14 and 69). The activities were dropped because the dam’s potential flooding areas overlapped with an
  offset sanctuary area for chimpanzee protection invested by the International Finance Corporation (IFC)
  (ICR, para 69).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: At appraisal, the project was estimated to be US$240.50 million (PAD, table 3, page 32). At
  project closing, the actual cost was US$204.45 million (Project/ICR team’s response to IEG’s inquiries
  received on May 10, 2024, hereafter, “Team’s Response”). Data Sheet in page 3 and para 5). An
  undisbursed balance was US$16.9 million (ICR, para 48). The difference between the US dollar amount at
  appraisal and the sum of the disbursed and undisbursed balance at closing was due to exchange rates
  variations between Special Drawing Rights and US dollar (Team’s Response).

  Financing: At appraisal, the project was planned to be financed through credits totaling US$212.50 million
  from the International Development Association (IDA), a grant of US$4 million from the Global
  Environmental Fund (GEF), and a grant of US$12 million from the Least Developed Countries Fund (LDCF)
  (PAD Data Sheet). At project closing, the project was financed by IDA credits of US$181.97 million, a GEF
  grant of US$11.70 million, and a LDCF grant of 3.27 million (ICR, Data Sheet in page 3 and para 5).

  Borrower Contribution: At appraisal, the borrowers’ contribution was estimated to be US$12 million (PAD
  Data Sheet). At project closing, the borrowers’ contribution was a cumulative US$13.40 million (ICR, para
  5).




                                                                                                Page 4 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SRB CCA & Strategic Plan Implementation (P131323)



   Dates: The project was approved on December 5, 2013, and became effective on June 24, 2014. The Mid-
   Term Review (MTR) was reported on January 22, 2018. The project closed on June 29, 2023, which was 24
   months after the original closing date of June 30, 2021.

   Restructurings: The project was restructured four times.

         First restructuring (September 18, 2019): The restructuring included: (i) revising the PDO by
          removing “for socially, environmentally and economically sustainable development” from the
          original PDO statement; (ii) refining the results framework including switching some indicators from
          PDO level to intermediate results level and vice versa, sharpening the definition of indicators to
          directly link the indicators to project activities and corporate indicators (e.g., land areas under
          sustainable land management practices) and lowering the targets to make them achievable; (iii)
          adjusting disbursement profile based on implementation delays; (iv) cancelling activities to conduct
          complementary studies for access roads and transmission lines for the Koukoutamba dam to
          develop it as a new hydropower; and (v) expanding the scope of the performance contract between
          OMVS and the implementing agencies (i.e., the Rural Development Agency for the Senegal River
          Valley (ADRS) in Mali, the Delta Management Holding Company (SAED) in Senegal, and the
          National Company for Rural Development (SONADER) in Mauritania) to enable them to carry out
          the pilot activities to improve climate resilience (ICR, paras 14 and 22).
         Second and third restructurings (July 29, 2020, and December 21, 2022, respectively): These
          restructurings extended the project closing date for a total of 24 months (i.e., an 18-months
          extension in 2020, and additional 6-months extension in 2022) to allow all the riparian countries to
          complete critical activities on fisheries and irrigation systems and operationalize new irrigation
          systems (ICR, para 23).
         Fourth restructuring (May 26, 2023): The restructuring reallocated funds between disbursement
          categories in all Credit and Grant Agreements to increase funding for the infrastructure components
          and to decrease funding for other disbursement categories with slow disbursement rates (ICR, para
          24).

   Split rating: IEG concurs with the ICR (para 28) that a split rating is deemed necessary due to the
   substantial reduction of the project scope during the first restructuring.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Region and Sector Context: The Senegal River Basin covers a surface area of about 300,000 square
kilometers (km2). The Senegal River originates in the mountainous and forested high plateau of northern
Guinea, which represents 31,000 km2 (11 percent) of the river basin area, and then flows to western Mali,
which has the largest share of the river basin (155,000 km2, 53 percent), southern Mauritania (75,500 km2,
26 percent), and northern Senegal (27,500 km2, 10 percent) (ICR, para 1). The four riparian countries of
the Senegal River Basin ranked among the poorest countries in the world with approximately half of their
population living below the poverty line and a Gross National Income per capita as low as US$430 (Guinea)
(PAD, para 2). Approximately 34 percent (12 million) of the estimated total riparian population (35 million)
were living in the basin, mostly relying on subsistence or smallholder farming for their living (PAD, para 2).


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SRB CCA & Strategic Plan Implementation (P131323)



The four riparian countries had been facing energy shortages, food insecurity, and limited river transport
and navigation, while the basin's hydropower and irrigation potential were significantly underexploited.
However, in the past, the construction of large dams for irrigation and hydropower contributed to negative
impacts on the basin population, including water-related diseases (e.g., malaria and Neglected Tropical
Diseases), reduced productivity of the fishing sector, and environmental degradation (PAD, paras 9-10). To
address development challenges in the Senegal River Basin, the Organization for the Development of the
Senegal River (OMVS: Organisation pour la Mise en Valeur du fleuve Sénégal) was established by Mali,
Mauritania, and Senegal in 1972 and joined by Guinea in 2006 with the mandate of securing countries'
economies and reducing the vulnerability of peoples' livelihoods through coordinated water resources and
energy development (PAD, para 24). The World Bank’s studies on OMVS highlighted inequalities in how
the benefits and costs of development were shared both internationally and within the basin population
(e.g., urban populations received benefits while traditional recessional farmers received negative impacts)
(PAD, para 31).

Relevance to Government Strategies: At project closing, the objectives aligned with the four borrower
countries’ strategies and sector programs. First, the objectives aligned with Guinea’s “Vision 2040 for a
Prosperous and Emerging Guinea” which was approved in 2017 and informed the “National Economic and
Social Development Plan 2016-2020.” The National Plan of Social and Economic Development 2021-2025
is under development at the time of the ICR Review. Second, the objectives aligned with Mali’s “Strategic
Framework for Economic Recovery and Sustainable Development (Cadre Stratégique pour la Relance
Economique et le Développement Durable) 2019-2023,” which incorporated elements from the “Sustainable
Recovery Plan (Plan de Relance Durable) 2013-2014.” Third, in Mauritania, the project’s objectives aligned
with the Strategy for Accelerated Growth and Shared Prosperity (SCAPP) for 2016-2030, which was
published in 2017 and approved by the Council of Ministers in January 2018 and by Parliament in April
2018. Fourth, the objectives aligned with Senegal’s “Plan for an Emerging Senegal (Plan Sénégal
Emergent) 2014-2023,” which was adopted and implemented by the Government.

Relevance to the World Bank Assistance Strategies: At project closing, the project’s objectives aligned
with the latest Country Partnership Frameworks (CPFs) of the four borrower countries. First, the objectives
aligned well with Guinea’s CPF FY18-FY23, especially to Objective 6 (Increased agricultural productivity
and access to markets) and Objective 7 (Better access to energy and water services through improved
management of utilities) as the World Bank had notable comparative advantages in these sectors (Guinea
CPF, pages 45 and 47). Second, the objectives aligned with Mali’s CPF FY16-FY19, especially to Objective
2.3 (Improve infrastructure and connectivity for all Malians). Third, the objectives aligned with Mauritania’s
latest CPF FY18-FY23, especially to Objective 1.2 (Increase agriculture and livestock production in the face
of climate change). Fourth, the objectives moderately aligned with Senegal’s CPF FY20-FY24, especially to
Objective 3.1 (Promote and protect resilient livelihoods, ecosystems, and infrastructures in the face of
climate change), although the project was not mentioned in the narrative for the objective nor listed in the
Results Framework. While the CPF stated continued support to OMVS, the World Bank’s new project with
OMVS under the CPF FY20-FY24 focused on improving interconnection and fostering a regional energy
market to stabilize the network and reduce energy costs (Senegal CPF, page 76 and para 72), which was
less relevant to the project’s aim to enhance sustainable land and water management.

The World Bank’s Previous Experience in the Sector: The World Bank has been supporting
coordination in water resource management in the Senegal River Basin for two decades, mostly through
supporting OMVS. The World Bank supported OMVS to execute the Senegal River Basin Water and
Environmental Management Project in partnership with UNDP and International Union for Conservation of
Nature (IUCN) between 2004 and 2008. The project was funded by the Global Environmental Facility (GEF)

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 24
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      SRB CCA & Strategic Plan Implementation (P131323)



               to develop the Trans-boundary Diagnostic Analysis (TDA) and Strategic Action Plan (SAP), which
               contributed to laying the foundation for more integrated land, water, and environmental management in the
               basin. Concurrently, the World Bank implemented the Senegal River Basin Multi-Purpose Water Resources
               Development 1 (P093826) between 2006 and 2013 as the first phase of two-phased Adaptable Program
               Loan (APL) with an overarching Program Development Objective “to enhance regional integration among
               the riparian countries of the Senegal River Basin through OMVS for multi-purpose water resources
               development to foster improved community livelihoods” (PAD, para 42). The first phase’s PDO at closing
               was “to improve management and use of water resources in the Senegal River Basin” (ICRR of P093826,
               page 2). This project, the Senegal River Basin Multipurpose Water Resources Development Project 2
               (P131323), was the second and last phase of a series of two operations that aimed for the same
               overarching objective, although this project used the Investment Project Financing (IPF) instrument due to
               the discontinuation of the APL instrument.

               In sum, the project’s objectives at project closing largely aligned with the strategies of the Governments and
               the World Bank assistance, except for a moderate alignment to Senegal’s CPF FY20-FY24. On the other
               hand, the relevance of the objectives was pitched at a level that does not adequately reflect a potential
               solution to the negative impacts on the basin population identified in the PAD (paras 9-10). While
               acknowledging the difficulty of the operational environment, shortcomings here were: (i) a reduced focus on
               development impact through the revision of the PDO statement at the first restructuring; and (ii) a lack of
               clarity around a results chain connecting how “improved coordination in water resources management”
               (PDO) would contribute to “improved community livelihoods” (the overall Program Development Objective).
               Improvements in community livelihoods may be longer term targets for the overarching program; however,
               tracking them and identifying them is an important aspect of a successful development operation, especially
               when an operation is the last phase of a series of operations. Overall, the relevance of objectives is rated
               substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve coordinated management of water resources for socially, environmentally and economically
                             sustainable development in the Senegal River Basin

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC): A formal presentation of a ToC for the project was not required at appraisal. The
                             ICR (page 9) presented a reconstructed ToC of the project based on the revised PDO at project closing. The
                             ToC aggregated project activities and outputs by components, resulting in unclear results chains leading



                                                                                                                           Page 7 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SRB CCA & Strategic Plan Implementation (P131323)



towards outcomes and articulating how the ratings have been reached. Based on the PAD and the ICR, this
ICRR postulates the ToC of Objective 1 as follows.

Objective 1 contained two elements: (i) improving coordinated management of water resources; which was
envisaged to contribute to the higher-level objective of (ii) enhancing socially, environmentally and
economically sustainable development.

Regarding the first element of improving coordinated management of water resources, the ToC postulated
that activities such as updating the framework for partition of costs and benefits for water resource
management for the Inclusive Framework and developing and updating analytical tools for water resources
management would result in outputs such as the Inclusive Framework (covering Guinea and containing an
updated partition framework for costs and benefits) finalized and the analytical tools available for use to
improve quality of analysis for water resource management. These outputs are postulated to result in the
outcomes such as the role of Guinea in OMVS strengthened, the framework for the partition of costs and
benefits operationalized, and the analysis and the decision-making process for water allocation improved,
contributing to an intermediate outcome of the improved coordinated management of water resources, which
was envisaged to contribute to the second and higher objective of the PDO as follows. Regarding the second
element of enhancing socially, environmentally, and economically sustainable development, the ToC
postulated that: (i) project activities such as distributing long-lasting insecticide-treated malaria nets (LLINs)
and providing awareness raising activities and mass treatments for the locally occurring Neglected Tropical
Diseases (NTDs) would result in outputs such as numbers of vulnerable population (e.g., children and
women) with the LLINs increased and a number of school-aged children treated against the NTDs increased;
(ii) project activities such as providing training programs on climate change adaptation and resilience and
implementing pilot activities to demonstrate climate change adaptation practices would result in an output that
beneficiaries’ awareness on climate change adaptation and resilience enhanced; (iii) project activities such as
strengthening water user associations, rehabilitating hydraulic axes, conducting reforestation on riverbanks,
and enhancing agroforestry on slopes would result in outputs such as irrigation schemes expanded and
slopes stabilized; (iv) project activities such as building facilities for farming, landing, transport, processing,
and conservation of fish would result in outputs such as qualities of fish products increased and values of
sales of fish increased; and (v) project activities such as developing a financing system for maintenance of
Diama dam would result in outputs such as the financing system operationalized. The above outputs are
postulated to result in the outcomes such as the irrigation and drainage services expanded and the behavioral
changes to use the LLINs enhanced, contributing to the PDO outcome of socially, environmentally, and
economically sustainable development. Those PDO outcomes are postulated to contribute to the long-term
outcomes of the regional integration of the riparian countries of the Senegal River Basin enhanced and the
community livelihoods improved.

Critical assumptions included: (i) the political situation is stable in the riparian countries; (ii) stakeholders
recognize the benefits of the project; (iii) the countries and communities are willing to maintain and scale up
the achievements of the project; (iv) the project duration is sufficient to observe outcomes on socially,
environmentally, and economically sustainable development; (v) potential conflicts in uses of water for
multiple purposes are adequately addressed; and (vi) the project activities are sufficient to contribute to a
reduction of water-related diseases in the target area.

The ToC was mostly sound, but ambitious to cover a wide range of outcomes at various levels including the
regional level (e.g., transboundary water resource management), the country level (e.g., irrigation services,
agricultural intensification, sustainable fishing management, maintenance of dams), and the community level
(e.g., community livelihoods, water-related diseases). The results chains of the second element had gaps

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SRB CCA & Strategic Plan Implementation (P131323)



among the outcomes of the second element (e.g., the irrigation and drainage services expanded and the
behavioral changes to use the LLINs enhanced) and the PDO outcome of socially, environmentally, and
economically sustainable development. The gaps were not adequately addressed by identifying and
implementing measures to fulfill critical assumptions.

(i) Improved coordinated management of water resources

Output (ICR, paras 28-41 and pages 32-38):

      New framework for partition of costs and benefits were tested and validated at a technical level,
       meeting the original target.
      Mapping, modeling, and other analytical tools for water resources management were developed or
       updated, meeting the original target. These analytical tools included: Transboundary Diagnostic
       Analysis, water resources management models for the Diama and Manantali dams, the rainfall runoff
       model for the catchment upstream of Manantali, and climate risk models (PAD, pages 55-56). One of
       the analytical tools developed was the Water Evaluation and Planning (WEAP) in Guinea (ICR, page
       39).

Outcomes (ICR, paras 28-41 and pages 32-38):

      The new framework for partition of costs and benefits in the river basin was finalized, validated at
       country level, and presented to the CoM, meeting the original target. Though this indicator was
       designed to measure an outcome-level result, this indicator measured an intermediate outcome at
       best due to its lack of reference to implementation of the new framework. Indeed, as of March 15,
       2024, the CoM has not approved the new framework due to a lack of consensus among the Member
       States affected by a political factor (ICR, para 31). As a result, the Member States continue to use the
       old framework for partition of costs and benefits approved by the Council of Ministers (CoM) in 1981,
       while the new framework is used as references to inform breakdown of costs and benefits (Team’s
       Response). The pending of the approval of the new framework poses a question regarding to what
       extent development challenges described in the PAD (page 54). Such development challenges
       included the issue of gaining political acceptance on revising the partition of costs and benefits and
       the inequality in sharing costs and benefits described in section 3.
      Improved tools are used in decision-making on water allocation during the meetings of the Permanent
       Water Commission, meeting the original target. The indicator aimed to measure the “use” of these
       tools, which implied informed decisions on approval of projects and on operational procedures for the
       dams (PAD, page 55).

In addition to the outcomes defined in the Results Framework, the project task team reported on the following
achieved outcome which did not have any formal target.

      The new River Basin Masterplan 2050 (SDAGE 2050: Schéma Directeur d’Aménagement et de
       Gestion des Eaux) was prepared and adopted in 2023 by all Member States and OMVS (ICR, para 31
       and Team’s Response). The SDAGE 2050 included the Climate Investment Plan outlining concrete
       actions for climate adaptation and mitigation to set a new reference for coordinated water resources
       management in the basin (ICR, para 31). The project funded the process of updating SDAGE 2010 to




                                                                                                   Page 9 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SRB CCA & Strategic Plan Implementation (P131323)



        SDAGE 2050 in parallel to the framework for partition of costs and benefits by building in the same
        analytical studies (Team’s Response).

(ii) Socially, environmentally, and economically sustainable development

Outputs (ICR, paras 28-41 and pages 32-38):

     310 participants completed the climate change adaptation/resilience training program that was
        delivered to staff in OMVS National Cellules and National Agencies and to beneficiaries of the pilot
        programs, not meeting the original target of 2,000 (Team’s Response).
       20 operational water user associations were created and/or strengthened (ISR sequence 11, cited in
        Team’s Response), not meeting the original target of 50 due to cancellation of monitoring of the
        indicator after the first restructuring. On the other hand, the alternative indicator introduced at the first
        restructuring, “Operational entities in charge of the management of an irrigation system (with a statute
        and rules and that meet regularly)” was more challenging to achieve (Team’s Response).
       45.50 kilometers (km) of hydraulic axes (i.e., canals supplying irrigation areas) were rehabilitated, not
        meeting the target of 65.5 km (Team’s Response)
       3,256 hectares (ha) of land were stabilized through agroforestry development and reforestation,
        almost meeting the target of 3,527 ha. This indicator was defined to measure the area of land
        planted with vegetation to help reduce soil erosion and improve slope stability (PAD, page 55).
       The value of sales of fresh and processed fish in project sites increased by 21 percent, exceeding the
        target of 20 percent. The information on increase in sales was based on surveys which took place in
        2022, coordinated by States’ focal points on fisheries. Data was collected in 12 fish markets and
        landing sites built by the project (3 per country), but the number of survey respondents was not
        reported (Team's Response). According to the ICR (para 34), the increase in sales of fresh and
        processed fish contributed to improving beneficiaries’ livelihood, both in terms of income and protein
        intake in project areas. Although no specific nutritional study was carried out in the project area, it was
        postulated that more fish sold on the local markets and the absence of a structured cold chain would
        result in that more people in local communities had access to and ate fish, thereby increasing their
        protein intake (Team’s Response). Nevertheless, t what extent the fish value increase contributed to
        improve livelihoods of target communities in all Member States in an equitable manner was unclear
        due to two reasons. First, the survey methodology to measure the results of the indicator was not
        solid. Second, the project did not complete construction of fish markets such as those in Ourossogui in
        Senegal and Rosso in Mauritania (ICR, para 94).
       97 percent and 86 percent of school-aged children were treated against schistosomiases and
        geohelminth, respectively. Only schistosomiasis and soil-transmitted helminths occur in all regions
        across the entire river basin (PAD, page 56). The proportion of target beneficiaries having received
        mass treatment for locally occurring Neglected Tropical Diseases (NTDs), increasing from the
        baseline of 75 percent, and exceeding the target of 80 percent.
       No financing system for the long-term maintenance of Diama dam was put into place, not meeting
        the target (Team’s Response). The maintenance of Diama dam was funded by this project, while the
        broader question of creating a revenue stream for OMVS is being studied (Team’s Response).
       4.5 million of long-lasting insecticide-treated malaria nets (LLINs) were distributed, meeting the
        original target of 4.5 million. Although this indicator was designed as a PDO indicator, it measures
        an output.
             o 86.6 percent of children from 6 months to 59 months slept under LLINs the night before the
                 survey, increasing from the baseline of 74 percent and exceeding the original target of 80

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SRB CCA & Strategic Plan Implementation (P131323)



              percent. The data sources of this and the following indicators were the malaria indicator
              surveys (PAD, page 51).
            o 92 percent of women from 15 years old to 49 years old slept under LLINs the night before the
              survey, increasing from the baseline of 65.2 percent and exceeding the original target of 80
              percent.

Outcomes (ICR, paras 28-41 and pages 32-38):

      Direct Project Beneficiaries were 4.5 million people, meeting the original target of 4.5 million.
            o 51 percent of the direct project beneficiaries were women, meeting the original target of 51
                percent.
             o 9,000 direct project beneficiaries were benefiting from the pilot activities to build climate
                resilience, exceeding the original target of 5,000. Pilot activities for climate change
                adaptation demonstrated the benefits of, inter alia, climate-resilient agricultural practices,
                efficient wood burning stoves, small-scale biogas digesters to transform agricultural by-
                products and farm waste into biogas and fertilizer, and methods to transform the invasive
                Typha reed into biochar and construction materials (ICR, para 33). The hydrometeorological
                monitoring pilot project, implemented in Senegal, was accredited by the African Water Forum,
                and attracted benchmarking missions by other countries (ICR, para 33).
      14,042 ha of area was provided with irrigation and drainage services, exceeding the original target
       of 13,680 ha. On the other hand, the relative contribution of each country against indicative country
       targets varied. Senegal and Mauritania largely exceeded their planned contributions towards
       achieving the target of this indicator, which offset the modest delivery in Mali (1,549 ha, 52 percent
       of its planned contribution) and the negligible delivery in Guinea (105 ha, 5 percent of its planned
       contribution) (ICR, para 39). These low deliveries of irrigation and drainage services in Mali and
       Guinea hindered the irrigation investments to generate the expected outcomes (ICR, para 39). The
       underperformances of service delivery in Mali and Guinea were caused by the project’s
       implementation delays in: (i) construction of irrigation infrastructure, (ii) beneficiary identification in
       some irrigation perimeters, and (iii) provision of training and support to beneficiaries, due to fiduciary
       issues, the coups in Mali and Guinea, and the COVID-19 pandemic (ICR, paras 48, 93, and 94).

Referring to the ToC, the outcome of the first element (coordinated management of water resources
improved) was substantially achieved. While limited evidence was provided regarding actual changes in
implementing the framework for partition of costs and benefits and making decisions for water allocation, the
Member States and OMVS approved SDAGE 2050 to enhance climate adaptation and mitigation in the basin.
On the other hand, the higher-level outcome described in the second element (socially, environmentally, and
economically sustainable development) was modestly achieved, due to lack of evidence of achievement of
these higher-level objectives. While the provision of irrigation and drainage services were substantially
expanded in Senegal and Mauritania, the service deliveries in Mali and Guinea were limited. Moreover,
limited evidence was provided regarding: (i) changes in occurrences of water-related diseases in the target
area; and (ii) changes in crop yields and livelihoods of target communities. Overall, the achievement of
Objective 1 is rated a strong modest.



Rating
Modest


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SRB CCA & Strategic Plan Implementation (P131323)




OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve coordinated management of water resources in the Senegal River Basin

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC): A formal presentation of a ToC for the project was not required at appraisal. The
ICR (page 9) presented a reconstructed ToC of the project based on the revised PDO at project closing.
Based on the PAD and the ICR, this ICRR postulates the ToC of Objective 1 Revision 1 as follows.

Activities such as updating the framework for partition of costs and benefits for water resource management
for the Inclusive Framework and developing and updating analytical tools for water resources management
would result in outputs such as the Inclusive Framework (covering Guinea and containing an updated
partition framework for costs and benefits) finalized and the analytical tools available for use to improve
quality of analysis for water resource management. These outputs are to result in the outcomes such as the
role of Guinea in OMVS strengthened, the framework for the partition of costs and benefits operationalized,
and the analysis and the decision-making process for water allocation improved. The ToC also postulated
that: (i) project activities such as distributing long-lasting insecticide-treated malaria nets (LLINs) and
providing awareness raising activities and mass treatments for the locally occurring Neglected Tropical
Diseases (NTDs) would result in outputs such as LLINs distributed to vulnerable population (e.g., children
and women) and school-aged children treated against the NTDs; (ii) project activities such as implementing
pilot activities to demonstrate climate change adaptation practices would result in an output of enhanced
beneficiaries’ awareness on climate change adaptation and resilience; (iii) project activities such as
strengthening water user associations, conducting reforestation on riverbanks, and enhancing agroforestry on
slopes would result in outputs such as irrigation schemes expanded and slopes stabilized; and (iv) project
activities such as building facilities for farming, landing, transport, processing, and conservation of fish would
result in outputs such as qualities of fish products increased and values of sales of fish increased. The above
outputs are postulated to result in the outcomes such as the irrigation and drainage services expanded and
the behavioral changes to use the LLINs enhanced. The above outcomes are postulated to contribute to the
PDO outcome of improved coordinated management of water resources. The PDO outcome is postulated to
contribute to the long-term outcomes of the regional integration of the riparian countries of the Senegal River
Basin enhanced and the community livelihoods improved.

Critical assumptions included: (i) the political situation is stable in the riparian countries; (ii) stakeholders
recognize the benefits of the project; (iii) the countries and communities are willing to maintain and scale up
the achievements of the project; and (iv) the outcomes related to social, environmental, and economical
improvements among beneficiaries in the target area prevent potential conflicts on multiple uses of water
resources and strengthen the coordinated management of water resources.

The ToC was sound. A shortcoming was a lack of clarity around a results chain connecting how “improved
coordination in water resources management” (PDO) would contribute to “improved community livelihoods”
(Program Development Objective), as described in section 3.

The following paragraphs summarize achievements of outputs and outcomes in line with the revised objective
and indicators. The achievements of the unrevised indicators are the same as those described under
Objective 1.



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SRB CCA & Strategic Plan Implementation (P131323)



Outputs (ICR, paras 28-41 and pages 32-38):

100 percent of the participants of the climate change adaptation/resilience training program that was
delivered to staff in OMVS National Cellules and National Agencies improved knowledge of climate change,
exceeding the revised target of 75 percent. This indicator was revised at the first restructuring in the
following aspects. First, the unit of measurement and the target was changed from

      the number of training programs delivered (original target: 2,000) to the percentage of the training
       participants with improved knowledge of climate change (revised target: 75 percent of the participants
       scored at least 75 percent at the test). Second, the training programs excluded the beneficiaries of
       the pilot programs for climate resilience from target participants.
      55 operational entities were in charge of the management of an irrigation system (with a statute and
       rules and that meet regularly), exceeding the revised target of 25.
      The rehabilitation of the Diama dam was completed, meeting the target set at the first
       restructuring. This indicator was added during implementation to measure the progress of the
       maintenance work of the dam.

Outcomes (ICR, paras 28-41 and pages 32-38):

      The value of sales of fresh and processed fish in project sites increased by 21 percent, exceeding the
       original target of 20 percent, the target itself was not revised. However, this indicator was
       designed as an Intermediate Results indicator at appraisal but reclassified as a PDO indicator at the
       first restructuring. To what extent the fish value increase contributed to improve livelihoods of target
       communities in all Member States was unclear due to two reasons. First, no information was provided
       regarding whether the increase in the fish value was adjusted for inflations and increases in price
       levels of the Member States. Second, the project did not finish construction of fish markets in
       Ourossogui in Senegal and Rosso in Mauritania (ICR, para 94).
      The OMVS Regional Steering Committee (Comité du Pilotage) composed of representative from all
       the Member States became operational, meeting the target added at the first restructuring. This
       indicator was added to clarify the definition of “coordinated management” in the PDO and GEO.

Referring to the ToC, the project substantially achieved the outcome regarding improving coordinated
management of water resources. While limited evidence was provided regarding actual changes in
implementing the framework for partition of costs and benefits and making decisions for water allocation, the
Member States and OMVS approved SDAGE 2050 to enhance climate adaptation and mitigation in the basin.
The project contributed to developing SDAGE 2050 through funding the process and providing analytical tools
for water resource management and improving knowledge of climate change among the staff in OMVS
National Cellules and National Agencies. Thus, the achievement of Objective 1 Revision 1 is rated
substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2

                                                                                                 Page 13 of 24
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               SRB CCA & Strategic Plan Implementation (P131323)




                            Objective
                            To enhance regional integration among the riparian countries of the Senegal River Basin through the
                            Organization for the Development of the Senegal River (OMVS) for multi-purpose water resources
                            development to foster improved community livelihoods [The overarching GEO objective of the Senegal River
                            Basin Multi-Purpose Water Resources Development Program]

                            Rationale
                            The likelihood that the overarching objective would be achieved in the future is medium. There has been
                            progress towards enhancing the regional integration among the riparian countries of the Senegal River Basin
                            for multi-purpose water resources development. The coordinated management of water resources through
                            OMVS was improved by developing the new River Basin Masterplan 2050 (SDAGE 2050: Schéma Directeur
                            d’Aménagement et de Gestion des Eaux) and the associated Climate Investment Plan and implementing the
                            plans by OMVS Regional Steering Committee composed of representative from all the Member States. On
                            the other hand, there has been limited evidence regarding improvements in community livelihoods. While the
                            provision of irrigation and drainage services substantially expanded in Senegal and Mauritania, the service
                            deliveries in Mali and Guinea were limited. In addition, the provision of training and support for beneficiaries to
                            use irrigation to increase yields had suboptimal results.

                            The overarching development objective is not rated, based on the harmonized guideline between OPCS and
                            IEG.



                            Rating
                            Not Rated/Not Applicable


                            OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective
                            Same as Objective 2

                            Revised Rationale
                            Same as Objective 2



                            Revised Rating
                            Not Rated/Not Applicable


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Objective 1 was modestly achieved due to insufficient evidence on outcomes. Objective 2 was not rated.
                            Thus, the overall efficacy of the Overall Efficacy is rated modest.



                                                                                                                                Page 14 of 24
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             SRB CCA & Strategic Plan Implementation (P131323)




         Overall Efficacy Rating                                 Primary Reason
         Modest                                                  Insufficient evidence
 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Objective 1 Revision 1 was substantially achieved. Objective 2 Revision 1 was not rated. Thus, the Overall
         Efficacy Revision 1 is rated substantial.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Analysis. At appraisal, the Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA) conducted in
partnership with an investments team in the Food and Agriculture Organization showed an Economic Internal
Rate of Return (EIRR) of 37.7 percent, a Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) of 44.9 percent, and a Net
Present Value (NPV) of US$343.6 million over a period of 30 years at a discount rate of 12 percent (PAD, pages
165-168). The EFA at appraisal showed inflated rates and values because the EFA used very optimistic
assumptions (i.e., 167 percent valorization of the irrigated areas) and the EFA model included some incorrect
formulas (ICR, para 43).

At project closing, the EFA showed an EIRR of 34.7 percent, and FIRR of 26.8 percent, and a NPV of US$275.3
million over a period of 30 years at a discount rate of 12 percent (ICR, paras 45-46). The EFA at project closing
performed a sensitivity analysis by using reduced project lifespan to 25, 20, and 15 years, with a significant cost
item of 10 percent for maintenance, which demonstrated the robustness of the results (ICR, para 45).

While the EIRR at project closing was at the same level as the EIRR at appraisal with a slight decrease, the
disaggregated economic analysis (ICR, table 4, page 19) showed different trends in changes of the EIRRs
among the Member States. In Senegal, the EIRR slightly increased from 38.4 percent at appraisal to 39.9
percent at project closing (ICR, table 4, page 19). On the other hand, in Guinea, Mali, and Mauritania, the EIRRs
decreased from appraisal to project closing, especially in Guinea where the EIRR notably decreased from 29.5
percent at appraisal to 16.0 percent at project closing (ICR, table 4, page 19).

Aspects of Design and Implementation that Affected Efficiency. The project duration was extended for a
total of 24 months to account for delays induced by the COVID-19 pandemic and to give an extra dry season to
advance irrigation activities (ICR, para 50). Poor selection and contract management of contractors and
supervising engineers by executing agencies and insufficient supervision by national cellules and OMVS led to
implementation delays, especially in achieving the hydro-agricultural works (ICR, para 48). Consequently, the
Project closed with a few remaining contracts and unfinished work and an undisbursed balance of US$16.9
million (ICR, para 48). In Guinea, the award of four out of five irrigation development contracts to a single



                                                                                                        Page 15 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SRB CCA & Strategic Plan Implementation (P131323)



company proven incapable of delivering the expected results, and the overpayment of said company is an
example of administrative inefficiency under the project (ICR, para 50).

In sum, the project’s overall EIRR at project closing was approximately at the same range as the overall EIRR at
appraisal. Some overambitious assumptions of the EFA at appraisal were revised at the EFA at project closing.
While the EIRR in Senegal increased from appraisal to project closing, the EIRRs in Guinea, Mali, and
Mauritania decreased during the same period. Some instances of administrative inefficiencies
negatively affected completion of construction of infrastructure such as irrigation facilities in Guinea. Thus,
overall, the efficiency is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     100.00
 Appraisal                                                37.70
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     100.00
 ICR Estimate                                             34.70
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Table 1. Overall Outcome Ratings.

                                                Objective before                  Objective
                   Rating Dimension
                                                 Restructuring               after Restructuring
              Relevance of Objectives                              Substantial
              Efficacy
                Objective 1                         Modest                         N/A
                Objective 1 Revision 1                N/A                       Substantial
                Objective 2                        Not Rated                       N/A
                Objective 2 Revision 1                N/A                       Not Rated
              Overall Efficacy                      Modest                      Substantial
              Efficiency                                       Substantial
              Outcome Rating               Moderately Unsatisfactory            Satisfactory
              Outcome Rating Value                    3                              5
              Amount Disbursed (US$
                                                    111.55                         85.39
              million)

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SRB CCA & Strategic Plan Implementation (P131323)



              Disbursement (%)                        57%                          43%
              Weight Value                            1.70                         2.17
                                                                       4
              Total weights
                                                    (1.70 + 2.17 = 3.87, rounding up to 4)
              Overall Outcome Rating                       Moderately Satisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional support risk. There is a potential risk that monitoring of the project’s development outcome at
OMVS level might be discontinued after the dismissal of the Project Implementation Unit at project closing
(ICR, para 91). To mitigate the risk, the World Bank prepared the Development, Resilience & Valuation of
Water Resources for West Africa (DREVE) regional operation.

Government ownership risk. There is a potential risk that the framework for partition of costs and benefits
updated by the project might not be used (ICR, para 92). The lack of buy-in from a Minister in one Member
State delayed the framework to be adopted and implemented (ICR, para 31). To mitigate the risk, the project
developed other tools to inform priority-setting and decision-making at basin level, such as various analytical
tools for water resource management and the new Masterplan for the Senegal River Basin (SDAGE 2050)
and its Climate Investment Plan (PIC) (ICR, para 92).

Financial risk. There is a potential risk that the project’s unfinished work including construction of
infrastructure (i.e., irrigation facilities in Mali and Guinea, and fish markets in Ourossogui in Senegal and
Rosso in Mauritania) and beneficiary identification might not be financed by the Member States after project
closure (ICR, para 94). To mitigate the risk, the Government of Mali formally requested that the project’s
unfinished irrigation work of 958 hectares be transferred to the Mali Dryland Development project (Projet de
Développement de la Productivité et de Diversification Agricole dans les Zones arides et semi arides du
Mali). The ICR stated no mitigation measures for other unfinished work and indicated that Member States
might consider including the studies and completion of unfinished activities to new World Bank operations
under preparation in case no financing was mobilized by the Member States.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The strategic relevance and approach were adequate, as described in section 3. The project was
  designed based on lessons from the first and preceding phase of the Senegal River Basin Multipurpose
  Water Resources Development Program with an aim to achieve a phased approach over 17 years to
  ensure continuity, scaling-up, and consolidation of outcomes (ICR, para 83). The project design
  reproduced what worked in the first phase (e.g., the technical focus of the project, its legal structure,
  implementation and monitoring arrangements, and project components) and integrated improvements

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SRB CCA & Strategic Plan Implementation (P131323)



  (e.g., putting a stronger focus on building capacity at all levels and for all components for greater and
  lasting outcomes, scaling up activities such as fisheries and irrigation to expand outcomes related to
  communities’ livelihood, and entrusting the Organization for the Development of the Senegal River
  (OMVS) to implement GEF-funded pilots on climate resilience and to bring local activities into regionally
  integrated and coordinated approaches) (ICR, para 83). The poverty, gender, and environmental aspects
  were considered adequately. The identification of key risks and mitigation measures in the PAD (pages
  39-40 and 121-126) was largely adequate.

  On the other hand, the project design was insufficiently coordinated with the other operations and
  investments supported by the World Bank Group to maximize development outcomes. For instance, the
  potential flooding area of the Koukoutamba hydropower dam in Guinea overlapped with an offset
  sanctuary area to protect chimpanzees supported by an investment by the International Finance
  Corporation (ICR, para 69). It resulted in the World Bank to withdraw from the development of the
  Koukoutamba hydropower dam and lower the project’s support to green energy generation in the river
  basin (ICR, para 69). Moreover, the fiduciary aspects were not adequately designed, as described in
  section 10.b.

  Overall, the quality at entry is rated satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank’s supervision processes were adequate in general. The Bank team conducted regular
 supervision missions, adapting to COVID-19 by using virtual tools and when travel restrictions eased,
 undertook comprehensive missions to provide detailed guidance for improvements (ICR, para 85). They
 utilized virtual meetings, Google Earth, photos, and videos to monitor the Project during the pandemic and
 fragile and conflict-affected situations (FCS) that limited travel (ICR, para 85). The World Bank team
 adapted the project implementation arrangements adequately during supervision. Initially, the Bank team's
 communication about the project was mainly with the regional integration unit, leading to information
 asymmetry with Member States' Country Management Units (CMUs) and hindering the Bank's
 effectiveness. Subsequently, the task team improved communication with all CMUs, which was key to
 resolving implementation issues, particularly for irrigation investments in Mali (ICR, para 86).

 On the other hand, the World Bank’s supervision of fiduciary aspects was not adequate, as described in
 detail in section 10.b. Furthermore, the focus on development impact was reduced by the revision of the
 PDO statement at the first restructuring, as described in section 3.

 Overall, the quality of supervision is rated moderately satisfactory.

 The quality at entry is rated satisfactory, while the quality of supervision is rated moderately satisfactory.
 The overall Bank performance is rated moderately satisfactory, based on the harmonized guideline of
 OPCS and IEG.



                                                                                                      Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SRB CCA & Strategic Plan Implementation (P131323)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objectives were mostly clear, except for the definition of “coordinated management” in the PDO and
 the GEO. The decentralized data collection methods and proposed monitoring techniques (e.g., sentinel
 surveillance sites, Lot Quality Assurance Sampling (LQAS) surveys, and population-based surveys) were
 appropriate. The Theory of Change of the project at appraisal was largely sound and reflected to the results
 framework, though some links among outputs and outcomes were not clarified and the indicators in
 the original Results Framework did not encompass the outcomes related to “socially, environmentally, and
 economically sustainable development” in the original PDO statement.



b. M&E Implementation
  The agencies responsible for M&E ensured attention to effective M&E implementation. The national
  implementing agencies (i.e., Senegal’s Delta Management Holding Company (SAED: Société
  d’Aménagement des Terres du Delta), Mauritania’s National Company for Rural Development
  (SONADER: Société Nationale de Développement Rural), Guinea’s National Directorate of Rural
  Engineering (DNGR: Direction Nationale du Génie Rural) and Mali’s National Department for Rural
  Development in the Senegal Valley (ADRS: L’Agence de développement rural de la vallée du fleuve
  Sénégal)) collected data at country level and shared them in the form of progress monitoring reports with
  the PIU, on a quarterly basis. The PIU had a dedicated expert in charge of M&E, who monitored the
  reporting systems, followed up to ensure progress report submission by the implementing agencies, and
  provided feedback and support as required. In addition to the data collection methodology planned at
  appraisal, the project used the Geo-Enabling initiative for Monitoring & Supervision (GEMS) monitoring
  system, which enabled the PIU to map out all the project sites (ICR, para 75). The weaknesses in M&E
  design were mostly corrected during implementation. The restructuring in 2019 revised the PDO
  statement to remove “socially, environmentally, and economically sustainable development” and clarified
  the definition of “coordinated management” in the objectives, which addressed the disconnect between
  the original PDO and the indicators in the Results Framework (ICR, para 77). Moreover, the restructuring
  added a new PDO indicator regarding the operationalization of OMVS regional steering committee,
  upgraded the level of the indicator on the increased values of sales of fish, and downgraded the level of
  the indicator regarding the distribution of the long-lasting insecticide treated malaria nets (ICR, para 18).
  The indicators in the Results Framework were mostly measured and reported, except for some IR
  indicators in the original Results Framework that were dropped at the 2019 restructuring. Nevertheless,
  the project was not able to collect critical data regarding changes in incomes and quality of life of the
  beneficiary populations as household surveys were not carried out (ICR, para 74).



                                                                                                     Page 19 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SRB CCA & Strategic Plan Implementation (P131323)




c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E findings were communicated to the various stakeholders and informed formal shifts in
  implementation direction including restructurings. On the other hand, the M&E data provided very limited
  evidence for the long-term outcome to improve community livelihood.

  In sum, the weaknesses in the M&E design were mostly corrected during the M&E implementation,
  enabling the substantial utilization of the M&E findings. Overall, the M&E quality is rated substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards: The project was classified as category A in the Environmental
   Assessment classification of the World Bank, primarily due to the preparation of studies for large
   hydropower dams. At appraisal, the following safeguard policies were triggered: Environmental Assessment
   (OP/BP/GP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Pest Management (OP 4.09), Cultural Property (OP
   4.11), Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), Forests (OP/BP 4.36), Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37), and
   Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50) (PAD Datasheet). At project closing, the following two
   safeguard policies were also triggered in addition to those at appraisal: Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) and
   Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60) (ICR, para 78). Environmental and social screenings of
   activities were conducted and environmental and social studies were developed, based on the
   Environmental and Social Management Framework, Resettlement Policy Framework, and the Pest and
   Pesticide Management Plan (ICR, para 78). The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) monitored closely that
   environmental protection measures were implemented and ensured that contractors abide by the
   requirements (ICR, para 78). On the other hand, no explanation was provided in the ICR regarding reasons
   for the addition of the triggered safeguard policies. Additionally, no evidence was provided by the ICR
   regarding that to what degree (i) the project was in compliance with each of these policies and (ii) the
   project completed the planned mitigation activities.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement: The PIU managed procurement for the GEF-funded activities, while the national
   implementing agencies (i.e., Senegal’s Delta Management Holding Company (SAED: Société
   d’Aménagement des Terres du Delta), Mauritania’s National Company for Rural Development (SONADER:
   Société Nationale de Développement Rural), Guinea’s National Directorate of Rural Engineering (DNGR:
   Direction Nationale du Génie Rural) and Mali’s National Department for Rural Development in the Senegal
   Valley (ADRS: L’Agence de développement rural de la vallée du fleuve Sénégal)) handled procurement for


                                                                                                     Page 20 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SRB CCA & Strategic Plan Implementation (P131323)



  credit-funded activities with oversight from PIU experts for irrigation and fisheries activities. Procurement
  plans were established annually for OMVS and each national implementing agency and managed by the
  PIU. The cascading capacity building on procurement from the procurement specialist at the OMVS to
  the PIU and then to the national implementing agencies successfully increased the level of confidence in
  procurement management, resulting in the increased thresholds for review for the second phase of the
  project (ICR, para 79).

  On the other hand, some procurement contracts were not managed adequately in two key aspects. First,
  poor contract management practices led to several cases in Mali and Guinea to be investigated by the
  World Bank’s Integrity Vice Presidency (INT) (ICR, para 81). In Guinea, awarding four of the five major
  irrigation investments to the same company resulted in a delivery of very marginal results in exchange of
  overpaid advances, negatively affecting the implementation of irrigation activities (ICR, para 81). The
  World Bank did not conduct further due diligence in Guinea, which was a missed opportunity to ensure that
  the company could meet the selection criteria for the combined value of the contracts (ICR, para 88). This
  additional scrutiny might have enabled the project to identify the company's other large commitments with
  the World Bank and other international financial institutions, prompting questions about its capacity to
  deliver on all investments within the set timeframe (ICR, para 88). The government of Guinea is in the
  process to reimburse the amount between the advance payments and the actual work delivered by project
  closure to the World Bank (ICR, para 81). The INT case in Mali is under a confidential investigation
  (Team’s Response).

  Second, the World Bank did not ensure that the transfers of activities from other projects to this project
  were formalized. The World Bank did not formalize the transfer of dam safety inspection of the Manantali
  dam and the Diama dam from the Senegal Sustainable and Inclusive Agribusiness Development Project
  (PDIDAS, P124018) and the Community-based Sustainable Land Management Project (P130271) to this
  project (ICR, para 89). In a letter dated November 2021, the World Bank asked OMVS to accept the
  transfer of responsibility for completing these two dam inspections under the project. Although there was
  no record of a formal response to this letter, OMVS proceeded with procuring the dam safety inspection of
  the Diama dam under this project (ICR, para 89). The informal transfer of ongoing safety inspection of the
  Manantali dam from the PDIDAS to the project limited the PIU’s legitimate power to monitor the progress of
  the inspection by the Manantali Dam Holding Company (SOGEM: Société de Gestion de Eaux de
  Manantali), resulting in the delay of the inspection progress for over 18 months (ICR, para 89). At closing,
  the Diama dam safety inspection was completed; However, the Manantali Dam inspection was not yet
  completed due to the ongoing bathymetric assessment that was expected to be completed by March 31,
  2024 (ICR, para 89). The final report of the Manantali dam safety inspection was expected to be submitted
  by OMVS to the World Bank before the end of April 2024 (ICR, para 89).

  Financial Management: The financial management system functioned well and complied with the World
  Bank’s requirements. On the other hand, some cases of late payments and overpayments were reported
  (ICR, para 82). In particular, the poor financial management at DNGR led to a large overpayment of a
  company, for which the government of Guinea initiated a reimbursement procedure (ICR, para 82). All
  audit reports were submitted in a timely manner without any qualified opinion (Team’s Response).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  Not reported in the ICR.


                                                                                                    Page 21 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SRB CCA & Strategic Plan Implementation (P131323)




d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               The Original Efficacy is rated
                                                                               modest due to insufficient
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               outcome-level evidence on
                                                                               achievement of Objective 1.
                                                                               The Quality of Supervision is
                                                                               rated moderately satisfactory
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   due to the shortcomings in
                                                                               supervision of fiduciary and
                                                                               administrative aspects.
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (paras 95-101) provided seven lessons. Four of those lessons as well as two relevant
recommendations from the ICR are presented here with rephrasing as these may be useful for the
other projects on coordinated management of water resources at a regional level.

Solid institutional arrangement to strengthen communication between regional organizations
for transboundary water resources management and their member states may help
successful project implementations. Based on lessons from the first phase of the series of the
Senegal River Basin Multipurpose Water Resources Development Program, the project established
National Cellules, in each Member State to monitor and coordinate project activities (ICR, para 96).
The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in the Organization for the Development of the Senegal River
(OMVS) had specific focal points for each Member State and component and conducted regular
meetings with “national cells” and Implementing Agencies to track project progress (ICR, para 96).
Nevertheless, the lesson needs to be interpreted with an awareness regarding a potential tradeoff
between advantages of having a PIU where high-performing consultants could accelerate
implementation and disadvantages of missing opportunities to further strengthen OMVS as an
institution (Team’s Response).

Effective communication between task teams and Country Management Units (CMUs) may
contribute to the success of regional projects. CMUs do not have regional projects in their
portfolio, although the CMUs oversee the World Bank’s dialogues with the countries. It is vital for
task teams to engage CMUs to leverage the Bank-country dialogue and address country-specific
challenges. An example of this successful collaboration was seen in Mali, where the task team and
CMU worked together to overcome implementation hurdles in irrigation investments, boosting the

                                                                                                 Page 22 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SRB CCA & Strategic Plan Implementation (P131323)



project's delivery and increasing the area equipped from 200 hectares to 1,549 hectares by the
project's end (ICR, para 97).

Inadequate monitoring of quality of procurement and contract management may cause
critical challenges for procurement and contract management. Under the project,
some implementing agencies struggled with awarding contracts and displayed poor management,
particularly in Mali and Guinea; however, the PIU of OMVS faced difficulties monitoring procurement
and contract management due to its limited capacity to collect relevant information (ICR, paras 71
and 98). To address the lesson, the ICR (para 98) recommended future projects to: (i)
implement oversight mechanisms to ensure appropriate contract durations; (ii) verify the eligibility of
companies for multiple contracts; (iii) approve advance payment amounts at the PIU level, which
would be enabled by the legal transfer of project implementation responsibility from the Member
States to OMVS; and (iv) the PIU and the World Bank to review procurement documents to ensure
timelines align with the actual scope of works, considering seasonal constraints on ground activities.

Limited flexibilities in the fund reallocations and the use of remote supervision techniques
may disrupt the implementation timeline and prevent on-site visits by the World Bank in FCS
areas. The project experienced the impacts of coups and of limitations derived from FCS in two
Member States, which impacted implementation timeline in these countries and limited the World
Bank’s capacity to visit the sites (ICR, para 100). To address the lesson, the ICR (para 100)
recommended to introduce greater flexibility to reallocate funds from the affected Member States to
those that were performing well and to use remote supervision techniques, such as progress
monitoring apps or remote sensing, to facilitate earlier course corrections.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project. The narrative supports the ratings and available evidence.
It is candid and aligned to the project development objective in general. The report follows most of the
guidelines, tries to triangulate data to reach conclusions, and is focused on results. The quality of evidence and
analysis is aligned to the messages outlined in the ICR. The ICR’s lessons are clear, useful, and based on
evidence. The Project/ICR team provided a comprehensive set of supplemental information to respond to IEG’s
inquiries. On the other hand, the project’s theory of change aggregated project activities and outputs by
components, resulting in unclear results chains leading towards outcomes and articulating how the ratings have
been reached. Additionally, the ICR did not explain why the two safeguard policies were added during
implementation nor provide evidence on the compliance of each triggered safeguard policies, as described in
section 10.a. Thus, overall, the quality of the ICR is rated substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating


                                                                                                    Page 23 of 24
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
SRB CCA & Strategic Plan Implementation (P131323)



Substantial




                                                                                 Page 24 of 24
