     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     6O-(APL2)LC Disaster Vuln. Reduct. (P127226)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024101

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P127226                                    6O-(APL2)LC Disaster Vuln. Reduct.

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 St. Lucia                                  Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-54930,IDA-59140,TF-17101,TF-           31-Dec-2019                                          71,533,018.41
 17143,TF-A3651

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 04-Jun-2014                                30-Jun-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            56,000,000.00                                   31,931,935.64

 Revised Commitment                             75,226,870.25                                   31,791,423.79

 Actual                                         71,533,018.41                                   33,343,440.25




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Alvina Elisabeth Erman      Chikako Miwa                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financial Agreement (2014, p.5), the Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Saint
   Lucia Disaster Vulnerability Reduction Project (DVRP) is "to reduce vulnerability to natural hazards and
   climate change impacts in the Recipient's territory". In the Project Appraisal Document, PDO is essentially the
   same, except for using "Saint Lucia" instead of "the Recipient's territory".



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     6O-(APL2)LC Disaster Vuln. Reduct. (P127226)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The Project had five components:

   1. Risk Reduction and Adaptation Measures (Appraisal: US$49m; Actual: US$45.53m). This component
   aimed at mitigating flood and landslide risks and enhancing climate resilience. It included rebuilding
   infrastructure damaged in the 2013 floods with a build back better (BBB) approach, including reinforcing
   flood control infrastructure, climate resilient rehabilitation of road and bridge and water infrastructure
   and retrofit and rehabilitate shelters, schools and health centers. It also involved developing national plans
   and strategies for risk reduction and climate resilience, such as watershed management and public
   awareness programs. Technical assistance was imbedded within sub-activities and included development
   of maintenance plans, risk assessments, and hazard and climate analyses to guide project designs.

   Component cost was revised due to re-allocation of funds as the CERC was activated to respond to the
   COVID-19 crisis. While the focus on risk reduction infrastructure remained the same at closing, the actual
   investments carried out changed to respond to changing government priorities. The ICR did not provide
   specifics on what investments were dropped and added throughout project implementation but mentioned
   that the development of maintenance plans, meant to be delivered through TA, was dropped.

   2. Technical Assistance for Improved Assessment and Application of Disaster and Climate Risk Information
   in Decision-Making (Appraisal: US$10m; Actual: US$5.3m). The component aimed to enhance the use of
   disaster risk and climate data in decision-making and engineering design for risk reduction and adaptation
   in Saint Lucia (SLU). It funded the creation of a high resolution digital typographic and bathymetric model of
   the island, sea level rise modeling, and risk mapping, as well as the establishment of monitoring networks
   for weather, hydrology, and sea level. Additionally, it provided technical assistance and training to promote
   building safety and data standardization in the Eastern Caribbean.

   Component cost was revised mainly due to the CERC activation, but also due to changing priorities.
   However, the focus of activities remained the same.

   3. Climate Adaptation Financing Facility (Appraisal: US$5m; Actual: US$4.25m). Component aimed to pilot
   a financing mechanism to enhance climate resilience by providing loans to households and businesses for
   climate adaptation investments. The Saint Lucia Development Bank (SLDB) acted as the retail bank,
   distributing loans to build a sustainable loan portfolio focused on climate adaptation. The SLDB also
   received support to improve its operations and risk management.

   As a response to COVID-19, the Business Recovery Program (BRP) was introduced within CAFF to provide
   a combined loan and grant option aimed at assisting small and medium enterprises.

   4. Contingent Emergency Response (Appraisal: US$1m; Actual: US$5.41m). The CERC was activated on
   April 29, 2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, which facilitated a redirection of project funds to aid
   the health sector. Specific activities included establishing respiratory clinics and isolation units, upgrading

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    6O-(APL2)LC Disaster Vuln. Reduct. (P127226)



  primary healthcare surveillance with IT and communication systems, supporting the National Emergency
  Management Office's COVID-19 response, procuring water tanks, expanding public health education, and
  de-silting rivers and drains for the hurricane season.

  5. Project Management and Implementation Support (Appraisal: US$3m; Actual: US$6.06m). This
  component aimed to strengthen institutional capacity for project management of the National Development
  Unit (NDU) and the Project Coordination Unit (PCU).

  The component cost was revised to accommodate expenses of nation-wide household and firm survey
  carried to identify qualifying investments under CAFF, as well as additional PCU staffing.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. At appraisal, the project cost was estimated at US$68.0m (PAD, p.9). During implementation,
  the project cost estimate was increased to US$75.07m (ICR, p.10). At project closing, the component costs
  presented in the ICR added up to US$66.55m, which is US$5m less than the amount disbursed at closing
  (ICR, p.9). During the TTL interview, the team explained that the component cost numbers were shared with
  them by the Financial Management team, and they had no explanation for the discrepancy. There was also
  a discrepancy between the committed (US$75.2m) and disbursed amount (US$71.5m) of US$3.7m, as
  presented in the ICR datasheet. The team shared that this could be due to currency fluctuations but were
  not able to provide any further details. Reallocation of financing across components was mainly due to the
  activation of the CERC to respond to the COVID pandemic, but also due to changing priorities.

  Financing. According to the PAD (p. 9) and ICR (p. 10-11), the project financing was made up of a mix of
  national International Development Association (IDA), Regional IDA and IDA Crisis Response Window
  (CRW), with co-financing from the Climate Investment Fund (CIF) in the form of a Strategic Climate Fund
  (SCF) Grant and a SCF Loan. There was an Additional Financing (AF) in 2016 in the amount of US$7.07m
  to further support reconstruction efforts after the 2013 floods. The AF was made up of an additional IDA
  Credit and a European Development Fund (EDF) Grant. The final breakdown of financing sources was the
  following: IDA Credit (US$25.62m), IDA CRW (US$17m), SCF Grant (US$12m), SCF Loan (US$15m), EDF
  grant (US$5.45m). The total grant amount added up to US$34.45m.

  Borrower Contribution. There was no borrower co-financing.

  Dates. The project was approved on June 4, 2014, and became effective on November 13, 2014. The Mid-
  Term Review was conducted on December 4, 2017. The original closing date was December 31, 2019. The
  Project had three restructurings, including two extensions to the closing date. The first restructuring in
  2019 was a response to low implementation progress and disbursement and, as such, the closing date was
  extended by 23 months to December 15, 2021 (Restructuring paper, 2019). The second restructuring in
  2020 was to support the government of Saint Lucia (GoSL) in responding to the impact of the COVID-19
  pandemic and did not result in project extension (Restructuring paper, 2020). The third restructuring in
  2021 was also due to the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted implementation delays and extended the
  closing date to June 30, 2023 (Restructuring paper, 2021). In total the project closing date was extended by
  41 months.




                                                                                                 Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     6O-(APL2)LC Disaster Vuln. Reduct. (P127226)



   Split Evaluation. One PDO indicator was dropped in 2019 but not as a reflection of a change of scope and
   the restructurings did not trigger changes to the PDO. A split evaluation is not warranted.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Relevance of PDO:

Country context

The PDO remains highly relevant to the country context. SLU is highly vulnerable to the impacts of natural
hazards and climate change. Time and time again, the country has experienced economic setbacks and
negative growth due to extreme events, including hurricanes and tropical storms, landslides, and
earthquakes. These events are increasingly impacting people's livelihoods, infrastructure, and essential
services and areas with high poverty rates tend to be particularly affected. Costly reconstruction and
recovery efforts have posed serious threats to its fragile economy and the sustainability of its development
progress.

Bank strategy

The PDO is strongly aligned with the overarching objective of the Regional Partnership Framework (RPF) of
the Organization of the Easter Caribbean States (OECS) FY22-FY25, which is "to support Green, Resilient,
Inclusive Development (GRID) and competitiveness in the OECS countries as they recover from the
COVID-19 crisis, address their medium-term development priorities, and build resilience to climate change
and other external shocks", and the High-Level Outcome 1 (HLO1): "Strengthened Resilience to Climate
Change and Other Shocks". Among the priority areas included under HLO1 relevant to the Project are
support to ex-ante resilience building and risk reduction investments.

Government strategy

The PDO is also strongly aligned to national development priorities and strategies of the GoSL, including
the latest Medium-Term Development Strategy (MTDS) (2020-2023), which identifies "Disaster Risk
Management, Resilience & Sustainable Development" as essential to the "attainment of the level and
quality of development Saint Lucia aspires to achieve". The PDO is also aligned with sectoral strategies,
including the Climate Change Adaptation Policy and National Adaptation Plan (NAP).

Previous sector experience

World Bank has been financing projects focused on disaster risk reduction since 1998 (ICR, p.19). The
Project was designed as part of a series of country level engagements building on the Regional Disaster
Vulnerability Reduction Project (P117871), implemented by the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States
(OECS). The Project was part of the second phase of the roll out of the country level engagements,
following the approval of a project in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Grenada, and was followed by

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      6O-(APL2)LC Disaster Vuln. Reduct. (P127226)



               the approval of a project in Dominica. The country level DVRPs were designed using a "framework"
               approach to allow for flexibility to respond to changing priorities and emergencies. The SLU DVRP defined
               a broad PDO, which was relevant in the context of the framework approach but lacked clarity on expected
               achievements of the project.

               At project preparation, SLU participated in the regional Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR),
               supported by Climate Investment Fund (CIF), and developed its national Strategic Program for Climate
               Resilience, a five-year strategy to build resilience to climate change impacts. Through phase 2 of
               PPCR, establishing an Adaptation Loan Facility was proposed and by recognizing the potential synergies
               between PPCR and the Project, the World Bank team decided to integrate phase 2 PPCR activities into the
               Project, which ended up being CAFF.

               The Review agreed with rating the relevance of objective as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Reduce vulnerability to natural hazards and climate change impacts in the Recipient's territory.

                             Rationale
                             The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) as it was not required at the time the PAD was written. A
                             ToC was reconstructed in the ICR, describing main challenges the Project addressed, activities, outputs and
                             outcomes.

                             The Project included activities, such as (i) investments in risk reduction, (ii) capacity building for disaster
                             preparedness by investing in hydromet stations, risk mapping and data sharing, as well as training of relevant
                             staff, (iii) establishment of an Adaptation Loan Facility to provide loans for businesses and household to
                             finance investments in climate adaptation, (iv) COVID crisis response by CERC activation, including
                             investments in health related infrastructure and technology, and establishment of a Business Recovery
                             Program (BRP) to support businesses affected by COVID, and (v) institutional strengthening in project
                             management. These activities would then result in outputs, such as roads with storm drainage, resilient
                             potable water supply systems, community centers, health centers and schools with reduced disaster
                             vulnerability, doubling as emergency shelters equipped with rainwater harvesting systems, hydromet stations,
                             spatial data sharing platforms, staff trained in disaster preparedness, risk maps, climate adaptation loans
                             provided to households and firms, respiratory clinics and isolation units constructed, IT and communication
                             systems for healthcare surveillance established and policies, strategies and plans focused on building climate
                             resilience developed. These outputs were expected to lead to outcomes related to reduced disaster losses as
                             a result of investments in resilient infrastructure, strengthened disaster preparedness and capacity to respond

                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   6O-(APL2)LC Disaster Vuln. Reduct. (P127226)



to emergencies as a result of better access to risk data and institutional strengthening, improved
recovery/coping capacity as a result of enhanced access to credit for households and firms. This would
reduce vulnerability to natural hazards and climate change impacts (the PDO), which in turn in the long-term
would strengthen resilience to natural disasters and climate change impacts. Due to its involvement in the
COVID-19 response, it can be expected that general crisis management, beyond climate and natural hazard
indued shocks, would be improved as well.

The ToC in the ICR captured all the elements of project design. However, outcomes included could be better
defined to reflect the Project's focus on the entire DRM cycle (mitigation, preparedness, response
and recovery) to reduce vulnerability to natural hazards and climate change impacts. The critical assumptions
presented in the ICR were (i) Continued commitment and local ownership, and (ii) No occurrence of major
national disaster during the construction phase. Another critical assumption, not mentioned in the ICR, is in
regard to the quality and uncertainty of climate and risk modelling that resilience standards of
infrastructure are based on. There is a lot of uncertainty around the future impacts of climate change on the
intensity of storm and flood events that models are unable to account for.

Outputs (ICR, Annex 1): The Project fully achieved 15 out of 19 Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs).

      Road segments rehabilitated, rural and non-rural: Original target: To be determined (TBD - was to be
         defined upon determination on the scope of sub-activity); Formally revised target (2019): 25km;
         Actual: 13.16km; Achieved: 53%.
        Storm drains constructed or upgraded under the Project to accommodate a 10yr to 25yr-rainfall event:
         Original target: TBD; Formally revised target (2019, the IRI was revised to include the resilience
         standard): 3000m; Actual: 9490m; Achieved:316%.
        Number of government ministries/agencies connected to a spatial data sharing platform: Original
         target: 8; Actual: 8; Achieved: 100%.
        Persons trained in software/applications, equipment, & various capacities that help reduce disaster
         risk & build resilience to climate change under the Project, including training in spatial data
         management & analysis: Original target: 50 people; Formally revised target (2019): 153 people;
         Formally revised target (2020, this was not reflected in Annex 1 of the ICR due to typo as confirmed
         during TTL interview): 358; Actual: 779 people (the number reflected in Annex 1 of the ICR was 7793
         and was a typo as confirmed during TTL interview); Achieved of revised: 218%.
        Number of policies, strategies, guidelines, management plans, management systems (including data
         systems), assessments or studies that work towards climate resilience generated through
         Project activities: Original target: 4; Formally revised target (2019, the indicator was also rephrased to
         reflect output produced under the Project): 15; Formally revised target (2020): 12; Actual:12; Achieved
         of revised target: 100%.
        Number of meteorological or hydrological observational/monitoring stations made functional, upgraded
         or purchased under the Project and tide gauges installed for sea level rise monitoring: Original target:
         Yes; Formally revised target (2019, the IRI was also revised to capture quantity of stations): 23; Actual
         23; Achieved: 100%.
        LiDAR (light detection and ranging) mapping of the entire country completed. Original target: Yes;
         Actual: Yes; Achieved: 100%.
        Level of Climate Adaptation Financing Facility (CAFF) disbursement in the form of climate adaptation
         loans compared to budgeted funds (this IRI was rephrased in the restructuring in 2019 to increase
         clarity). Original target: 100%; Actual: 100%; Achieved: 100%.


                                                                                                     Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   6O-(APL2)LC Disaster Vuln. Reduct. (P127226)




      Total number of approved Sub-loan Borrowers (CAFF Project beneficiaries): Original target: TBD;
       180; Formally revised target (2019): 450; Actual 384; Achieved of revised target: 85%.
      Share of female Sub-loan Borrowers: Original target: 51%; Formally revised target (2016, this change
       was not reflected in Annex 1 in the ICR for unknown reason): 25%; Actual: 57%; Achieved: 228%.
      Operations Manual for Component 4 prepared to facilitate disbursement in the event of an emergency:
       Original target: Yes; Actual: Yes; Achieved: 100%.
      Time taken to disburse funds under Component 4 in the event of an eligible emergency: Baseline: 6
       weeks; Original target: 4 weeks; Actual 7 weeks; Achieved: 0%.

Added at Additional Financing 2016:

      Bridges constructed or rehabilitated under the Project: Original target: 2; Formally revised target
       (2019): 1; Actual: 2; Achieved: 200%.
      Share of business loans: Original target: 40%; Formally revised target (2019): 10%; Actual: 17%;
       Achieved: 170%.
      Percentage of outstanding loans in good standing: Original target: 95%; Formally revised (2020): 75%;
       Actual: 91%; Achieved of revised target: 121%.
      Percentage of Project activities that have incorporated a beneficiary feedback system: Original target:
       50%; Actual: 50%; Achieved: 100%.

Added at Restructuring 2019:

      Population with more resilient potable water supply as a result of Project activities: Original target:
       74860 people; Actual: 36227 people; Achieved: 48%.
      Total number of public awareness products disseminated or awareness raising activities undertaken
       through the Project to educate on the importance of risk reduction and climate resilience: Original
       target: 970; Actual: 1008; Achieved: 104%.

Added at Restructuring 2020:

      Interventions undertaken through the CERC to support the health sector’s response to the COVID-19
       Pandemic: Original target: 3; Actual: 3; Achieved: 100%.

Outcomes: To achieve the PDO, the Project addressed gaps in all four stages of the DRM cycle, namely
mitigation (reduced losses from disaster impacts), preparedness, response and recovery. Each one of these
elements is discussed below:

Disaster Mitigation. The PDO indicators supporting the achievement of this outcome include:

      Number of school facilities, health centers and emergency shelters with reduced vulnerability to
       landslips, flooding, and other climate-related events as a result of project interventions; Original
       target: 8; Formally revised target (2019): 10; Actual: 9; Achieved of revised target: 90%.
      Percentage of infrastructural works under the Project incorporating climate risk analysis in design:
       Original target: Yes; Formally revised target (2019, indicator was rephrased to capture share of works




                                                                                                     Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   6O-(APL2)LC Disaster Vuln. Reduct. (P127226)



       and to cover all infrastructure investments under the Project, as opposed to only transport and
       drainage): 100%; Actual: 100%; Achieved: 100%.

The ICR noted that the facility remaining to reach the target of 10 was finalized by the time of the ICR mission
(p. 13) so both the indicators were achieved. However, these indicators did not provide sufficient evidence of
significant change in disaster losses (the first indicator only indicate reduced vulnerability of 10 buildings,
which is not significant in terms of avoided asset losses, and the second does not reflect the outcome of
these design - in terms of the implementation of resilience standards). The IRIs provide complementary
evidence. IRIs related to road rehabilitation, storm drains, bridges rehabilitated or constructed, and population
with access to more resilient potable water supply support the achievement of the mitigation outcome. The
targets for IRIs related to roads and water supply were not reached. During the TTL interview, the team
indicated that this was due to changes in government priorities, as well as budgetary issues towards the end
of the Project leading to the cancellation of some works. Regarding stormwater and bridges, targets were
exceeded. Considering all indicators related to mitigation, 4 out of 6 were achieved or exceeded their targets.
In other words, 10 facilities, health centers and schools with reduced vulnerability to hazards, 13.16km of
resilient roads, just under 1km of storm drainage, 2 bridges were rehabilitated or constructed and over 36k
people were served with more resilient potable water supply and all infrastructure designs incorporated a
climate risk analysis. These efforts have significantly reduced the risk of disaster losses and
improved accessibility on the island.

In addition, the ICR also provided evidence on the success of the interventions in terms of mitigation. For
example, Dennery Infant School designed under the Project was able to withstand Hurricane Else and
Tropical Storm Bret without damage or service disruption (ICR, p. 13). The road investments have improved
accessibility on the Island, by halving driving time between key destinations for tourism and agriculture (ICR.
p. 13, citing Department of Infrastructure, Ports and Transports). Since the roads were strengthened
by drainage investments that can accommodate extreme rainfall events (1-in-10 to 1-in-25), the risk of
disruptions caused by flooding has been reduced and the sustainability of the road network has been
improved. The investments in road drainage, and the Marchand Riverbank protection improved flood
protection in 5 flood-prone constituencies and 12 other constituencies witnessed reduced flood risk during the
2020 hurricane season (ICR, p.14). The Review finds that the result of the indicators in combination with
complementary evidence provided in the ICR support the conclusion that disaster losses have been reduced
as a result of the Project and that the mitigation outcome has been achieved.

Disaster Preparedness. The PDO indicator related to reduced vulnerability of facilities, health centers and
schools support the achievement of improved preparedness since the facilities were designed to double as
emergency shelters for the population and equipped with climate-resilient featured, such as water rain
harvesting systems (ICR, p.13). Unfortunately, the ICR did not specify the number of people benefitting from
improved access to emergency shelter due to investment. The indicator related to incorporating climate
analysis into infrastructure design is also indirectly related to preparedness due to the potential capacity
building aspect of having integrated this good practice into implementation.

The outputs provide supplementary evidence on preparedness. The Project improved disaster preparedness
by strengthening risk-informed planning, hazard and climate related data collection and data management,
including inter agency data sharing. The project monitored the number of hydromet stations made
operational, the number of government ministries/agencies connected to a spatial data sharing platform, the
number of persons trained in technologies and capacities linked to climate resilience, including spatial data
and the completion of a LiDAR mapping exercise. The targets of these indicators were all achieved or
exceeded. The Project also supported relevant policies and plans, as well as public awareness raising. The

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   6O-(APL2)LC Disaster Vuln. Reduct. (P127226)



indicators monitored the number of policies, strategies, guidelines, management plans, management systems
(including data systems), assessments or studies that work towards climate resilience generated through
Project activities and the number of public awareness products disseminated or undertaken. These indicators
were both achieved or exceeded. Finally, the Project provided improved access to financing to enable
investments in climate adaptation through the CAFF. Relevant indicators monitored the total number of
approved sub-loan borrowers, as well as % female borrowers and % business loans. While the indicator
related to number of borrowers was not achieved, it achieved 85% of the target that was revised upwards in
the 2019 restructuring. The CAFF supported preparedness, mainly through investments in rainwater
harvesting systems and water tanks, with the intention to improve water storage capacity, although the
outcome of the loans was not captured in the Results Framework (RF) or ICR.

While targets have been reached, the PDO indicators are not providing evidence of improved preparedness
due to their output orientation. The ICR provided some complementary evidence of strengthened institutional
capacity for disaster preparedness. For example, the Water Resources Management Agency (WRMA) and
Saint Lucia Meteorological Services (SLMS) were able to assess the validity of the Flash Flood Guidance
System (FFGS), developed under the Project, by back validating the areas exposed to flooding during the
November 6, 2022 flood in Northern parts of the country, indicating both the predictive ability of the tool, as
well as technical capacity of the team. In addition, National Emergency Management Organization (NEMO),
having benefitted from training and equipment was able to use state-of-the-art technology, including a
Damage and Needs Assessment Dashboard and search and rescue drones to support the disaster response
during Tropical Storm Bret in 2023 (ICR, p. 15). Having established CAFF also improved preparedness since
the facility could be used to provide financing to affected households and firms in case a disaster happened
during project implementation, which was the case with the COVID-19 crisis. At the community level,
a beneficiary survey indicated that CAFF helped reduce communities' vulnerability (ICR, p.18), but not clear
how vulnerability was measured in the survey or how many beneficiaries participated. In conclusion, the
Project financed many activities that are critical for strengthening disaster preparedness but the RF, while
capturing the number of outputs produced, did not adequately capture the achievement of this outcome. The
ICR provided complementary evidence and put together, the Review can conclude that Preparedness has
been improved and the outcome achieved.

Disaster Response. This phase of the DRM cycle take place in the immediate aftermath of a disaster and
was not the main focus of the Project. However, due to the strengthening of institutions such as NEMO, the
main agency in charge of disaster response, this capacity has been improved. And due to the COVID crisis,
the Project's CERC component was activated and as a result the Project engaged directly in COVID response
activities. The CERC was used to swiftly redirect funds to address urgent needs during the COVID-19 crisis,
and the main activities financed included retrofitting Victoria Hospital into a dedicated respiratory hospital,
which played a central role in the GoSL's COVID response, scaling up surveillance capabilities and
emergency communication systems, public education and awareness campaigns about COVID-19 safety and
prevention (ICR, p.13). Direct support was provided to NEMO, an agency critical to the COVID response
(ICR, p.10). As mentioned above, having CAFF in place enhanced the response capacity by being able utilize
an already established financing facility to support the COVID response and recovery. The ICR did not
provide data on the outcome of these interventions but Feedback from beneficiaries, collected through an ICR
survey, indicated that these efforts aided in the recovery from COVID-19 impacts (ICR, p. 18). One
indicator was directly related to response capacity, and it was the time taken to disburse funds under the
CERC in case of an eligible emergency. It took 7 weeks for funds to be allocated and so the target of 4 weeks
was not reached. Having an Operations Manual for the CERC activation prepared ex-ante to facilitate
disbursement in the event of an emergency was also included as an IRI and was achieved. The Review


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                6O-(APL2)LC Disaster Vuln. Reduct. (P127226)



                            concludes that the Project supported both disaster response capacity and the actual COVID crisis response,
                            achieving this outcome.

                            Disaster Recovery. Finally, the Project supported recovery efforts from the 2013 flooding using a Build Back
                            Better (BBB) approach. CAFF also strengthened recovery and coping capacity by providing loans to people
                            and businesses. In particular the Business Recovery Program (BRP) that was launched as a special
                            envelope under the CAFF to respond to the COVID-19 crisis offered a blended loan and grant facility to small
                            and medium-sized businesses. This support was essential for them to cope with the impacts of the crisis on
                            the economy, as evidenced in the ICR beneficiary survey (ICR, p. 14 & p.18). During the TTL interview, the
                            team emphasized that the focus of the Project was mitigation rather than recovery/reconstruction and while
                            the BBB aspect of the reconstruction was captured under mitigation, there were no indicators
                            monitoring recovery or coping capacity. While it can be acknowledged that the Project did support the
                            recovery of specific events, it is not likely that the Project improved recovery and coping capacity for the next
                            shock, especially since the CAFF concluded at Project closing.

                            PDO indicator 1 and 2, related to number of beneficiaries, as well as share of female beneficiaries, were not
                            useful to support the achievement of the PDO and have therefore not been used in the Efficacy analysis
                            mainly because they did not specify from what activity the beneficiaries benefitted and because the target
                            was so high (97% of population) and the actual achievement exceed population size. This indicates that
                            double counting has most likely taken place. In the TTL interview, the team acknowledged that the indicator
                            was not informative.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is rated Substantial. Overall, the Project has helped reduce SLU's vulnerability to natural
                            hazard and climate change impacts, particularly by improving mitigation (reduced disaster losses) and
                            disaster preparedness. The Review also noted that the Project supported disaster response and recovery,
                            which also contributes to reduced vulnerability. There were shortcomings in the ability of the RF to
                            capture the impacts of the interventions, beyond the outputs produced. However, this was complemented by
                            evidence provided in the ICR. As such, the Review concludes that the PDO has been achieved. And beyond
                            the management of natural hazards and climate change impacts, the Project has also supported general
                            crisis management as evidenced by an effective COVID response.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      6O-(APL2)LC Disaster Vuln. Reduct. (P127226)




 5. Efficiency
At appraisal: The economic efficiency was assessed using a cost-benefit methodology. The analysis was
based on a subset of activities financed under Component 1, covering 51% of total costs at appraisal. Economic
costs included capital investment and operating costs. Economic benefits included avoided losses measured as
the net difference of the damage costs obtained for with and without project scenarios. The infrastructure was
estimated to produce benefits for 25 years and used a conservative discount rate of 12%. Based on this the
appraisal estimates of economic viability were: Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 21.0% and Net
Present Value (NPV) of US$9.4m.

At completion: The post-completion economic analysis used a different subset of comparable activities
since the investments under Component 1 changed. It was confirmed during the TTL interview that the cost was
the same (US$16.6m), which cover 22% of total Project costs due to the increase in overall budget. The post-
completion analysis yielded an EIRR of 15.6% and an NPV of US$21.1m. Based on a review of information
obtained at the TTL interview, the reason the NPV increased was due to inconsistencies in the way the analysis
was carried out at Appraisal and Completion and as such, the result, in terms of the NPV, is somewhat
problematic. In addition, the post-completion analysis had not updated its assumptions to reflect the actual
investments, based on their resilience standards and value of assets protected, and relied instead on
assumptions made at appraisal, reducing the validity of the analysis. It is worth noting that the coverage of the
analysis was low in both appraisal and post-completion applications. However, a rate of return at 15.6% is
above the assumed (conservative) discount rate of 12% and so the Review can conclude that the Project
remained economically viable at completion.

Other factors affecting efficiency: The Project was extended 23 months in 2016, which was driven by initial
implementation delays due to complexity of project design vis-a-vis low implementation capacity, and in 2021,
the Project was extended 18 months due to delays caused by supply chain issues and travel restrictions caused
by the COVID-19 pandemic (Restructuring paper, 2016; Restructuring paper, 2021). While the complexity in
project design did cause initial implementation delays and resulted in significantly higher than expected project
management and implementation support costs (US$6m, twice the initial cost envisioned), its multisectoral
design made it capable of adapting to changes in government priorities and leveraging multiple funding sources
(ICR, p. 17). For example, through the CERC and CAFF components, the Project was able to shift from
response to natural hazards to health emergencies, and according to the ICR, the Project played a central role
in the GoSL's COVID response (p. 17).

Since the Project maintained economic viability, despite increased investments costs and delays, it was rated
Substantial with moderate shortcomings.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      6O-(APL2)LC Disaster Vuln. Reduct. (P127226)



                                                                                      51.00
Appraisal                                                   21.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      22.00
ICR Estimate                                                15.60
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The PDO was highly relevant to the country context, as well as Government and Bank strategies. The efficacy
analysis showed that vulnerability to natural hazards and climate change impacts was reduced, and so, the
PDO was achieved. The results of the IRIs and PDO indicators, complemented by evidence presented in the
ICR supported this conclusion. A post-completion analysis demonstrated that, while efficiency was reduced due
to delays and cost overruns, the Project remained economically viable. Taken together, the overall Outcome
rating is therefore Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical risk. The risk to the development outcome is substantial due to the limited focus on strengthening
maintenance of infrastructure investments made under the Project. In the PAD, it was emphasized that the
lack of maintenance was a driver of vulnerability to natural hazards and climate change impacts in SLU:
"underdeveloped and dilapidated infrastructure challenges disaster vulnerability reduction
efforts. [...] Oftentimes, designs and construction were carried out without due consideration to disaster
hazard and risk, and maintenance has been deferred over multiple years." (PAD, p.3). To address this gap,
the Project proposed to embed technical assistance focused on development of operational and
maintenance (O&M) plans (including a bridge maintenance system) (PAD, p.7). However, this activity was
dropped. According to the ICR, beneficiary feedback indicated that there is a lack of clarity on the availability
of financing and asset management of the resilient measures built under the Project, jeopardizing
sustainability of results (ICR, p.25). While there were certain investments with particularly high risk to
development outcome due to the lack of clarity on roles and responsibilities in terms of O&M, including the
risk reduction investments, the TTL interview indicated that due to the complexity of project implementation,
covering 7 different government agencies as well as the SLDB, there was limited scope to focus on
sustainability for all types of investments made under the Project.

Government ownership risk. The risk to development outcome for results achieved under CAFF is also
substantial. The ICR (p. 26) and the TTL interview highlighted that due to the disconnect between CAFF and
the GoSL's climate programs and agencies, it is unlikely that the government will support a CAFF on their
own account in the future. As such, since CAFF closed at project completion, the only benefits that may be
sustained are the ones generated from the investments made by households and firms enabled by the CAFF




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     6O-(APL2)LC Disaster Vuln. Reduct. (P127226)



sub-loans. However, since neither the RF nor the ICR provided much information on the nature of these
investments that could shed light on their sustainability, this remains unclear.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The PDO was highly relevant and well aligned to GoSL and Bank strategies. As discussed in section 3,
  the PDO was broad to accommodate for the Project's framework approach. As a result, it lacked clarity
  on expected achievements.

  The Project was prepared in the context of the Eastern Caribbean Regional DVRP and was the second
  Project to be prepared at the country level. The regional focus and alignment enabled the Project to
  secure Regional IDA resources. As articulated in the ICR (p. 19), the Project was built on lessons learned
  from previous Bank initiatives in SLU and benefitted from extensive dialogue and collaboration with
  regional government counterparts, resulting in high-quality technical and analytical outputs. For instance,
  insights from the Second Disaster Management Project (DMP II - P086469) informed the approach to
  resilient infrastructure, broadening the scope beyond hurricane-proofing to include drainage, slope
  stabilization, and water storage systems. Project design was informed by stakeholder consultations
  carried out during the phase I of the CIF-funded PPCR, which resulted in the design of CAFF.

  The Project adopted a "framework approach", which allowed it to harness multiple funding sources and
  address various sector challenges, resulting in SLU's largest World Bank-funded initiative. Specific
  design decisions under Components 1 and 2 were deferred to the implementation stage, such as the
  road, drainage and bridge investments. While this strategy offered flexibility to align with government
  priorities, the highly complex project design exceeded the organizational capacities of the implementing
  agencies and overwhelmed them, resulting in significant implementation delays and cost overruns. The
  issue of low implementing capacity also caused challenges for fiduciary and safeguard compliance, as
  described in section 10. Due to the flexible design while the outputs could be adjusted as priorities
  changed, the Project lacked PDO indicators outcome oriented enough to provide evidence on the
  achievement of the PDO.

  The overall implementation risk was considered substantial in the PAD. The World Bank underestimated
  the risks on "stakeholder" and "governance," which materialized amidst a change in public administration
  resulting in new government priorities that negatively affected the project implementation timeline (ICR, p.
  19). In the early years of Project implementation, mitigation measures to address the risk related to
  implementing agencies’ capacity, which was assessed as “substantial”, were not sufficient, contributing to
  implementation delays (ICR, p. 20).

  Quality at Entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory due to moderate shortcomings during project
  preparation.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     6O-(APL2)LC Disaster Vuln. Reduct. (P127226)



  Moderately Satisfactory



b. Quality of supervision
 Due to the complexity of the Project, covering many sectors and stakeholders, implementation was a
 challenge, resulting in initially slow disbursement rate, which led to a 23-month extension of the project
 duration (Restructuring paper, 2019). The TTL interview shed light on the implementation challenges,
 noting that the PCU team doubled in size during implementation and as did the budget. It was also a
 challenge for the World Bank team. The vast geographic and thematic scope prevented the Bank team
 from focusing in depth on certain important topics, such as O&M. On a positive note, the team added that
 the implementation arrangements through the Ministry of Economic Development facilitated the multi-
 sectoral approach and led to good stakeholder engagement between PCU and local counterparts
 throughout implementation, which facilitated the handover process and, as such, supported sustainability.

 Overall, the Bank team provided implementation support that was proactive, responsive to client needs and
 hands-on (ICR, p. 20). Throughout implementation, the World Bank team proactively identified systemic
 issues and clearly communicated them in the Project's Aide Memoires. These proactive measures
 facilitated responsiveness to client needs, leading to the approval of additional financing and three project
 restructurings, including two extensions to the closing date, all of which supported the achievement of
 the PDO. In 2017, the Mid-term review (MTR) identified challenges, prompting recommendations such as
 hiring a senior Procurement Officer and migrating to the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement
 (STEP) system to address procurement delays. The World Bank also provided technical support, including
 assistance with procurement processes and compliance with safeguards. This hands-on support continued
 throughout implementation. However, shortcomings in the M&E arrangements related to the lack of
 outcome orientation of the PDO indicators were not adequately addressed during implementation.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 While no ToC was required at appraisal, the detailed project description in the PAD provided a clear
 rationale for each intervention, emphasizing a multi-sectoral approach to address the multi-faceted risks
 associated with hydrometeorological events. This approach was enabled by a broad, but relevant, PDO
 statement.

 At appraisal, there were four PDO indicators: a) Number of direct Project beneficiaries (male/female), b)
 Number of days of interrupted traffic due to landslips, flooding and other climate-related events in project
 areas; c) Number of schools/health centers/emergency shelters with reduced vulnerability to landslips,

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     6O-(APL2)LC Disaster Vuln. Reduct. (P127226)



 flooding and other climate-related events; d) Climate risk analysis reflected in transport and drainage
 infrastructure design. Overall, the PDO indicators were not sufficiently outcome oriented to provide
 evidence on the achievement of the PDO:

       The indicator measuring the number of direct beneficiaries did not contribute to efficacy analysis
        since it did not provide information on how the people benefitted, nor how the number of
        beneficiaries was calculated. The target was very high, covering 97% of the country's population. In
        fact, the final number of beneficiaries actually exceeded the population size. It also did not specify
        how the beneficiaries benefitted, whether it was from having the risk of asset losses reduced, or
        improved preparedness, such as access to shelters or water storage. As such, the indicator did not
        provide useful information on the achievement of the PDO. This PDO indicator was included to align
        with the PPCR Core Indicator 5: Numbers of people supported by the PPCR to cope with effects of
        climate change. Perhaps this limited the team's ability to produce a useful indicator.
       The second PDO indicator "Number of days of interrupted traffic due to landslips, flooding and other
        climate related events in project areas", was dropped in the 2019 restructuring because it was
        dependent on a hazard event occurring during the monitoring period (ICR, p. 10). However, this
        indicator was more outcome oriented than the others. To further strengthen measurability of the risk
        reduction investments, crucial to the achievement of the PDO, the Project could have considered
        the use of an indicator measuring the area benefitting from reduced flooding and landslip risk,
        specifying the resilience standard, or number of people benefitting from risk reduction
        infrastructure.
       Lastly, the indicator related to climate risk analysis was included to align with PPCR Core Indicator
        2: Evidence of strengthened government capacity and coordination mechanism to mainstream
        climate resilience. This indicator was adjusted in 2019 to cover all infrastructure investments carried
        out under the Project, not only transport and drainage, which was a significant improvement.
        However, it still ended up being output oriented and even though using a precondition to incorporate
        a climate risk analysis into investment design is good practice, it did not measure improved capacity
        to adapt this beyond the Project.

 The IRIs were generally adequate and there was a good balance of indicators across interventions.

 The M&E arrangements were well-embedded institutionally, the National Development Unit (NDU), which is
 responsible for M&E nationally, was tasked with overall M&E, with the PCU reporting progress quarterly to
 the World Bank. For activities specific to CAFF, the Climate Change Coordinator, within the Ministry of
 Public Service, Sustainable Development, Energy, Science and Technology (MoSDEST) would monitor
 and report according to the CIF M&E guidelines.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project team proactively adjusted indicators and targets to align with changes to project design and
  to address M&E design limitations. Some of the improvements include broadening the focus of the PDO
  indicator focused on climate risk analysis reflected in design to encompass all infrastructure funded by
  the Project and the improved the measurability of the IRI focused on hydromet stations by capturing the
  quantity of stations. A number of IRIs were added, such as number of bridges built, persons with access
  to more resilient water supply systems, share of business loans (although in this case, it would be helpful
  if it was specified in the comment section that the Project had initially struggled reaching businesses,


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     6O-(APL2)LC Disaster Vuln. Reduct. (P127226)



  justifying the inclusion of the IRI). Not all changes were good. The PDO indicator focused on reduced
  traffic interruptions was dropped in 2019, reducing the outcome orientation of the RF.

  Despite M&E design shortcomings, M&E arrangement and implementation worked as planned and data
  collection for all result indicators was satisfactory. The ICR reported that the PCU-submitted reports
  reflecting transparency and detail (p.22).

  Some issues were identified, such as the reporting on direct beneficiaries exceeded the size of the
  population of the country. There were also inconsistencies between Annex 1 in the ICR, the final ISR and
  ICR Annex 6 Summary Table of Adjustments to Indicators and targets. For example, the number of
  trained people exceeded 7000 in Annex 1, but the team confirmed during TTL interview that it was a typo
  and should have been 779. The target in Annex 1 for persons trained was 153 but should have been 358.
  The Review also found that the target for % of female sub-borrowers was 25% in the last ISR but is 51%
  in Annex 1. These inconsistencies indicate that the indicators have not been properly updated in the
  Operations Portal.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR, the Quarterly Progress Reports, submitted to the World Bank, facilitated the
  assessment of progress against indicator targets, allowing both the GoSL and the World Bank to identify
  implementation issues such as contract management, procurement, financial management, and
  safeguards (p. 22). This close monitoring of progress informed project restructurings and aided in
  identifying mitigation measures to achieve the intended outcomes. In particular, the 2016 restructuring
  responded to the slow progress towards the PDO indicator targets and a project extension was granted.
  Monitoring data was also used to strategically engage with the counterpart through Aide Memoires
  (AMs).

  Due to the lack in outcome orientation of the PDO indicators, complementary evidence was needed to
  provide evidence on the achievement of the PDO.

  The M&E design had some shortcomings, in particular the lack of outcome-oriented PDO indicators.
  While this was not addressed during M&E implementation, the changes made to IRIs through
  restructuring improved the quality and scope of the IRIs, and as such the measurability and relevance of
  the RF. The M&E utilization was limited by the lack of outcome-oriented indicators in the RF.
  Nevertheless, the ICR presented complementary evidence that helped provide evidence on the
  achievements of the PDO.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards



                                                                                                 Page 16 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    6O-(APL2)LC Disaster Vuln. Reduct. (P127226)



  At appraisal, the Project was classified as Environmental Category B due to its focus on the rehabilitation
  and retrofitting of existing infrastructure, resulting in environmental impacts primarily during the construction
  phase. Three World Bank environmental safeguard policies were triggered concerning Environmental
  Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Forests (OP/BP 4.36). According to the ICR, International Waterways
  (OP/BP 7.50) was triggered at Appraisal. The Project also triggered policies related to Natural Habitats and
  Physical Cultural Resources as a precautionary measure, maintaining satisfactory compliance throughout
  implementation. In terms of social safeguards, the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards (OP/BP4.12) was
  triggered (PAD, p. 15-16). Various documents, including an Environmental Assessment and Management
  Framework (EAEMF) and an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), were established to
  ensure adherence to environmental safeguards. In 2015, a remedial Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan
  (ARAP) was prepared due to unforeseen land acquisition for safety reasons and negotiations with affected
  individuals was carried out (ICR, p. 23).

  According to the ICR, the Project faced challenges in environmental and social compliance due to staffing
  limitations. Although this led to downgraded ratings for some components, collaboration with the World
  Bank and capacity-building initiatives, including hiring a regional specialist and conducting trainings,
  improved performance between 2021 and 2023, reflected in associated ratings. At closing, the Safeguard
  rating of the Project was Satisfactory. The ICR did not provide specific information on the compliance
  to each of the policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM): According to the ICR, FM was initially adequate, but faced challenges as
  the PCU's responsibilities expanded with additional World Bank projects, leading to delays in reporting. To
  address these issues, the PCU received training by the World Bank, hired an internal auditor and
  the World Bank provided additional implementation support during the preparation of the quarterly interim
  financial reports. FM performance was rated as “Moderately Satisfactory” throughout the project. The ICR
  did not provide information about external audits.

  Procurement: According to the ICR (p. 23), implementation faced initial delays and challenges including
  difficulties in adhering to procurement guidelines, managing a large volume of activities, coordinating
  multiple stakeholders, and navigating market conditions. High staff turnover and capacity limitations at the
  PCU exacerbated these issues, leading to difficulties in monitoring multiple civil work contracts and
  resulting in "Moderately Unsatisfactory" ratings between 2017 and 2019. Collaborative efforts between the
  World Bank task team and the PCU eventually helped overcome these capacity issues. By the end of the
  project, procurement operations had improved significantly within the constraints of available staffing,
  achieving "Moderately Satisfactory" ratings at project closure.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

                                                                                                     Page 17 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     6O-(APL2)LC Disaster Vuln. Reduct. (P127226)




11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   Shortcomings in Quality at Entry

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR provided three lessons (ICR, p. 25-26). The review reformulated two of them, which were
the most strongly linked to lessons drawn from actual experiences during project implementation.
The reformulation was based on the results of the Review and the TTL interview:

1. The Project's broad "framework approach" allowed for flexible funding across various
sectors but overwhelmed implementing agencies, leading to delays, increased costs, and
insufficient focus on sustainability and local ownership, suggesting a more focused
approach may be beneficial. The Project leveraged funding from 5 different sources, which
covered many different sectors and interventions and provided flexibility to allow the government to
respond to emerging priorities. However, this approach quickly overwhelmed the implementing
agencies, resulting in initial implementation delays. Project management costs and the size of the
PCU team doubled during implementation. The complexity of project implementation left little
bandwidth to focus on sustainability of investments and making sure there is financing and sufficient
local ownership for a successful handover. A more focused approach would leave more space to
focus on O&M, roles and responsibilities and to do it well.

2. The Climate Adaptation Financing Facility (CAFF) lacked alignment with GoSL's climate
programs and monitoring frameworks, highlighting the need for stronger connections with
key climate agencies to ensure ownership, sustainability, and potential government-led
continuation of the program. The CAFF supported climate adaptation by offering affordable credit
to households and businesses to make critical investments in water storage capacity, renewable
energy generation, etc. The program demonstrated adaptability when it was expanded through a
Business Recovery Program (BRP) to address financial impacts on businesses from COVID-19.
However, the intervention was not connected to climate policy makers in the key climate agencies
and the CAFF monitoring framework lacked alignment with monitoring of climate plans and
strategies, such as the National Adaptation Plan (NAP) and the Nationally Determined Contributions
(NDC). Focusing on strengthening the connection was particularly important to support ownership
and sustainability since the CAFF was implemented by the Saint Lucia Development Bank (SLDB),
a corporate entity, and not a government agency like the other activities under the Project. A
strengthened alignment between CAFF and key climate agencies could have strengthened
ownership, and enabled climate agencies to receive and act on feedback from CAFF, and perhaps
realize the value of CAFF, increasing the chances of a government-led continuation of the program.


                                                                                                  Page 18 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       6O-(APL2)LC Disaster Vuln. Reduct. (P127226)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR adequately complemented the gap in outcome orientation of the PDO indicators with robust evidence
that supported the achievement of the PDO. The quality of analysis was good, and the lessons highlighted were
relevant and mostly drawn from project experience. However, there were inconsistencies between reporting in
the text and Annex 1 that were not sufficiently explained or addressed, and the assessment left some important
unanswered questions, such as the discrepancy between the aggregate of Component costs, the amount
disbursed, and the amount committed. The analysis was comprehensive but at times repetitive, especially in
the efficacy analysis, in which the same results were used several times to support the achievement of different
outcomes. Structuring the ToC and the efficacy analysis around the four elements of the DRM cycle (which was
done in the Efficacy analysis in this Review), or another structure with less overlap, could have mitigated this.

The ICR did an adequate job in summarizing achievements and challenges of this highly complex Project in the
limited space offered by the ICR format and page limitation. Overall, the quality of the ICR was Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 19
