     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pakistan Human Capital DPF Series (P170568)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023963

1. Program Information



 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 Pakistan                                  Education

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                         Approved Operations
 2                                          2

 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P170568                                    Pakistan Human Capital DPF Series




 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-66470                                31-May-2021                                        506,185,262.01

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 21-May-2020                              31-May-2021
                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                            500,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Revised Commitment                             499,999,997.92                                           0.00

 Actual                                         506,185,262.01                                           0.00




P172628_TBL
 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 Pakistan                                  Education

 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P172628                                   SHIFT DPCII ( P172628 )




                                                                                                Page 1 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pakistan Human Capital DPF Series (P170568)




  L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
  IDA-66470,IDA-69490                       30-Jun-2022                                           397400612.00

  Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
  28-Jun-2021                               30-Jun-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                          400,000,000.00                                                0.00

  Revised Commitment                           400,000,000.00                                                0.00

  Actual                                       397,400,612.00                                                0.00



 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 William F. Steel            Judyth L. Twigg              Susan Ann Caceres               IEGHC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The program development objectives (PDOs) of the Pakistan Securing Human Investments to Foster
Transformation (SHIFT) Development Policy Financing series (as stated in the ICR, para. 13 and the program
document for the second SHIFT [PD2, para. 33]) were to: (i) strengthen CRVS [Civil Registration and Vital
Statistics], health, and education systems essential for HC [human capital] accumulation; (ii) recognize the
contribution of women to economic productivity; and (iii) improve national safety nets to respond to shocks in a
more efficient manner. The PDOs did not change between the first and second development policy finance
operation (DPF). For the purpose of this ICRR, the PDOs are taken as:

      PDO 1: Strengthen CRVS, health, and education systems essential for HC.
      PDO 2: Recognize the contribution of women to economic productivity.
      PDO 3: Improve national safety nets to respond to shocks in a more efficient manner.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The Pillars as stated in the PD were identical to the PDOs. For the purpose of this ICRR, the Pillars and Policy
Areas (as indicated in the ICR, Section II) are represented as follows:

      Pillar 1: Strengthen CRVS, health, and education systems essential for HC:
             o Improve quality of civil registration and vital statistics;
             o Improve quality of primary health care and increase the sustainability of national immunization;

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pakistan Human Capital DPF Series (P170568)



            o Reduce learning poverty among all children.
      Pillar 2: Recognize the contribution of women to economic productivity.
      Pillar 3: Improve national safety nets to respond to shocks in a more efficient manner:
             o Improve coordination of national safety nets to respond to the impact of COVID-19 and protect
              and support HC accumulation;
            o Update and governance of the National Socio-Economic Registry (NSER);
            o Improve efficiency of Benazir Income Support Program (BISP) programs.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The World Bank (WB) Executive Board approved US$ 900 million of IDA loans for the series of two operations
(US$ 500 million and US$ 400 million, respectively) on May 21, 2020. Actual disbursements upon effectiveness
(US$ 506,185,262 on June 19, 2020, and US$ 397,400,512 on 29 June 29, 2021) totaled US$ 903,585,874,
due to exchange rate variations.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Country Context

 The series was designed to address deficiencies in Pakistan’s human capital status, with one of the lowest
 ratings in the region on the WB’s Human Capital Index (ICR, para. 4). Low investment in human capital and
 gender gaps in education and employment had constrained Pakistan’s economic growth rate and resulted in
 poor human development outcomes (especially in education and health). Although "Pakistan had a well-
 established federal safety net program, the Benazir Income Support Program (BISP), the database used for
 targeting beneficiaries…had not been updated in more than a decade,” and the National Socio-Economic
 Registry (NSER) needed support to update it and address errors and inefficiencies (ICR, para. 4). The
 government had also launched a comprehensive poverty alleviation program (Ehsaas) to consolidate safety
 nets and undertake further investments in HC. It had established a Technical Support Unit in the Ministry of
 Planning, Development and Special Initiatives to help address “the challenges of harmonizing CRVS services
 at the local, provincial and federal levels” (PD 1, para. 30). With respect to education, the government was
 also introducing reforms to address “learning poverty” (the percentage of children not being able to read and
 understand a short age-appropriate text by age 10), low attendance, and inequity.

 Relevance of Objectives

 The objectives of the SHIFT DPF series were highly relevant to addressing the identified constraints on
 Pakistan’s human capital development, consistent with Pakistan’s strategic objectives, and became all the
 more important to help mitigate the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, which was emerging as the PD1 was
 being finalized (decision review April 9, 2020). PDO3 was especially relevant to enhancing the ability of
 Pakistan’s national safety nets to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 restrictions on income and hence on HC
 investment, in line with the Ehsaas poverty alleviation program launched in 2019 (PD1, para. 6; ICR, para. 5).
 PDO1 was likewise relevant to implementing Ehsaas in some specific areas of reform needed with respect to
 vital statistics, health care, and basic education, as well as to the National Education Plan and National

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Pakistan Human Capital DPF Series (P170568)



Education Policy Framework (PD 1, para. 45). PDO2 represented a step toward improving the status and
conditions for women to contribute to economic growth, responding to Pakistan’s near-bottom ranking in the
Global Gender Gap Report 2020 (World Economic Forum; PD1, para. 49). Although the PD and ICR did not
identify specific national policies regarding the status of women, the province of Punjab (with nearly 9 million
home-based workers, about half women) had developed a Home-Based Workers Act (PD1, para. 51), and
support under the SHIFT series represented a suitable entry point for further strategizing.

The objectives were in line with the WB’s Pakistan Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY15-FY19.
PDO2 was particularly relevant to Results Area 3 for “enhancing inclusion of women across
sectors, increasing economic opportunities, and productively engaging women” (PD1, para. 67). PDO1 and
PDO3 supported CPS Results Area 4 regarding Service Delivery, and PDO3 also “complemented the WB’s
rapid response to the COVID-19 crisis in Pakistan which initially comprised the Pandemic Response
Effectiveness in Pakistan project and eight ongoing projects” (ICR, para. 12).

Table 1: Objectives and Prior Actions (PAs) for Securing Human Investments to Foster
Transformation Development Policy Financing Series

PAs under DPF1                                     PAs under DPF2
PDO 1: Strengthen CRVS, health and education systems essential for HC accumulation
Improve quality of civil registration and vital statistics
                                                   PA 2: At least three Provincial Cabinets and/or
PA 1: The Ministry of Planning, Development        Chief Ministers have approved the revised rules
and Special Initiatives (MPDSI) has approved and/or by-laws to harmonize birth and death
the policy to revamp and reform civil registration registration with the national civil registry at
and vital statistics system.                       NADRA [National Database and Registration
                                                   Authority].
Improve quality of primary health care and increasing the sustainability of national
immunization
PA 3: The Ministry of National Health Services, PA 4: The Provincial Finance Departments have
Regulations and Coordination has approved the notified the Ministry of Finance on the transfer of
essential package of health services at            costed essential primary health care vertical
community and primary health care center           programs from development budget to recurrent
levels.                                            budget, effective as of FY22.
                                                   PA 6: Ministry of Finance and provincial Finance
PA 5: The Recipient has enabled the use of         Departments approve the inclusion of all
national mechanism for pooled procurement of remaining capital costs under the respective
vaccines to continue and be reflected under        expanded programs on immunization into the
recurrent budget from FY20/21 onwards.             recurrent budget starting from FY21 to
                                                   institutionalize national immunization.
Reduce learning poverty among all children
PA 7: The Cabinet has approved the National PA 8: (i) The Inter Provincial Education
Education Plan 2020.                               Ministerial Conference has endorsed the
                                                   National Student Assessment Framework
                                                   (NSAF), and (ii) the Federal cabinet has
                                                   approved the establishment of the Pakistan
                                                   Institute of Education, with the mandate to
                                                   produce, analyze, and disseminate education

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Pakistan Human Capital DPF Series (P170568)



                                                   statistics (revised and expanded from Indicative
                                                   Trigger).
                                                   PA 9: Federal Cabinet has approved a policy
                                                   framework to reduce out-of-school children
                                                   through comprehensive policy options and
                                                   approaches.
PDO 2: Recognize the contribution of women to economic productivity
                                                   PA 11: Home-based Workers Bills move in
PA 10: The Punjab Cabinet has approved the
                                                   federal Cabinet and Provincial Cabinets of
Punjab Home-Based Workers Act.
                                                   Khyber, Pakhtunkhwa, and Balochistan.
                                                   PA 12: Draft amendments on Shops and
                                                   Establishments Act and Factories Act to provide
                                                   better and safe working conditions for women
                                                   including no restriction on working hours, toilets,
                                                   and childcare facility move in Provincial
                                                   Cabinets.
PDO 3: Improve national safety nets to respond to shocks in a more efficient manner
Improve coordination of national safety nets to respond to the impact of COVID-19 and
protect and support HC accumulation
                                                   PA 14: [in PD2] At least three* Provincial
PA 13: The Cabinet has approved the cash           Cabinets approve a coordination and
assistance package under the Ehsaas Program collaboration mechanism for nutrition-sensitive
in response to COVID-19 pandemic, which            cash transfer described in a Memorandum of
includes a framework for improved coordination Agreement between the provincial governments
between BISP, NADRA, Pakistan                      and BISP under the Ehsaas Program.
Telecommunications Authority, and provincial
governments.                                       *The ICR and PD1 simply state: “Provincial
                                                   Cabinets approve…”
PA 15: The BISP Board has approved the plans
for: (i) national expansion of the Waseela-e-
Taleem (WeT) Program; and (ii) implementation
of nutrition-sensitive conditional cash transfer
program at the federal level, as stipulated in the
Ehsaas Program.
Update and governance of NSER
                                                   PA 17: BISP Board approved the statutory
PA 16: The BISP Board has approved revised
                                                   regulations for the governance of NSER to allow
data exchange protocols and socio-economic
                                                   its independence from all programs (federal and
classification to be applied to the updated NSER
                                                   provincial), including a governing committee
data for ease of targeting by social programs as
                                                   with federal, provincial, and other core
stipulated in the Ehsaas Program.
                                                   stakeholders’ representations.
Improve efficiency of BISP programs
                                                   PA 19: Cabinet approved a framework allowing
PA 18: The BISP Board has approved the
                                                   (i) vertical expansion of BISP’s Kafalat Program
Recertification Strategy, with clear protocols for
                                                   with updated NSER, and (ii) a mechanism for
entry and exit into the kafalat and conditional
                                                   the periodic update of regular cash transfer
cash transfer programs.
                                                   benefits.

                                                                                                         Page 5 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Pakistan Human Capital DPF Series (P170568)




b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

The two operations had a total of 19 prior actions (PAs; 9 in SHIFT-I and 10 in SHIFT-II), with a total of 22
distinct actions and sub-actions. All but one of the PAs in SHIFT-I had follow-up actions in SHIFT-II (related
to implementation of indicative triggers). Fifteen of the PAs involved approval of a measure; only four related
directly to implementation of approved policies and measures. All were based on appropriate analytical work
and relevant to the stated objectives.

PDO 1: Strengthen CRVS, health and education systems essential for HC

PA1 was highly relevant to strengthening systems essential for HC by reforming the civil registration and vital
statistics system to “provide authentic information on population and birth and death statistics” and thereby
facilitate access, monitoring, and evaluation (PD1, para. 72). PA1 and PA2 were based on a number of
studies conducted by UNICEF, including the Roadmap for Digital Birth Registration, Assessments of the
CRVS system (2013 and 2014), Review of Current Legislation, and Gap Analysis (PD1, Table 7).
Consolidation and improved efficiency were expected to “reduce the actual cost and transaction costs for
registering life events” and thereby increase uptake and thus access to social services (PD1, para. 73).
Rating: PA 1: Highly Satisfactory.

PA2 followed through on PA1 by addressing the problems of a “fragmented civil registration system and no
clearly defined data sharing protocols across the country” (PD1. para. 39). PD2 tightened up the somewhat
vague Indicative Trigger from SHIFT-1 by specifying what was to be approved and the number of Provincial
Cabinets expected to approve them (however, the ICR reported the original IT as the PA, indicating “no
change”). Rating: PA 2: Satisfactory.

PA3 was intended to address inadequacies in the delivery of basic health interventions, especially to the
general public, by prioritizing a basic set of interventions that were expected to improve the efficiency of the
budgetary process and facilitate reallocation from tertiary to primary health care (ICR, Table 2). PA3 and PA5
drew on several studies by the Ministry of National Health Services Regulation and Coordination, including
the Pakistan National Health Vision 2016-2025 and Action Plan 2019-2023, and Minimum Health Services
Delivery Package for Primary Health Care Facilities (PD1, Table 7). This represented a first step toward
implementing the recommendations of the World Health Organization report: Disease Control Priority –
Edition 3 (PD1, para. 40). Rating: PA 3: Satisfactory.

PA5 addressed the problems of implementing the Expanded Program on Immunization due to time-
consuming and uncoordinated procurement by federal and provincial governments and donor-funded
programs (PD1, para. 41). The supported action was expected to lower costs and speed delivery in four
provinces through a pooled procurement process. Rating: PA 5: Satisfactory.

PA4 and PA6 moved the capital/development budget costs of PHC and immunization programs to recurrent
budgets in order to ensure their institutionalization and sustainability. Classifying such programs as capital


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Pakistan Human Capital DPF Series (P170568)



expenditures had made the budget and procurement process unpredictable and time-consuming (PD1, para.
41). Ratings: PA 4: Satisfactory; PA 6: Satisfactory.

PA7 and PA8 were intended to address the government’s reforms to address “learning poverty” among
children. They drew on Provincial Education Plans supported under the Global Partnership for Education, the
National Education Plan (2020), and the Pakistan National Education Response and Resilience Plan for
COVID-19 (PD1, Table 7). However, they were at a level of simply approving a National Education Plan and
Pakistan Institute of Education without a clear results chain to measures that would address the causes of
learning poverty. While setting goals and gathering/analyzing data were appropriate first steps, expected
results were phrased in terms of “more accurate ranking in international comparisons” and “higher
accountability” (PD1, paras. 47-48) rather than learning outcomes for children. Ratings: PA 7: Moderately
Satisfactory; PA 8: Moderately Satisfactory.

PA 9 was added in SHIFT-II to extend beyond the indicative trigger from SHIFT-I by developing policy
guidelines more explicitly targeted toward out-of-school children and expansion of the education system
(PD2, paras. 50-51). This was motivated by the addition of an estimated 1-2.5 million out-of-school children
due to closure during the pandemic, on top of "the approximately 19 million children already out of school"
(PD 2, para. 46). Rating: PA 9: Satisfactory.

PDO 2: Recognize the contribution of women to economic productivity

PA 10 and PA 11 were directly relevant to the objective of giving greater recognition to the economic
contribution of informal women workers in the specific area of home-based work by supporting passage of
Home-Based Workers Acts in four provinces. The predominance of home-based work among Pakistan’s
estimated 17 million female workers reflects the “discriminatory attitudes, workplace barriers and lack of
female-friendly workplaces” that have deterred women from more formal employment, and indeed from
participating in the labor force, yet home-based work was not legally recognized (PD1, para. 50). To remedy
that situation, the province of Punjab had developed a Home-Based Workers Act, and PAs 10 and 11
supported its approval in Punjab and three other provinces, to recognize the contribution of women and lay
the groundwork for further support. They drew on a number of relevant studies, including the Punjab Home-
Based Workers Survey (2017), Recognizing and Supporting Home-Based Workers (South Asian Regional
Consultation), and Labor Force Experiences for Urban, Low-Income Pakistani Women (PD1, Table 7). The
Act would establish a Home-Based Workers Council (including representatives of home-based workers and
civil society) “to register home-based workers and map home-based workers in different economic sectors
and geographical areas…[and] develop a robust information dissemination plan” (PD1, para. 51). The Act
would also enable registered home-based workers to “to enter into written contracts with their employers to
ensure their access to appropriate wages and other benefits, including employees old age benefits.” Ratings:
PA 10: Satisfactory; PA 11: Satisfactory.

PA 12 likewise supported PDO2 by amending the provincial Acts governing retail and factory employment to
improve working conditions for women. It was assumed that changes in the regulations would be
implemented by private retail and factory establishments, resulting in an increase in women working in formal
employment in these sectors. Specifying mechanisms and time frames for implementation and enforcement
and prospects for further actions and support in future operations would have strengthened the relevance to
achievement of the objectives. Rating: PA 12: Satisfactory.

PDO 3: Improve national safety nets to respond to shocks in a more efficient manner



                                                                                                  Page 7 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pakistan Human Capital DPF Series (P170568)



 PA 13 and PA 14 were directly relevant to the objective of improving the ability of national and provincial
 safety net programs to respond effectively to shocks through improved coordination and data-sharing. They
 were based on the study underlying Pakistan’s Ehsaas Programme: Shift from Politics of Patronage to
 Politics of Performance, as well as several ongoing WB studies on NSER Legal Frameworks, Interoperability
 Frameworks, and Transitioning NSER into a Dynamic Social Registry (PD1, Table 7). The impact of improved
 coordination had been demonstrated in the COVID-19 response, making “it possible to horizontally expand
 threefold the beneficiary base for the COVID-19 emergency cash transfer” (PD2, para. 57). As in the case of
 PA2, PD2 tightened up the Indicative Trigger from SHIFT-1 by specifying the number of Provincial Cabinets
 expected to approve the mechanism (although the ICR reported the original IT as the PA, indicating “no
 change”). Ratings: PA 13: Satisfactory; PA 14: Satisfactory.

 PA 15 was relevant to improving responsiveness to the negative impact of COVID-19 on education by
 approving expansion of the WeT (Waseela-e-Taleem) program of conditional cash transfer to mothers linked
 to primary education that had been successfully tested in a third of Pakistan’s 160 districts (PD1, para. 58)
 and by extending it to conditional cash transfers linked to nutrition. However, implementation of the approved
 plans was assumed, rather than supported, by follow-up actions in SHIFT-II. Rating: PA 15: Moderately
 Satisfactory.

 PA 16 was relevant to improving safety net responsiveness to shocks by approving socio-economic
 classification (to help pre-identify poor households that could qualify for benefits) and data exchange
 protocols to protect privacy while sharing data across relevant agencies (PD1, para. 61). PA 17 sought to
 make the National Socio-Economic Registry (NSER) a national registry independent of BISP (which had
 initiated it in 2010 to collect data) that could also work with other national and provincial agencies (PD1,
 paras. 61-62). Classification through a central, unified registry was expected to yield “better targeting,
 reduced duplication and fragmentation, and ultimately better HC outcomes” (PD1, para. 63). The reforms
 were supported by WB studies in progress on NSER Legal Frameworks, Interoperability, and “Transitioning
 NSER into a Dynamic Social Registry” (PD1, Table 7), as well as by complementary technical assistance.
 Ratings: PA 16: Satisfactory; PA 17: Satisfactory.

 PA 18 and PA 19 addressed limitations in the BISP program resulting from a decade of failure to update
 means test criteria and to open new enrollment (PD1, para. 64). Some beneficiaries no longer needed cash
 transfers, while potentially eligible households whose ability to invest in HC would be enhanced by such
 transfers were unable to apply. Furthermore, impact evaluations had found that the low value of transfers
 also limited their effectiveness in supporting HC. The PAs appropriately supported approval of protocols and
 a framework to address these issues (on the assumption that they would be implemented as approved),
 drawing on ongoing WB studies on BISP Recertification, Expansion of Safety Nets, and Updating the
 Universal Cash Transfer Value over Time (PD1, Table 7). Ratings: PA 18: Satisfactory; PA 19:
 Satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators




                                                                                                   Page 8 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pakistan Human Capital DPF Series (P170568)




Rationale

The series used ten results indicators (RIs) to track implementation and results of eight pairs of PAs (in SHIFT-I
with a follow-up in SHIFT-II) and two additional actions (one in SHIFT-I, one in SHIFT-II), with one sub-indicator
for female participation. The RIs were oriented toward outcomes that generally represented implementation of
the associated PAs, although in some cases they were not necessarily attributable to the PA. However, two RIs
did not adequately track implementation of actions in the associated PAs (i.e., three PAs did not have clearly
associated RIs), and one of them lacked a suitable data source for monitoring.

PDO 1: Strengthen CRVS, health and education systems essential for HC

RI 1 directly measured the expected result of PAs 1 and 2 to revamp, harmonize, and reduce costs of civil
registration and vital statistics, and an increase in the share of children with a birth certificate could reasonably
be attributed to the actions taken (on the implicit assumption that the approved measures were in fact
implemented). Definition and measurement were straightforward, and data readily available. Rating: RI 1:
Highly Satisfactory.

RI 2 related to the expected result of implementing PAs 5-6 to improve the procurement and funding of
vaccination programs but served as only a partial proxy for the improvement of essential health services
supported by PAs 3-4. Because uptake of vaccinations depends on many factors in addition to availability,
notably education and outreach, changes in the indicator could not necessarily be attributed to the associated
actions. Definition and data collection were straightforward. Rating: RI 2: Moderately Satisfactory.

RI 3 tracked whether the measures approved in PAs 7-9 resulted in a national learning assessment being
undertaken. While such an assessment would be an important input into implementing policies to address the
problem of learning poverty, it was not necessarily related to establishment of the Pakistan Institute of Education
(as approved under PA 8) nor to achievement of the intended result of reducing learning poverty. The ICR (para.
36) appropriately noted the challenge of establishing a results chain from “measuring learning poverty [to] the
various mechanisms through which a national assessment could genuinely affect learning poverty.” The
indicator was defined simply in terms of the number of national learning assessments conducted. Rating: RI 3:
Moderately Unsatisfactory.

PDO 2: Recognize the contribution of women to economic productivity

RI 4 was directly relevant to measuring the impact of PAs 10-11 on the readiness of home-based workers to
register as a result of greater acceptance through Home-Based Workers Acts and associated support
mechanisms (including awareness campaigns; PD1, para. 51). Official registration could reasonably serve to
indicate greater recognition of the contribution of informal women workers, as well as an important step toward
improving their access to social protection. Measurement was straightforward, and appropriately included a sub-
indicator for the share of women among those registered. Rating: RI 4: Satisfactory.

RI 5 directly related to the expected result of implementing the amendments supported by PA 12 in terms of the
readiness of women to seek employment in formal retail establishments and factories, but it did not necessarily
track actual implementation of the mandated improvements in working conditions. Although technical
assistance for implementation was expected (PD2, para. 55), the PDs did not mention how the new regulations
might be enforced, and the time frame for implementation was likely to exceed that of the series, making it
difficult to attribute changes in the indicator directly to the action, except insofar as passing the amendments


                                                                                                         Page 9 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pakistan Human Capital DPF Series (P170568)



changed perceptions of both employers and women workers. Furthermore, attribution was limited by the many
factors other than the legislation that affect demand for and readiness of women to engage in such work.
Measurement depended on the biennial Labour Force Survey, which is issued with a substantial time lag (data
currently available only through 2021). Rating: RI 5: Moderately Unsatisfactory.

PDO 3: Improve national safety nets to respond to shocks in a more efficient manner

RI 6 was directly relevant to PAs 13-14 inasmuch as the baseline was nil for these COVID-19 response
programs, meaning that an increase in beneficiaries could be attributed to implementation of the approved
measures. The existence and reach of these programs directly related to the objective of improving the ability of
national safety nets to respond to shocks. Data were collected by BISP/NSER. Rating: RI 6: Satisfactory.

RI 7 and RI 8 similarly tracked implementation of approved measures under PA 16 to expand the WeT program
nationwide and to implement a nutrition-sensitive conditional cash transfer program. The beneficiaries were
mothers, consistent with the objective of overcoming Pakistan’s low HC among women. Data for RI 7 depended
on the annual Economic Survey (which is issued with some delay). Data for RI 8 were available from
BISP/NSER. Ratings: RI 7: Satisfactory; RI 8: Satisfactory.

RI 9 related to a desired result of the revised data exchange protocols and classification approved under PA 16,
which would contribute to the objective of more efficient responses to shocks by permitting better targeting by
safety net programs (but did not track whether classification data were in fact being applied). It did not relate to
PA 17, which would have benefited from a separate indicator of the independence or effectiveness of NSER.
Data were available from BISP/NSER. Rating: RI 9: Moderately Satisfactory.

RI 10 was relevant to the implementation of PA 18 to the extent that the Recertification Strategy exited BISP
beneficiaries who no longer qualified and approved new ones from the bottom two quintiles, thereby meeting the
objective of improved efficiency. It did not capture either of the sub-actions under PA 19 regarding expansion of
the Kafalat Program and updating of the value of cash transfers, which would have benefited from separate
indicators. The data source was a periodic survey that was used for the baseline, but which was not repeated in
2022 as expected (TTL). Hence the ICR (footnote 16) had to undertake a simulation using the 2018-19
Household Integrated Economic Survey in order to estimate results for 2023. Rating: RI 10: Moderately
Unsatisfactory.



Table 2: Results indicators by Objective and PAs; baseline and target values; status and achievement
(Source: ICR, Table 1)

                                                               Actual as
                                                                              RI
    Results     Associated     RI    Baseline Target              % of
                                                                Actual
                                                                         Achievement
 indicator (RI)    PAs     Relevance (2019) (2023)              targeted
                                                                (2023)
                                                                            rating
                                                                 change
PDO 1: Strengthen CRVS, health and education systems essential for HC
       RI
1: Percentage
                                                      36.8%
  of children     1-2      HS        36%      41%                 16%     Negligible
                                                       [est.]
under 5 with a
birth certificate

                                                                                                      Page 10 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pakistan Human Capital DPF Series (P170568)



         RI
2: Percentage
of children age
 12-23 months     3-6        MS         66%      81%        76.4%      69%  Substantial
 who received
     all basic
  vaccinations
RI 3: Number
   of national
     learning     7-9        MU           0        1          1       100%     Modest
 assessments
   conducted
PDO 2: Recognize the contribution of women to economic productivity
         RI
4: Percentage
of home-based
                                               20% of
     workers                                                                   Modest
                                                 which
   registered    10-11        S           0                   0         0%   [additional
                                                 70%
  (federal and                                                                evidence]
                                                female
 provincial), of
    which are
      female
         RI
5: Percentage
    of women                                                                Substantial
   working in     12         MU         10%      14%        14%`      100%   [additional
      shops,                                                                  evidence]
establishments
 and factories
PDO 3: Improve national safety nets to respond to shocks in a more efficient manner
RI 6: Number
of beneficiaries
 from COVID-
                                                         14.8 million
19 safety nets                                    12
                 13-14        S           0               (10.55 m. 123%        High
    response                                    million
                                                           one-off)
 interventions
  (federal and
   provincial)
RI 7: Number
of beneficiaries                         2.8
                  15          S                4 million 6.52 million 310%      High
      of WeT                           million
     program
RI 8: Number      15          S           0    500,000 778,641        156%      High
of beneficiaries
   of nutrition
sensitive CCTs
  (federal and

                                                                                             Page 11 of 20
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Pakistan Human Capital DPF Series (P170568)



          provincial)
        RI 9: Number
        of households
         classified by
                                                                  22
        welfare status         16-17         MS          0                 35 million     159%       High
                                                                 million
       and percentile
       in the updated
             NSER
               RI
       10: Percentag
           e of BISP
          beneficiary                                                         77.5%
                               18-19         MU         33%       70%                     120%      Modest
            families                                                       [simulation]
        covered from
       the bottom two
           quintiles

  Rating

  Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Strengthen CRVS, health and education systems essential for HC

               Rationale
               RI 1 showed only a slight increase from 36 percent of children under 5 with a birth certificate to 36.8 percent
               (as estimated by the ICR, Table 7), only a sixth of the targeted increase of 5 percentage points. PD1 (para.
               39) indicated that most of the funding for reforming the CRVS would be disbursed in the second and third
               years of the program, and the ICR (para. 21) stated that several steps to implement the approved policy and
               mechanism for nationwide registration under PAs 1-2 had in fact been “rolled out.” But (besides the absence
               of recent data from the Demographic and Health Survey) the targeted impact on issuance of birth certificates
               showed negligible progress. Achievement Rating: Negligible.

               RI 2 increased by 10.4 percentage points from a baseline of 66 percent of children aged 12-23 months
               receiving all basic vaccinations to 76.4 percent, representing 69 percent of the targeted increase of 15
               percentage points. This substantial achievement during a situation of decreased utilization of health services
               during the COVID-19 pandemic was attributable to special mitigation measures such as air-freighting supplies
               and home-based immunization campaigns (ICR, para. 23). Achievement Rating: Substantial.

               Although the RI 3 target of one national learning assessment was achieved, this indicator was not sufficient
               as a measure of achievement of the objective of reducing learning poverty among children. The ICR (para.
               26) did note that the Pakistan Institute of Education had become functional, indicating substantial progress in

                                                                                                                 Page 12 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Pakistan Human Capital DPF Series (P170568)



implementing actions approved under PA 8, but it recognized that “institutional actions [only] lay the basis for
improved assessment, monitoring, planning, and adjustment of education sector policies and priorities.” The
Bank team noted that a number of complementary education projects address learning poverty and
enrollment, including: Actions to Strengthen Performance for Inclusive and Responsive Education Program
(P173399); Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Human Capital Investment Project (P166309); Punjab Human Capital
Investment Project (P164785); and Sindh Early Learning Enhancement Through Classroom Transformation
(P172834). An MU rating for the RI triggers a downrating to Modest. Achievement Rating: Modest.



Rating
Moderately Unsatisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Recognize the contribution of women to economic productivity

Rationale
RI 4 was not achieved because registration of home-based workers (HBWs) had not begun, nor was it clear
when it might be (ICR, para. 28). Nonetheless, some progress toward implementation of actions under PAs
10-11 was made through passage of the necessary legislative framework and formulation of guidelines in
“nearly all provinces.” Further progress, however, would depend on “capacity building and large-scale
support.” The Bank team noted that the WB has supported the labor department with HBWs rules
development and facilitated the Balochistan labor department and social security institution toward developing
a management information system database for HBWs, and that some provincial authorities are making
progress with implementation (the Sindh labor department is regularly receiving registration applications from
HBWs, and its social security institution has launched an on-line portal where HBWs can register to receive
benefits; the Balochistan labor department has started registration of HBWs in two provinces). Based on this
additional evidence, the achievement rating is upgraded from Negligible to Modest. Achievement Rating:
Modest.

RI 5 regarding women working in shops, establishments, and factories was fully achieved, but an MU rating
for the RI triggers a downgrade to Modest. Nevertheless, additional evidence provided by the ICR (para. 30)
of measures to implement the actions supported by PA 12 with respect to hours, childcare, safe working
environment, toilet facilities, etc., warrant an achievement rating of Substantial. Achievement Rating:
Substantial.



Rating
Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 20
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Pakistan Human Capital DPF Series (P170568)




                  OBJECTIVE 3
                  Objective
                  Improve national safety nets to respond to shocks in a more efficient manner

                  Rationale
                  The target for RI 6 was exceeded, with the majority of beneficiaries of COVID-19 response interventions
                  being one-off emergency transfer beneficiaries. This result directly supported the objective of a more efficient
                  and coordinated response to shock via national safety nets, as did approval of a Memorandum of Agreement
                  between BISP and provincial governments (ICR, para. 32). Achievement Rating: High.

                  The target for RI 7 was substantially exceeded, indicating highly effective implementation of PA 15 (i) to
                  expand the WeT Program. Of the beneficiary children, 49 percent were girls (TTL). Achievement Rating:
                  High.

                  Overachievement of the target for RI 8 indicated effective implementation of PA 15 (ii) regarding nutrition-
                  sensitive conditional cash transfer programs and further progress toward the objective of effective national
                  safety nets. Achievement Rating: High.

                  The RI 9 target for classification of households was exceeded, indicating effective implementation of PA 16 to
                  improve the ability to target social programs, consistent with the objective of enhancing efficient
                  responsiveness to shocks. Although the ICR (para. 34), as well as this indicator, did not provide information
                  on implementation of measures under PA 17 regarding the independence and governance of NSER, the TTL
                  has reported that the representative, independent Steering Committee has been formed and held two
                  meetings. Achievement Rating: High.

                  The ICR (footnote 16) attempted to simulate the likely 2023 status of RI 10 using the 2018-19 Household
                  Integrated Survey, yielding an estimate above the target. However, an MU rating for the indicator due to
                  weaknesses in terms of data availability and pertinence to the associated PAs limits the rating to Modest.
                  Achievement Rating: Modest.



                  Rating
                  Satisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Achievement of PDOs 1 was Moderately Unsatisfactory, PDO2 was rated Moderately Satisfactory, and PDO3
was rated Satisfactory, yielding an overall average of Moderately Satisfactory.



                                                                                                                    Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pakistan Human Capital DPF Series (P170568)




Overall Efficacy Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

The relevance of PAs was rated as Satisfactory and Efficacy was rated Moderately Satisfactory, yielding a
Moderately Satisfactory Outcome.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Two principal, interrelated risks to maintaining progress toward the development objectives supported by this
series are macroeconomic prospects and natural disasters. The ICR (para. 51) also noted political, governance,
and institutional risks, but did not elaborate on them.

Macroeconomic imbalances have created fiscal and inflationary pressures that tend to compromise both
personal and public spending on school attendance, nutrition, and social services, thus undermining
progress toward improving Pakistan’s low HC status (ICR, para. 52). The COVID-19 pandemic exacerbated
macroeconomic risks through “a sharp reduction of domestic economic activity, reduced demand for exports,
import shortages, rising prices, higher external financing costs, and fiscal pressures” (PD2, para. 91). Ongoing
fiscal and debt challenges could further constrain the budget for social spending and investment in HC.
Mitigating measures in the SHIFT series included shifting primary health care and immunization programs to the
recurrent side of the budget. In addition, the complementary Resilient Institutions for Sustainable Economy
(RISE) DPL “supported better fiscal management and improvements in the digital payments architecture, which
was important for resolving circular debt of the power sector, as well as other macro risks” (TTL).

Natural disasters pose a recurrent risk to Pakistan’s ability to sustain progress toward HC objectives.
The reforms supported by the SHIFT series have substantially improved the capacity of safety nets to respond
to shocks such as COVID-19 and the severe floods in 2022, and of federal and provincial governments to
coordinate responses. However, costs imposed by future disasters could adversely affect the fiscal capacity to
respond to such shocks, undermining both safety net reforms and further investments in HC. Mitigation was
supported by the complementary the Program for Affordable and Clean Energy (PACE) DPL, which “supported
the reform of electricity subsidies and rationalizing consumer tariffs to better target the poor and vulnerable”
(TTL).




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pakistan Human Capital DPF Series (P170568)



The political risk of instability has been heightened by the military’s intervention in the recent election and
appointment of a Prime Minister. Although the PDs referred broadly to “political risks,” they did not explicitly
discuss this risk or how it might be mitigated.

PD2 (para. 92) also cited governance, institutional capacity and stakeholder risks as challenges to be
addressed in part through the SHIFT DPF series. Several PAs explicitly supported better coordination between
federal and provincial governments and programs, especially regarding safety nets. But the involvement of so
many actors in a multi-sectoral, multi-level reform program raised the risks of “elite capture, political influence on
implementation of reforms, [and] slow decision-making at institutional level.” These risks were mitigated in part
by continuing engagement and support programs by the WB and other development partners, as well as by the
parallel RISE DPL (see above). The ICR (para. 42) also stated that “the SHIFT series had a strong impact on
institutional change and strengthening,” including reforms for better provincial-federal coordination, the merger of
two previous institutions into the Pakistan Institute of Education, and independence of NSER, among others.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

Analytical underpinnings and lessons from prior experience

The design drew on a wide range of analytical underpinnings in studies by various agencies. PD1 (Table 5) cited
three documents as providing a “medium to long-term vision for Pakistan including recommendations on key
policies for improved sustainable growth and increased HC accumulation": Pakistan@100; Pakistan Human
Capital Policy Note; and Weathering the storm: restoring macroeconomics stability, Pakistan Development
Update (June 2019). A number of UNICEF documents provided assessments and guidance for reforms to the
CRVS systems, while various World Health Organization, WB, and Ministry of National Health Services
Regulation and Coordination reports underpinned reforms to basic health services and immunization. The WB’s
Pakistan District Education Management Service Delivery Study highlighted the problem of learning poverty,
with reforms guided by the government’s National Education Policy Framework and the Punjab Education
Sector Plan 2019 to 2023.

The need for and design of measures to improve recognition of and working conditions for women workers (both
informal and formal) drew on several studies by the International Labour Organization (ILO), Women in Informal
Employment: Globalizing and Organizing, and the Pakistan Bureau of Statistics. Measures to improve safety
nets were based on a number of studies by the WB and partners regarding BISP, NSER, and other social
protection programs.

PD1 (para. 33) reported the following as key lessons from six DPF operations supporting social sectors from
2004 to 2009:

      Country ownership and alignment to government priorities is critical for program success. The
       SHIFT series supported reform actions that were aligned to the federal and provincial governments’
       priorities to improve HC outcomes in the country.

                                                                                                      Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pakistan Human Capital DPF Series (P170568)



      Sequenced reforms supported by a DPF series of two operations provides greater momentum for
       policy changes. The first SHIFT operation in the series laid out core reform actions that
       were consolidated by the second operation and supported national reforms that required consensus
       building between the federal and provincial governments.
      Policy lending needs to be complemented by investments that support achievement of
       results. Investment lending operations and technical assistance in the portfolio and prepared in parallel
       to the SHIFT series across the federating units financed interventions on a sustained basis to achieve
       implementation results.

Results chain and indicators

The PD stated the intentions and expected results for each action, but was less explicit on the underlying
rationale, and neither the PDs nor the ICR provided an explicit theory of change or results chain. The RIs
generally tracked expected outcomes from implementation of the associated PAs, although in some cases not
necessarily attributable to the PA. However, three PAs did not have clearly associated RIs.

Identification and mitigation of risks

PD1 (paras. 90-91) appropriately assessed the macroeconomic, political, and governance risks as “high,” with
low reserves and a high debt ratio aggravated by the COVID-19 pandemic, noting that “Pakistan’s track record
on reform implementation has remained mixed, with those benefiting from status quo, elites, and systemic
hurdles resisting the reform process both at the federal and provincial levels.” This was to be mitigated by
“strong ownership of the HC agenda both at the federal and provincial levels” with support from programs and
technical assistance from the WB and other development partners.

The SHIFT series included a number of mitigating measures, particularly against the negative effects of the
COVID-19 pandemic on the lower-income population and HC, such as actions to harmonize and coordinate
social safety nets at the federal and provincial levels, and shifting primary health care and immunization
programs to the recurrent side of the budget.

Consultation with development partners and stakeholders

PD1 (para. 70) stated that the SHIFT series was “prepared in close collaboration with development partners,” in
particular: UNICEF for CRVS reforms; World Health Organization, Unkted Kingdom Department for International
Development, United States Agency for International Development, and United Nations Population Fund with
regard to health care and education; and Japan International Cooperation Agency, UNWomen, and ILO with
respect to women workers. The latter was also supported by “rigorous consultations (including tripartite)…in all
provinces.” A National Steering Committee led consultations at all levels on CRVS reforms, including the private
sector and religious leaders.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pakistan Human Capital DPF Series (P170568)



Rationale

Monitoring and Adaptation

The data required for monitoring implementation were available (as reported in the ICR), with the exception of RI
10.

Preparation of the SHIFT series began prior to the advent of the COVID-19 pandemic. The WB then adjusted its
program for Pakistan, in line with the WBG Crisis Response Approach Paper (PD2, Annex 1, para. 4), including
two human capital projects in some of the poorest districts and a PfoR (Program for Results) operation “to
address disruptions to the education sector.” The ICR (para. 47) reported that the DPF series was quickly
adjusted on an emergency basis, with the support of “an extensive multisectoral team of specialists…under the
guidance of two experienced team leaders, one of whom continued to lead both operations in the series, thus
ensuring continuity.” As then designed, the measures under the SHIFT series to reform safety nets and
institutions for more efficient responsiveness to shocks were highly relevant to adapting to the COVID-19 crisis,
and the ICR (para. 15) said that no further significant changes were needed during implementation.”



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

While design is rated Moderately Satisfactory, generally satisfactory performance in areas other than results
chains and indicators, together with Satisfactory implementation weight the overall rating toward Satisfactory.
Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

It is too early for evidence to be available on possible social and poverty impacts.



b. Environmental

It is too early for evidence to be available on improvements in resilience to climate change and other external
shocks.



                                                                                                   Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Pakistan Human Capital DPF Series (P170568)




c. Gender

Data are not yet available on the extent to which measures supported by the SHIFT series might have mitigated
the adverse effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on girls’ education.



d. Other

n.a.



10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR provided a coherent narrative of the SHIFT series, both complete (in accordance with guidelines) and
concise. It provided adequate context and rationale for WB support; tables explaining the relevance of PAs and
the extent of achievement of results; and discussion of outcomes, risks, and lessons. There was no explicit
results chain, in part because the PDs lacked specific explanations of the rationale behind each PA (just a
discussion of expected results), and its theory of change was at best implicit in the PDOs, PAs, and RIs (which
the ICR [para. 47] asserted but did not lay out). The discussion of efficacy (section II.B) was thorough and in
some cases (e.g., paras. 21, 23, 26 and 30) provided important supplementary evidence of implementation and
supporting measures undertaken. Similar information would have been useful on implementation of PAs 17 and
19, which were not adequately tracked by the RIs. The ICR (para. 56) appropriately noted that the limited time
frame of a two-operation series makes it difficult in some cases to monitor outcomes, leading to less satisfactory
process-oriented indicators.

The ICR (paras. 55-57 and 42) provided a thoughtful discussion of lessons learned and experience with
institutional strengthening. More analysis of gender-related impacts of measures regarding education (PAs 7-9)
and women workers (PAs 10-12) would have been interesting, although perhaps constrained by the limitations
of the indicators and availability of data.


a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreement/Comments
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory         Satisfactory



                                                                                                   Page 19 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pakistan Human Capital DPF Series (P170568)



Relevance of Results
                                ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Reforms are more likely to have sustained impact when supported by further actions, technical
assistance, and/or complementary investment projects. The ICR (para. 55) observed that PAs supported by
further financial and technical assistance were better sustained than those without follow-on projects, which
often “suffered from delayed results.” This is especially true when government capacity and resources are
constrained.

Reforms at the national and provincial levels enable but do not guarantee delivery of human capital
development services at the sub-national/local level. The ICR (para. 56) noted that, despite improved
coordination between federal and provincial governments and programs, “progress was uneven at the sub-
national level.” Motivating sub-national actors poses a challenge for designing reforms and actions to achieve
desired results at the local level.

Policy and institutional reforms through a DPF series can lay the foundation for continued and more
ambitious reforms. The ICR (para. 57) observed that the health financing reforms under SHIFT “allowed the
government in Sindh…to push further for getting funds to the district level” and motivated further requests for
WB analytical, advisory, and technical assistance.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                   Page 20 of 20
