     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR Support to the Nat. Education Pact (P146831)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023919

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P146831                                     DR Support to the Nat. Education Pact

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Dominican Republic                          Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-85400,IBRD-89130                      30-Jun-2020                                            47,500,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Sep-2015                                30-Jun-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             50,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                              47,500,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                          47,500,000.00                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Judyth L. Twigg             Salim J. Habayeb             Susan Ann Caceres                IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (p. 4) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 6), the project's
   objectives were "to improve the Borrower's capacity to: (i) recruit and train primary and secondary school
   teachers; (ii) assess student learning in primary and secondary education; (iii) evaluate the quality of service
   provided by Public Early Childhood Development (ECD) Centers; and (iv) enhance the process for
   decentralizing public school management."



                                                                                                     Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR Support to the Nat. Education Pact (P146831)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project contained four components, which were not revised during the project's lifetime:

   1. Improving capacity to recruit and train primary and secondary school teachers (appraisal:
   US$25.375 million ; actual, US$22.875 million) was to carry out a comprehensive revision of the Ministry of
   Education's (MINERD's) primary and secondary school teacher recruitment and training activities, with a
   focus on pre-service training (through the revision of the Salomé Ureña Teacher Training Institute's
   (ISFODOSU's) teaching degree curricula and competence profiles, creation of specialized degrees for
   secondary school teachers, implementation of a quality assurance and monitoring system for ISFODOSU,
   implementation of a scholarship program to attract high-performing secondary students to ISFODOSU pre-
   service degrees, implementation of a remedial program for admitted students with skill gaps, and revision of
   the career structure and promotion schemes for ISFODOSU teachers); human resources management
   (through design and implementation of a competitive induction exam and selection process for public school
   teachers, administrators, and staff; launch of an online teacher recruitment system; and launch of web-
   enabled management information systems); the teaching career (through support for the design and
   adoption of guidelines for the teaching career, a revised teacher evaluation based on international best
   practices, and implementation of a certification system); and in-service training (through development and
   piloting of in-service training programs for current teachers through the National Institute of Education and
   Training of Teachers (INAFOCAM), revision of guidelines and evaluation of existing in-service programs,
   institutional capacity strengthening for the INAFOCAM evaluation office, and an impact evaluation of
   INAFOCAM in-service programs).

   2. Improving capacity to assess student learning in primary and secondary education (appraisal:
   US$13 million; actual: US$13 million) was to support the strengthening of the student assessment system
   through development and implementation of a national strategy for pre-tertiary student assessments,
   participation in and dissemination of international assessments, technical improvement of student
   assessments, design and implementation of a system for dissemination of results and use of assessment
   data, and development and implementation of a national assessment in early grades.

   3. Improving capacity to evaluate the quality of service provided by Public ECD Centers (appraisal:
   US$5 million; actual: US$5 million) was to support the organizational design and institutional strengthening
   of the National Institute of Comprehensive Care for Early Childhood (INAIPI), through developing a strategic
   plan for INAIPI and quality standards systems for Public ECD Centers and personnel, and development and
   implementation of an information and communications strategy to disseminate standards of quality service
   delivery for the Public ECD Centers, improve public understanding of the Quisqueya Starts with You (QEC)
   program, and improve parenting practices. (Quisqueya, translated as "cradle of life," is an indigenous name
   for the island on which the Dominican Republic and Haiti are located. The QEC program is the
   government's flagship program for ECD.)

   4. Improving capacity to enhance the process for decentralizing public school management
   (appraisal: US$6.5 million; actual: US$6.5 million) was to support the decentralization of MINERD's

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR Support to the Nat. Education Pact (P146831)



   functions and resources, through supporting the increase of established School Management Committees
   (SMCs) in public schools through transfers to SMCs, supporting a review of regulations and processes to
   increase efficiency of establishing SMCs, implementation of a functional expenditure system for SMCs,
   improving training for SMCs to develop school improvement plans and annual work plans, improving
   financial and procurement practices at the school level, and revising school auditing guidelines and
   procedures.

   The project was to follow a results-based approach with 20 disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs).
   Disbursements were to be made against eligible expenditures under the 2014 National Education Pact.
   Estimated costs at appraisal included a front-end fee of US$0.125 million.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The project was to be financed by a US$50 million Loan from the International Bank for Reconstruction and
   Development. No government contribution was expected or made. Actual spending was US$47.5 million,
   after it was determined that one DLI in the amount of US$2.5 million (adoption of a teaching career and
   evaluation system based on standards established by MINERD) would likely not be disbursed.

   The project was approved on September 30, 2015, and became effective on December 9, 2016. The delay
   between approval and effectiveness was due to the need to gain Congress' approval; such delays are
   common among projects in the Dominican Republic (DR). Due to the delay in effectiveness, retroactive
   financing was allowed up to a maximum of US$10 million. The project closed on June 30, 2023, three years
   after its original closing date of June 30, 2020. It was restructured twice:

         December 10, 2019: The project was extended for 27 months, to September 30, 2022, to
          accommodate an additional financing (AF) request of US$100 million that was ultimately not
          approved by Congress. The AF would have included three new outcome indicators and new gender
          results indicators, but these ultimately were not incorporated when Congressional approval was not
          forthcoming.
         August 22, 2022: The closing date was extended by an additional nine months, to June 30, 2023, to
          accommodate delays in the formation and functioning of SMCs caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project's objectives were highly relevant to country context and government strategy. At the time of
project appraisal, the DR had experienced decades of rapid economic growth but continued high levels of
poverty and inequity. Low-quality education was seen as contributing to the weak linkages between growth
and shared prosperity. The government's National Development Strategy for 2010-2030 identified
investments in education to increase human capital as key to ending extreme poverty and boosting
equality. However, despite having achieved significant gains in education access over the preceding
decade, significant challenges remained with student learning outcomes. Regional student assessments
conducted in 2006 found DR students ranking last, performing well below regional averages in all subject

                                                                                                Page 3 of 16
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       DR Support to the Nat. Education Pact (P146831)



areas. Even students from upper income quintiles, while performing much better than lower-income
students, performed poorly relative to similar socio-economic groups in other countries in the region.

The PAD (p. 2) argued that, in order to improve learning outcomes, the DR required improvement in the
foundations and systems in place to formulate and implement quality-enhancing policies. DR's education
system is managed by a complex set of institutions that has produced largely sound policies but
implemented those policies unevenly and without robust evaluation. The sector is managed by two
separate ministries: MINERD (responsible for delivery of public pre-university education, at the initial basic,
and intermediate levels) and the Ministry of Higher Education, Science, and Technology (responsible for
higher education, including courses related to pre-service teacher training). ECD programs, grounded in the
QEC, fall under MINERD's INAIPI, a relatively new institute regulating provision of ECD services under
QEC for children ages 0-4. Within this institutional landscape, the PAD presented evidence identifying four
main underlying challenges that constrained education system performance: (i) MINERD's capacity to
recruit and train teachers according to quality standards, (ii) MINERD's capacity to assess student learning,
in particular in basic education, and the dissemination and use of that information by different actors in the
system, (iii) MINERD's capacity to evaluate and ensure the quality of service provided for initial education
(ages 0-6) that contributes to school readiness of children entering basic education, and (iv) MINERD's
capacity to decentralize the school management system. The project's objectives responded directly to
these challenges, and the Bank had the technical knowledge, operational experiences, and convening
power to facilitate and incentivize progress in these areas.

The government had shown commitment to addressing these issues through doubling the pre-tertiary
education budget (to four percent of gross domestic product [GDP] by 2013) and launching of the National
Education Pact (NEP) in April 2014, valid through 2030. The NEP encompassed, among other priorities,
reform of the teaching career through revision of pre-service and in-service teacher training programs,
adoption of a culture of evaluation across all education sectors and actors, increasing the quality of early
childhood education, and modernization and decentralization of the education system to increase its
efficacy and efficiency. Implementation of the NEP was already under way at the time of project appraisal
through an increase in teachers' salaries, revisions in teacher training and standards through ISFODOSU,
implementation of a sample-based student assessment in grades 3-4 and 10, and design and early
implementation of the QEC program. The project remained highly relevant to the MINERD 2021-2024
strategic plan, which contains five central axes: enhancing quality of education, improving competencies
and welfare of teaching staff, strengthening the leadership and regulation of the education system,
increasing social participation and active citizenship, and strengthening internal administrative processes
and management.

This project was the Bank's first in DR's education sector in many years. The project was strongly aligned
with the Bank's Country Partnership Strategy at appraisal (FY15-19), contributing to its Results Area of
strengthening social services delivery and, under that results area, its outcome of improved quality of
learning through implementation of a robust student assessment system. The project remained relevant to
the next Country Partnership Framework (FY22-26), which contains a high-level outcome on increased
number of high-quality jobs and an objective on enhanced quality of education and training, deliberately
transitioning from this project's support for the NEP into analytical and financial products that support post-
secondary level initiatives and gender equality initiatives at all levels.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating

                                                                                                       Page 4 of 16
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      DR Support to the Nat. Education Pact (P146831)



               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                Improve the Borrower's capacity to recruit and train primary and secondary school teachers

                Rationale
                The theory of change for this objective held that development of teacher standards and a revised entrance
                exam would produce a more selective, transparent, and meritocratic system of recruiting and selecting both
                teachers and students entering teaching degree programs. The design of new teaching degree programs,
                revising and adjusting in-service teacher training programs, and improving MINERD's teacher training
                institution (ISFODOSU) would lead to improved teacher training programs. Development of a teacher career
                framework and a new assessment process for teachers would provide more information and incentives for
                teacher performance and would guide teachers more effectively through their teaching careers. All of these
                outputs would, in turn, lead to improved capacity to recruit, train, and hire teachers. The theory of change for
                this and the other three objectives assumed that the ministry would have the knowledge and capacity to
                conduct these activities.



                Outputs/intermediate outcomes

                MINERD designed, adopted, and disseminated new professional standards for teachers (DLI5). The
                "Professional and Performance Standards for Teaching Certification and Development of the Teaching
                Career" were approved by the National Council of Education in 2014. According to the ICR (p. 16), approval
                of these standards established a national consensus on what is expected from teachers in terms of their
                knowledge and classroom performance. The standards were accompanied by regulations on teacher
                competencies.

                A competitive entrance exam was designed and implemented for prospective teachers entering ISFODOSU,
                aligned with the new teacher professional standards (DLI2, DLI6). MINERD started administering this exam to
                hire teachers in 2015. In 2021, an evaluation consultant was hired under the project to ensure that these
                exams were aligned with professional standards; this consultant determined that the tests and standards
                were well aligned and provided recommendations for improving the clarity of some questions on the exams.
                ISFODOSU also improved the selection process by which it awards scholarships to better target high-
                achieving secondary school graduates. As a result of improved recruitment efforts, the percentage of
                applicants passing the more rigorous teacher recruitment exam increased from 70 percent in 2015 to 95
                percent at project closure.

                The project supported strengthening of the regulatory framework for pre-service teacher training. The
                "Regulation for Teacher Training Quality in the DR," approved in 2015, specified teacher competencies and
                the mandatory entrance exam, proposed an increase in minimum face-to-face classroom time from 1-2 days

                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DR Support to the Nat. Education Pact (P146831)



to 4 days/week, and included practice in schools as part of the training curriculum. In addition, ISFODOSU
designed and implemented two new secondary-level teaching degrees (DLI8).

INAFOCAM adjusted its in-service training programs based on results from assessments and impact
evaluations (DLI18).

A new teacher evaluation system, aligned with the new professional standards, was implemented in
2021 (DLI13). At least 20 percent of teachers at all levels of education now receive two evaluations per year,
achieving the target. The system includes a self-evaluation, a supervisor evaluation, and a student-teacher
evaluation. The results of these three assessments are used to determine teacher bonuses.

A new teaching career framework (DLI9) was not developed as planned, as this activity receded in priority
with the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, steps were taken toward design of a professional
development plan for educators, including a revised career structure and promotion scheme (DLI17).
According to the ICR (p. 18), this plan is currently pending approval by the ISFODOSU Board.

By project closure, INAFOCAM's and ISFODOSU's annual financial reports were being prepared using a new
comprehensive financial management information system that was being implemented nationwide (SIGEF)
(DLI12).



Outcomes

By project closure, all teacher positions were being staffed through the new teacher entrance exam (DLI1).
The number of teaching positions staffed through the exam increased from 6,000 in 2014 to 40,126 in 2023,
more than doubling the target of 19,000. Of the teachers in those positions, 79 percent have been women,
essentially meeting the target of 80 percent.

Student positions in the teaching degree programs at ISFODOSU have been filled through the revised
entrance exam since 2021. 26,686 student applicants have been admitted on the basis of this exam,
exceeding the target of 5,600 student applicants. Of those applicants, 79 percent have been women,
exceeding the target of 65 percent women applicants.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the Borrower's capacity to assess student learning in primary and secondary education

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective held that development of a new framework and strategy for student
assessment, as well as development of an assessment to evaluate learning in the first three year of primary
education and the application of international tests (Program for International Student Assessment, PISA),

                                                                                                 Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DR Support to the Nat. Education Pact (P146831)



would increase the amount and quality of available information on student learning outcomes. This
information, together with the development of a strategy for dissemination of assessment results, would lead
to improved capacity to assess student learning.



Outputs and intermediate outcomes

A medium-term student assessment strategy was developed, piloted, and began implementation (DLI7,
DLI10). MINERD's Student Assessment Directorate staff received training on sampling, item design,
database management, and statistical software (DLI19). Workshops and trainings were carried out with the
Ministry of Education of Colombia on the development of instrument items for student assessment. A
workshop on use and dissemination of international student assessments was completed. In 2022, MINERD
prioritized two key activities: application of sample-based national student learning assessments of grades 3,
6, and 9 to estimate learning losses following the pandemic, and design of a student learning monitoring
system for schools.

MINERD designed and administered a diagnostic, census-based Spanish and mathematics assessment for
the first cycle of primary education in 2017 (grades 1-3) (DLI14). Reports with the results of this assessment
were generated and disseminated at the regional, district, and school levels. MINERD also implemented
diagnostic evaluations at the secondary school level (grades 6 and 9) in 2018 and 2019. In 2016, a
government ordinance established census evaluations for all third, sixth, and ninth graders, representing the
last grades of each education cycle. Beginning in 2017, one grade was evaluated per year, such that all three
grades held their first round of evaluations before the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. A census evaluation
of grade 3 took place in 2023, resuming the evaluation cycle.

MINERD administered the PISA in 2022 (DLI3), with results published in 2023. The project developed a
strategy for disseminating and using the results data, in which 254 schools and 7,878 students participated.



Outcomes

By project closure, student learning outcomes for both the primary and secondary education levels had been
generated, analyzed, and disseminated, as planned.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve the Borrower's capacity to evaluate the quality of service provided by Public Early Childhood
Development Centers

Rationale

                                                                                                 Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DR Support to the Nat. Education Pact (P146831)



The theory of change for this objective held that design and implementation of a strategic plan for INAIPI,
including a quality assurance system accompanied by a communication strategy about that system would
lead to a quality assurance system having been designed, functioning, and communicated. The inclusion in
this system of clear quality standards for ECD centers and instruments for assessment would lead to
improved capacity to evaluate the quality of services at early childhood centers.



Outputs and intermediate outcomes

The Dominican Institute for Educational Quality Evaluation and Research (IDEICE) and INAIPI evaluated the
teaching quality of 30 QEC care centers using TEACH-ECE, a classroom observation tool that explores what
goes on in ECD classrooms, focusing on the quality of teaching practices that nurture cognitive and language
skills, socioemotional competencies, and executing functioning abilities for children ages 3-6. IDECIE and
INAIPI staff were trained and certified to use the TEACH-ECE tool. Results reports from the assessments
focused on areas where pedagogical practices required strengthening. The ICR (pp. 19-20) reported that
analysis of the assessment data was interrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic, but that it was eventually
completed. In April of 2022, decision makers and staff from MINERD, IDECIE, and INAIPI met to discuss the
application of the TEACH-ECE tool and confirmed its utility in measuring teaching practices and promoting
improvement.



Outcomes

By project closure, 50 percent of QEC care centers were evaluated against quality standards and their results
were analyzed, meeting the target of 50 percent (DLI15, DLI20) and reflecting improved capacity to assess
the quality of services.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
improve the Borrower's capacity to enhance the process for decentralizing public school management

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective held that the development of communication and training campaigns
on the roles and responsibilities of different SMC members, together with support for increasing the number
and quality of SMCs, would lead to an increased number of trained and fully functional SMCs. A review of
regulations on school-based management and support for schools would lead to a clear regulatory framework
in terms of processes and roles of different school actors. Together, these interventions would produce
improved capacity for decentralized public school management.



                                                                                                Page 8 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DR Support to the Nat. Education Pact (P146831)




Outputs and intermediate outcomes

The project supported a communication and training campaign to inform SMC members about their roles and
responsibilities, including training on how to form SMCs, SMC resource management, and financial
accountability.

A government regulation on new manuals for school-based management, supported by the project, was
issued in 2018. An additional government ordinance in 2019 redefined how funds for SMCs were managed
and allowed for greater flexibility in schools spending while still maintaining flexibility and
transparency (DLI11). The ICR (p. 20) noted that the rigidity of allowable spending under the previous legal
framework had been a significant constraint on school development.

By project closure, out of 7,687 schools that could have SMCs, 7,276 schools had formed legally constituted
SMCs, and 2,525 of those had received resources from MINERD (DLI4).

In addition to supporting SMCs, the project also strengthened decentralized education system management
by redefining the roles and responsibilities of MINERD district and regional directors and establishing the first
competitive recruitment for these roles, and by improving in-service training for school principals. The ICR (p.
21) noted that SMCs played a key role in the functioning and reopening of schools during and following the
COVID-19 pandemic, with student support programs (including provision of technological resources to
support distance learning) administered with the support of SMCs, and principals authorized to use
decentralized funds for basic services like food rations.



Outcomes

In 2023, IDEICE carried out an audit to assess the number of SMCs that were fully functional. (Fully
functional SMCs were those that were legally constituted, had an improvement plan and a bank account, and
were receiving transfers from MINERD.) The audit randomly selected 304 of the 2,525 SMCs that were
receiving MINERD funding for assessment, conducting interviews and reviewing the improvement plans at
those 304 schools. The audit showed that 91 percent of the sample had prepared an acceptable improvement
plan, and 85 percent had both an acceptable improvement plan and spent most of their resources according
to that plan. Applying that percentage to the total number of SMCs receiving funds from MINERD, the ICR
concluded that around 2,145 SMCs were adequately implementing their development plans (0.85 * 2525 =
2145) (DLI16).

Therefore, by project closure, 27.9 percent of SMCs (2,145 out of the 7,687 total SMCs) were successfully
implementing their school development plans, exceeding the target of 10 percent. (Successful plan
implementation was understood as SMCs spending money according to their improvement plans with the
participation of all members of the SMC in decision making.)



Rating
Substantial

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                DR Support to the Nat. Education Pact (P146831)




OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project reached 524,476 beneficiaries, of whom 58 percent were female, exceeding the target of 455,520
                            beneficiaries, of whom 53 percent were female. Three mechanisms of beneficiary feedback were
                            implemented.

                            The PAD (p. 5) noted that several other donors and partners were highly engaged in the education sector,
                            including the European Union, Inter-American Development Bank, United Nations Children's Fund, United
                            States Agency for International Development, French Development Agency, and Government of Cuba.
                            Initiatives financed by these partners complemented interventions under this project, but this project's focus
                            areas were unique, such that it is plausible to attribute observed outcomes to this project's incentives.

                            With all objectives substantially achieved, overall efficacy is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   At appraisal, a present discounted value (PDV) approach was used to estimate the net effect of the project on
   beneficiaries (PAD, pp. 60-68). Data for the analysis were obtained primarily from a 2011 household survey of
   the labor force conducted by the National Statistical Office. Assuming that project impact would occur through
   two channels in life-earning profiles—higher probability of school completion, and higher labor productivity
   growth—the project estimated the stream of benefits and costs of schooling over the lifetime of a representative
   student with and without the project. Project interventions were expected to yield a PDV of incremental benefits
   of US$1,819 per final beneficiary student. Sensitivity analysis showed the results to be robust under variance in
   adult labor earnings growth rate gains and secondary school completion rates.

   The ICR's analysis updated that conducted at appraisal, finding a PDV of incremental benefits of US$1,923 per
   beneficiary. The result was higher than that in the PAD because secondary school completion rates were higher
   than those forecasted in 2018. Based on these results, the ICR found an internal rate of return between 41.6
   percent and 61.8 percent, varying with assumptions on the future growth of adult labor earnings and the
   project's effect on the probability of secondary school completion.

   There were some efficiencies in implementation, largely because the project did not require a dedicated
   implementation unit. The technical work of the project was carried out by personnel from MINERD, who were not
   compensated by the project. However, implementation efficiency was significantly affected by a three-year
   extension to accommodate the 14-month delay in effectiveness, the proposal but then failure to approve AF, and
   delays related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The delay in effectiveness was typical for Bank-financed projects in
   the country. The COVID-19 crisis affected MINERD staffing and diverted MINERD's attention to the
   development of inputs for the provision of distance learning. The largest negative impact on project efficiency

                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DR Support to the Nat. Education Pact (P146831)



stemmed from unsuccessful efforts at AF. The AF was approved by the Bank in December 2018 and signed by
the Ministry of Finance in December 2019, but due to the COVID-19 pandemic and its redirection of priorities
toward the emergency response, Congressional approval was not obtained before the 18-month deadline for
declaration of effectiveness. The AF Loan Agreement was therefore terminated in June 2020. A new
government administration took office in August 2020 and requested reinstatement of the AF. The Bank agreed
to proceed with an exceptional reinstatement, establishing September 30, 2021, as the new effectiveness
deadline. The government requested a four-month extension of this deadline, to January 31, 2022, due to an
increase in the number of requests for Congressional approval to support multiple COVID-19 crisis responses,
an environment of increasing political polarization, and lengthy scrutiny of loan agreements. The Bank agreed to
this extension, but Congress did not meet the deadline, and the AF Loan Agreement was again terminated.

Although the PDV analysis demonstrated strong returns on the project's investment, the diversion of time and
resources to an ultimately unsuccessful request for AF, delays in effectiveness and implementation, and
significant COVID-19-related disruptions indicate that the project's results were not achieved at least cost.
Project efficiency is therefore rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     100.00
 ICR Estimate                                              41.60
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project's objectives were highly relevant to country context, government priorities, and Bank strategy. All of
the project's four objectives were substantially achieved. Although a PDV analysis demonstrated strong returns
on the project's investment, the diversion of time and resources to an ultimately unsuccessful request for AF,
delays in effectiveness and implementation, and significant COVID-19-related disruptions indicate that the
project's results were not achieved at least cost. With High relevance, Substantial efficacy, and Modest
efficiency, the project's Outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory, indicative of moderate shortcomings in its
preparation, implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR Support to the Nat. Education Pact (P146831)




7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project significantly strengthened MINERD's institutional capacity, with student learning evaluations now
integrated into the regulatory framework; MINERD staff well trained on sampling, data management, and
evidence-based methodologies; commitment to continued participation in international student assessments,
use of the TEACH-ECE tool, and use of assessment data to inform policy making; strengthening of a culture
of meritocracy through teacher and ISFODOSU entrance exams; and successful establishment and ongoing
functioning of SMCs. The ICR (p. 29) noted that these elements have "collectively built a sustainable
framework for maintaining and enhancing educational practices after project closing."




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project emerged from a deep assessment of the educational landscape and broad commitment
  among all stakeholders, including the government, to bring about transformational change, evidenced by
  the signing of the 2014 NEP and an increase of resources to the sector to almost four percent of GDP.
  Key lessons were explicitly learned from other Bank projects in the sector, including the role of political
  economy as a key determinant of project outcomes, the importance of ensuring implementation
  readiness across all involved agencies, and the importance of coordinating with other interventions and
  donors. Institutional and implementation arrangements were thoroughly detailed (PAD, pp. 49-59),
  including the designation of MINERD's Office of International Cooperation (OCI) as the project
  coordination unit and the formation of a Steering Committee to oversee timely coordination and reporting.
  Risk assessment was thorough, identifying substantial political and governance risks (mitigated through
  the Bank maintaining a broader dialogue with all relevant stakeholders), sector strategies and policies
  risks (mitigated by supporting the government to maintain participatory processes that MINERD had
  already established to anticipate and deal with potential resistance from teachers and teachers' unions to
  new policies), and institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability risks (mitigated through
  collaboration with other donors to support the government in strengthening INAIPI and implementing the
  results-based approach). The project's design and results framework were clear and logical. M&E
  arrangements were robust (see Section 9a).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team engaged with MINERD and OCI teams effectively across the project's lifetime, with
 engagement intensified when implementation was progressing more slowly, especially during the COVID-
 19 pandemic. The Bank's engagement helped smooth technical challenges encountered by MINERD and
 facilitate important changes and updates to government regulatory frameworks. The government's ICR (p.


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR Support to the Nat. Education Pact (P146831)



 64) credits the Bank team's specialists as "decisive" in supporting achievement of DLIs and addressing
 implementation issues as they arose. The project team later added that the Bank was highly proactive in
 addressing the challenges related to approval of AF, deploying all available resources in a sustained effort
 to resolve the problem.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project's objectives and theory of change were clearly stated. Regular government information
 systems were to be used to monitor progress. DLIs were clearly defined, with amounts and calendar years
 of expected completion as well as detailed verification protocols for each DLI specified in the PAD (pp. 43-
 48). OCI was to be in charge of overall M&E activities, supported by input from each of the units carrying
 out project activities. OCI was to send biannual progress reports to the Bank. An impact evaluation of
 teacher training was to be carried out by INAFOCAM.



b. M&E Implementation
  The results framework was not amended during project implementation. The government presented
  adequate data to verify compliance with DLIs. Project monitoring reports were created every six months
  using regular administrative data from MINERD. Training sessions were carried out for MINERD staff to
  ensure adequate data collection and analysis. The impact evaluation of INAFOCAM in-service programs
  was implemented as planned.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data were monitored and updated by the project implementation unit, allowing the Bank team to
  review progress. Adjustments were made to INAFOCAM in-service programs based on data and
  analysis from the impact evaluation. Data from student assessments were used to improve policy and
  decision making.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DR Support to the Nat. Education Pact (P146831)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated Environmental Assessment category C. No safeguard policies were triggered.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   At appraisal, the Bank assessed that OCI had the capacity to handle loan proceeds using country systems
   in the education sector. MINERD's Department of Management and Decentralization was to oversee,
   monitor, and supervise transfers to SMCs, for whom the government had conducted comprehensive
   fiduciary training. Regular audits were conducted to identify potential issues. The project's financial
   management rating was moderately satisfactory throughout implementation, with the exception of
   a downgrade in May 2021 to moderately unsatisfactory because of an overdue audit report and failure to
   submit interim financial reports. The rating returned to moderately satisfactory in July 2022.

   As the project was disbursed through DLIs, it involved minimal procurement. Procurable items financed
   under the eligible expenditure program were to be limited to small goods and minor works financed under
   transfers to SMCs and would be procured in accordance with Bank guidelines. Ultimately, the only
   procurement conducted by the project was the selection of the audit firm. The procurement rating was
   satisfactory throughout the project's lifetime.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 Shortcomings in implementation
                                                                                 efficiency related to considerable
                                                                                 delays in project effectiveness
                                                                                 and implementation,
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory   interruptions due to the COVID-
                                                                                 19 pandemic, and repeated
                                                                                 attempts to secure Additional
                                                                                 Financing that was not ultimately
                                                                                 approved.

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       DR Support to the Nat. Education Pact (P146831)



Bank Performance                  Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 29-30) offered several insightful lessons, adapted here:

Aligning a project with medium or long-term sectoral policies provides a solid foundation
that ensures continuity, though continued efforts and political economy analysis are
necessary to sustain momentum through periods of political transition. In this case, the project
fully supported the 2014 National Education Pact, and the broad support for that strategy enabled
continued progress through a turbulent change of government in 2020. That turbulence, however,
caused efforts as securing Additional Financing ultimately to fail.

Empowering decentralized entities with financial decision-making authority can lead to more
efficient and relevant allocation of resources, but that autonomy must be accompanied by
efforts to ensure financial integrity and transparency. in this case, School Management
Committees were provided with comprehensive training on financial practices and the use of Annual
Operations Plans to ensure that they had the tools to allocate funds toward the schools' best
interests.

The use of DLIs can incentivize important regulatory reforms when they are well aligned with
government objectives and priorities. In this case, the Ministry of Education had support (and
pressure) for reform from other government ministries, including the Ministry of Finance, facilitating
regulatory changes and their implementation.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was clear and candid, though it was frequently repetitive. The quality of data and analysis was
adequate. There was some inconsistency in reporting of data between the main text and the results annex
(Annex 1). The ICR's lessons were clear, insightful, and well supported by the main narrative.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial



                                                                                                     Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
DR Support to the Nat. Education Pact (P146831)




                                                                               Page 16 of 16
