     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Results-based Scaling Up RSWS Program (P152693)



                                                                                 Report Number : ICRR0023979

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Program Name
 P152693                                   Results-based Scaling Up RSWS Program

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Viet Nam                                  Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)              Total Program Cost (USD)
 IDA-57390                                 31-Jul-2021                                         173,328,409.35

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 12-Nov-2015                               31-Jul-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          200,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           191,289,993.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                       173,328,409.35                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Dileep M. Wagle            Fernando Manibog             Ramachandra Jammi               IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Program Development Objective (PDO) was to (i) “improve hygiene behavior, increase and sustain
   access to rural sanitation and water supply in rural areas in the participating provinces" (Financing
   Agreement, March 10, 2016, Schedule 1, p.5). This was identical to the wording of the PDO in the Program
   Appraisal Document, October 21, 2015, p.14.

   For the ICRR, the PDO is parsed into the following objectives:


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Results-based Scaling Up RSWS Program (P152693)



   Objective 1 (PDO1): To “improve hygiene behavior in rural areas in the participating provinces”.

   Objective 2 (PDO2): To “increase and sustain access to rural sanitation in rural areas in the participating
   provinces”.

   Objective 3 (PDO3): To “increase and sustain access to water supply in rural areas in the participating
   provinces”.

   The objectives and approach of the Program were to strengthen the Government of Vietnam’s NTP3 (National
   Target Program) for Rural Water & Sanitation, a US$1.3 billion nation-wide program that ran from 2012 to
   2015, and successor program the NTP for New Rural Area in the 21 provinces of the NM-CH (Northern
   Mountains and Central Highlands). The current program was developed in the wake of two prior PforR
   operations – the Results-Based Rural Water Supply & Sanitation under the NTP (which was assessed by IEG
   through a Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) and the Results-Based National Urban
   Development Program in the Northern Mountains. Key lessons learned from these two Programs were
   integrated into the current Program.



b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during
   implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The program scope, activities, and classification into Results Areas, as defined in the PAD, are given below.

   Program Scope: The Program aimed to support achievement of the WSS targets of the third phase of the
   Government’s National Target Program for Rural Water Supply and Sanitation (NTP3) and successor
   program, the National Target Program for Rural Water Supply & Sanitation (NRD) for 2010-2020 and 2020-
   2025, in the 21 provinces of the NM-CH (Northern Mountains and Central Highlands). The scope of
   activities included:

   a) Rural Water Supply
   - Increasing access to and improving O&M of water supply systems in communities and households, with a
   focus on rehabilitation and extensions from existing systems and construction of new water supply schemes
   when needed.
   - Providing TA for developing an IEC (Information, Education & Communication) toolkit and applying IEC
   activities for increasing awareness on clean water, use of clean water, willingness to pay, and improved
   O&M procedure.

   b) Rural Sanitation and Hygiene
   - Provision and O&M of hygienic sanitation solutions, hand washing facilities, and adequate water supply in
   health clinics and schools.
   - Scaling up hygiene and sanitation solutions by building demand, support for interventions to build the
   supply chain, and construction of latrines to achieve Commune-Wide Sanitation (CWS).

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Results-based Scaling Up RSWS Program (P152693)



- Development of latrine one-stop shops for latrines to increase affordability and accessibility of latrine
construction in households.

c) Capacity Building and Implementation Support
- Capacity building at the national, provincial and local agencies involved in the Program to develop their
implementation and management capacity and improve inter-sectoral collaboration, including: (i) capacity to
promote hygienic behavior change and provide sustainable WSS services; (ii) planning, M&E and reporting;
(iii) support for improved environmental, social and fiduciary systems.
- Program implementation support, including (i) policy support for institutional capacity development at the
provincial, district and commune levels for school water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), development of a
water pricing framework, and development of sanitation markets, (ii) M&E and verification of Program
results and an external audit of the Program by the State Audit of Vietnam (SAV), and (iii) The launch of a
national and provincial high-level communication campaign to raise the political profile of sanitation and
hygiene.
- Improving clean water use and sanitation behaviors through communication and awareness changing
programs.

The Program results and supporting actions needed to efficiently achieve them were organized around
three key results areas. Specifically:

Results Area 1: Key hygienic behaviors changed amongst the population and increased access to basic
services: (estimated cost to IDA at appraisal US$140 million; actual cost at completion - not reported in the
ICR).

Activities under this results area relate to the delivery of BCC (Behavior Change Communication) plans,
achievement of commune-wide sanitation and increased coverage of water supply. The delivery of BCC
plans was incorporated to incentivize the Provinces to introduce new approaches and tools, and to increase
investment in hygiene and sanitation approaches. BCC plans would be reviewed by the World Bank
annually, be developed dynamically, based on learning from the experiences of previous years of the
Program. Commune-wide sanitation was defined by a specified level of improved household and
institutional sanitation and coverage in the commune as a proxy for reduced open defecation. High
coverage of hand-washing points was used to indicate improved hygiene practices.

Results Area 2: Adequate water and sanitation infrastructure in place and in working condition: (estimated
cost to IDA at appraisal US$40 million; actual cost at completion - not reported in the ICR).

Indicators under this Results Area assessed the performance of the water supply schemes and institutional
sanitation two years after installation, including the management of water supply schemes and whether
institutional facilities were being maintained.

Results Area 3: Improved capacity for program implementation: (estimated cost to IDA at appraisal US$20
million; actual cost at completion - not reported in the ICR).

Indicators under this Area measured whether the new approaches developed under the Program were
mainstreamed nationwide. Also, they measured whether more immediate improvements in implementation
were being achieved, including: (a) effective oversight and management of the Program (including more
responsive planning, monitoring and financing) at the provincial and national level; (b) implementation of



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Results-based Scaling Up RSWS Program (P152693)



   Annual Capacity Development Plans, including safeguards and fiduciary management, TA for BCC and
   sustainability of infrastructure; and (c) improved governance systems.

   These Results Areas are linked to specific PDO and intermediate indicators, derived from the Program’s
   Results Framework (RF). Details of these are provided in the subsequent sections. They are also
   associated with specific disbursement linked indicators (DLIs), which derived directly from the Program’s
   RF, so that the Program would disburse against achievement of Program outputs and outcomes.



e. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Program cost: The estimated program cost at appraisal was US$300 million. Actual disbursed amount
   was US$173.3 million.

   Financing: IDA financing for the program amounted to US$200 million. At completion, actual
   disbursement was US$173.3 million.

   Borrower contribution: At appraisal, the planned contribution from the Borrower was US$100 million. At
   completion, the actual contribution from the borrower was zero.

   Dates: The project was approved on November 17, 2015, becoming effective on June 8, 2016. The
   planned closing date of July 31, 2021 was extended by two years to July 31, 2023 (see below). Actual
   closing took place on that date.

   MId-Term Review (MTR): A Mid-Term Review (MTR) was undertaken on October 19, 2018.

   Restructurings: The project underwent a Level 2 restructuring on August 2, 2021, resulting in extension of
   the closing date by 24 months, cancellation of SDR 6.1 million (US$8.84 million equivalent) of IDA
   financing, reallocation of funds between DLIs and adjustments being made to the results framework. The
   reason for the restructuring was a shortage of official development assistance (ODA) allocation in 2016 and
   2017 from the Government of Vietnam (GoV), which constrained the implementation of Program activities
   during those years. The issue was resolved in subsequent years and the extension applied to compensate
   for the insufficient counterpart funding allocation of the previous two years. The cancellation of IDA funds
   was on account of GoV Directive 18/CT-TTG of June 29, 2019, which stated that ODA funds could no
   longer be used to finance “recurrent-tagged expenses” (e.g capacity building, consultants, communication
   activities, etc.). The impact of this change was minimal, not affecting the Program's scope, as it was offset
   by counterpart funds.




3. Relevance   TBL




a. Relevance of Objectives   New




  Rationale



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Results-based Scaling Up RSWS Program (P152693)



Country and Sector Context: Vietnam’s economic growth and poverty reduction efforts had recorded
significant progress by the time of appraisal of the project. Reforms had transformed the country from one of
the poorest in the world to a lower-middle-income country, with an average growth rate of 5.8 percent
between 2008 and 2014. The poverty rate for the country was 9.6 percent in 2012; however, there were
important regional differences, so that the rate for remote Northern Mountains and Central Highlands (NM-
CH region) ranged from a much higher 23.8 percent to 17.8 percent respectively. Ethnic Minority (EM)
households also experienced a higher rate of poverty; their income averaging only one-sixth of the national
average.

Vietnam had also made significant progress with respect to improvements in water supply and sanitation
(WSS) coverage, although here too, regional differences existed. Whereas access to improved toilet
facilities was 67 percent in 2012, with open defecation being only of the order of 2 percent, and access to
water was 94 percent nationwide, in the NM-CH areas, the open defecation rate among rural populations
was as high as 20 percent, with 30 percent having access to toilets that were deemed unhygienic (per the
Ministry of Health’s definition). In addition, 27 percent of people in rural areas of NM-CH did not have access
to safe water supply, as many of the installed schemes were non-functioning on account of poor
maintenance. Countrywide, only a third of these schemes operated sustainably. Hand washing was also not
widely practiced in the country; data indicating that only 13 percent of people washed their hands regularly at
critical moments, with poor households showing even lower rates.

The Government of Vietnam (GoV)’s National Rural Clean Water Supply and Sanitation Strategy for 2020
introduced a vision and priorities for the sector, which included community participation, sustainability and
cost recovery. The GoV also introduced the National Target Program for Rural Water Supply and Sanitation
(NTP) to implement the strategy. This was integrated into the National Target Program on New Rural
Development (NTP/NRD) for 2010-2020, which directed investments in rural areas for physical and social
infrastructure in different sectors, including RWSS.

Alignment with National Priorities and Country Partnership Strategy/Framework:

The development objectives of the program were aligned with the GoV’s priorities and the 2017 World Bank
Group (WBG)’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS), which was still in operation at the time of Program
closing. The Program – which supported direct investments in basic WSS infrastructure and improved
sustainable operations - was aligned with Objective 11 of the CPF, which was aimed at strengthening natural
resource management and improving water security. It also contributed to Objective 5 of the CPF (aimed at
broadening economic participation of ethnic minorities, women and vulnerable groups), as it was targeted the
poorest provinces with highest levels of ethnic minorities, who had benefited least from advances in access
to economic opportunities, education, health and social protection services relative to the rest of the
population.

The objectives of the program were also fully consistent with the GoV’s RWSS objectives, as reflected in the
NTP/NRD for 2020-2025. The Program’s objectives were aligned with several key priorities aimed at
improving RWSS service delivery, including more demand-driven investments, more sustainable O&M, and
capacity building of provincial agencies and service providers.

The Program also contributed to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), especially SDG6
(“Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for All”) and its targets.




                                                                                                 Page 5 of 20
                              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                              Results-based Scaling Up RSWS Program (P152693)



                       Prior Bank involvement in the Sector: The third phase of the NTP and its successor program were
                       supported in 8 provinces of the Red River Delta through the World Bank-funded Results-Based Rural Water
                       Supply and Sanitation PforR , which closed in 2019, providing improved access to over 2.1 million
                       beneficiaries. The current PforR Program was a follow-up program, developed to improve the effectiveness
                       of the GoV’s existing efforts in the 21 provinces of the NM-CH, to scale up access to sanitation and improved
                       hygiene behavior, and increase and sustain access to WSS and reduce open defecation.

                       Based on the above, Relevance of Objectives is rated High.


       Rating Relevance TBL




                       Rating
                       High


b. Relevance of DLIs                          New




DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                DLI 1
                DLI
                Results Area 1: Behavior change and infrastructure:
                DLI 1-1: Number of Behavior Change Communication Plans implemented by participating provinces.
                DLI 1-2: Number of new Communes achieving Commune-Wide Sanitation (CWS) in the participating provinces.
                DLI 1-3: Number of new or rehabilitated Functioning Water Supply Connections to households in the
                participating provinces.



                Rationale
                The Disbursement Linked Indicators, which were embedded in the results chain of the operation, were
                intended to trigger the Bank disbursements under the program. The DLIs and their associated amounts were
                selected to signal and create financial incentives to achieve critical but measurable results during
                implementation of the Program under the three Results Areas. All DLIs triggered disbursement against
                performance; though the nature of the results achieved under each DLI varied. DLI-1 triggered outputs
                related to improvements in hygiene behavior at the provincial level and to increasing access to WSS for
                households and key public buildings, DLI-2-1 triggered disbursements against WSS sustainability outcomes
                and DLI-2 against the adequacy of O&M of the services for two years after DLI 1-2 was met. Sustainability
                was also strengthened by behavior change through DLI 1-1. The objective of improved capacity for Program
                implementation was linked to the detailed requirements for annual plans and reports in DLI 3-1 and
                implementation of capacity development investments in DLI 3-2. Additionally, the DLIs were directly related
                to the GoV’s clean water and sanitation goals of the NTP/NRD 2020-2025.

                In principle, Disbursement Linked Indicators were distinct from the outcome and intermediate indicators linked
                to the Results Areas, in so far as achievement of the former was meant to trigger the Program’s
                disbursements, and achievement of the latter, to measure the Program’s results. However, a degree of
                overlap could and did occur in some cases. Some of the DLIs were framed identically to outcome and
                intermediate indicators (e.g. DLIs 1-2 and 2-2, were identical to PDO indicators 3 and 4, respectively, and DLI


                                                                                                                       Page 6 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Results-based Scaling Up RSWS Program (P152693)



1-3 to Intermediate Indicator 6), and simultaneously triggered disbursements and measured results for the
activities concerned.



Rating
High

DLI 2
DLI
Results Area 2: Sustainability of infrastructure:

DLI 2-1 (i): Number of households in the participating provinces with Sustainable Water Systems.
DLI 2-2 (ii): Number of Communes in the participating provinces which have achieved Commune-Wide
Sanitation two calendar years (CY) ago, where all public kindergarten, primary and secondary schools and
health centers maintain Hygienic Status.


Rationale
The sustainability DLIs (2-1 and 2-2) could be considered to be key drivers for the rural WSS sector (ICR,
para 24). These DLIs required that achievements relating to access to sanitation and water supply
connections be monitored and maintained for at least two years. The previous PforR had demonstrated the
value of this approach; since earlier NTP interventions lacking this approach had often failed after a few
years.

Since communes were the smallest unit of government, providing a potentially sustainable base for improving
sanitation and hygiene over the longer term, the inclusion of CWS (Commune-Wide Sanitation) in DLI 1.2
could be considered a highly relevant (incremental) step towards the goal of combating open
defecation. CWS required that each commune meet the criteria of requiring:

       a. 70 percent of households to have an improved latrine that hygienically separated human feces from
         human contact,
      b. 80 percent of households to have dedicated hand-washing points, with soap and water available,
      c. All schools and health clinics to have functional water supply, hygienic sanitation and hand washing
         facilities. CWS was therefore a proxy for a significant reduction in open defecation.

The DLIs themselves were designed as incentives to implement a demand-driven approach and improve
investment planning. Provinces were incentivized to develop an annual investment plan based on estimated
demand and willingness to pay for the services. Also incentivized was coordination between different
provincial implementing agencies, as success of CWS objectives called for interventions in water, health and
education sectors – allowing for development of WSS schemes on customized basis.



Rating
High



                                                                                                   Page 7 of 20
                                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                  Results-based Scaling Up RSWS Program (P152693)




                  DLI 3
                  DLI
                  Results Area 3: Capacity for implementation:

                  DLI 3-1: Number of Annual Program Plans and Program Reports disclosed.
                    DLI 3-2: Number of approved Annual Capacity Development Plans implemented.


                  Rationale
                  The institutional capacity DLIs (3-1 and 3-2) were highly relevant and could be considered the foundation for
                  the success of the Program (ICR, para 27). DLI 3-1’s requirement to develop annual program plans and
                  reports at the provincial and central levels ensured appropriate planning/reporting and coordination between
                  all participating agencies. Strong knowledge exchange was further incentivized under DLI 3-2 on Capacity
                  Development.



                  Rating
                  High


      OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




                  OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
                  Rationale
                  The Program’s PDOs and DLIs were highly relevant and aligned to the Government and World Bank’s
                  strategic objectives for Rural WSS, and remained so throughout the Program. The PforR approach provided
                  a valid framework for introducing results-based financing for bringing about sustainable institutional
                  development of the sector in Vietnam in the poorest and most vulnerable provinces.



                  Rating
                  High



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                       OBJECTIVE 1
                       Objective
                       “To improve hygiene behavior in rural areas in the participating provinces”

                       Rationale
                       The Program was intended to support improvements in hygiene practices and increase in sustainable access
                       to WSS services in rural areas of the 21 poorest provinces in Vietnam by aligning with the GoV’s intervention

                                                                                                                       Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Results-based Scaling Up RSWS Program (P152693)



areas under the NTP/NRD for 2010-20. It was expected that this would enable the lessons learned from the
Program to inform that national strategy, helping the GoV to scale up sanitation promotion in rural areas.

Theory of Change (ToC)

The objective of improving hygiene behavior in rural areas would be achieved through the following activities:
(a) Information, education and communication (IEC) and behavior change communication (BCC) activities in
households, schools and health centers to raise awareness and educate the population on the benefits of
hygienic latrines and water supply, thereby increasing the use by beneficiaries and willingness to pay for
construction of hygienic latrines and water tariffs. BCC activities also promoted the importance of proper
maintenance of RWSS systems, to improve their sustainability; and (b) Strengthening of institutional capacity
at national and local levels through training on planning skills for provincial agency staff, monitoring and
evaluation (M&E) and effective management.

Towards this end, the following DLIs were identified in the context of PDO1:

       DLI 1-1 # of Behavior Change Communication Plans implemented by participating provinces
       DLI 1-2 # of New Communes achieving Commune-Wide Sanitation (CWS) in the participating provinces

   DLI 1-3 # of new or rehabilitated Functioning Water Supply Connections to households in the participating
provinces

Outputs and Outcomes:

The Program exceeded the target for DLI 1.1, as seen from Table 1 below, whilst meeting or exceeding the
targets for intermediat indicators under Results Area 1. A total of 116 BCC plans were developed and
implemented in 2,435 schools and 728 health centers (II-2 and II-3), assisting 446 communes maintain their
CWS status – allowing a national BCC program to be launched, based on this experience.

           Table 1    Achievement of Indicators linked to PDO1

        No.                 Indicator Name                             Target              Total      Achieved (%)
                         Communes where schools and
PDO-Indicator 4          health clinics have maintained          340               446              131
                         hygiene status (#)
                         New approaches for BCC and
                         supply chain activities are included
PDO-Indicator 5                                                  Yes               Yes              100
                         in the successor program to NTP3
                         (Yes/No)
                         Development & implementation of
II-1                     BCC plans at the provincial, district   105               116              110
                         and commune levels (#)
                         Schools reached through targeted
II-2                                                             1,360             2,435            179
                         BCC campaigns (#)
                         Clinics with antenatal programs
II-3                                                             340               728              214
                         which are covered by BCC (#)



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Results-based Scaling Up RSWS Program (P152693)




                        National BCC Program was
II-4                                                       Yes                  Yes               100
                        launched (Yes/No)
                        Increase in hand-washing with soap
                        after using the latrine: Increased
II-5                                                       20                   54                270
                        among target population compared
                        to non-target population (%)

  Note: II = Intermediate Indicator

Training and materials were developed to serve as reference materials for implementing BCC. The Program
also supported the setting up of Sanitation Convenience Shops (SANCON) and sales representatives’
networks, all of which were aimed at contributing to changing households’ perceptions of the benefits of
sanitation and handwashing, and their awareness of where to acquire and utilize the necessary supplies and
facilities. The acquisition and construction of improved latrines and handwashing places changed the
hygiene landscape for households, reinforcing changes in behavior and attitude to handwashing (confirmed
through focus group meetings and commune discussions – part of BCC activities).

BCC activities in the education and health sectors were also replicated nationwide and conducted at the
commune level, nationwide, outside the Program. A BCC toolkit on household hygiene was prepared by
Vietnam’s Health Environment Management Agency (VIHEMA), with World Bank support, as part of the
Program. As reported by GoV, some 50 provinces had developed and adopted BCC plans, with BCC’s
health sector activities being implemented in 38 communes outside the Program, and education sector
activities in 133 communes – a testimony to the effectiveness and high level ownership of the Program’s BCC
approach.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
"To increase and sustain access to sanitation in rural areas in the participating provinces”.

Rationale
The Program was intended to support improvements in hygiene practices and increase in sustainable access
to WSS services in rural areas of the 21 poorest provinces in Vietnam by aligning with the GoV’s intervention
areas under the NTP/NRD for 2010-20. It was expected that this would enable the lessons learned from the
Program to inform that national strategy, helping the GoV to scale up sanitation promotion in rural areas.

Theory of Change (ToC)

The objective of increasing and sustaining access to sanitation infrastructure in rural areas would be achieved
through the following activities: (i) Construction of hygienic latrines in households, schools and health centers;
(ii) Development and achievement of commune-wide sanitation (CWS) requirements; and (iii) Monitoring of
the sustainability of CWS for two years. (a) Identification of demand; (b) Construction, rehabilitation and
repair of rural water supply schemes; (c) Application of sustainability criteria; and (d) Implementation of

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Results-based Scaling Up RSWS Program (P152693)



operation & maintenance (O&M) models that were fit to the size of the schemes and would enable cost
recovery.

Towards this end, the following DLIs were identified in the context of PDO2:

   DLI 2-1 # of Households in the participating provinces with Sustainable Water Systems
   DLI 2-2 # of Communes in the participating provinces which had achieved commune-wide sanitation
(CWS) two calendar years earlier, where all public kindergarten, primary and secondary schools and health
centers maintained Hygienic Status.

In addition, DLIs 1-2 and 1-3, listed under PDO1, were also directly relevant to PDO2.


Outputs and Outcomes:

As seen from Table 2 below, the Program nearly met the target (94 percent) for providing school and health
centers with new/rehabilitated WSS facilities (Intermediate Indicator- 7). On this basis, DLIs 1.2 and 2.2,
corresponding to PDO indicators 3 and 4, were more than fully achieved.

       Table 2      Achievement of Indicators linked to PDO2

No.          Indicator Name                             Target         Total           Achieved (%)
PDO -        Communes achieving Commune-Wide
Indicator    Sanitation (CWS) in participating          680            703             104
3/DLI 1.2    provinces (#)

             # of Communes in participating provinces
PDO -
             which had achieved CWS 2 years earlier,
Indicator                                             340              446             131
             where all schools and health clinics
4/DLI 2.2
             maintained Hygienic Status

               Schools and health centers with new and
II-7                                                   2,720          2,547           94
               rehabilitated WSS facilities (#)
               # of beneficiaries from communes
                                                       n.a.           5,764,600       n.a.
               achieving CWS
Under the Program a total of 564 SANCON were set up, helping the rural population construct latrines. As
reported by GoV, 254,631 household hygienic latrines were built or rehabilitated, of which 57,843 households
(23 percent) were serviced by the developed SANCON. Some 54,564 poorer households received subsidies
under the Program between 2016 and 2020, to assist them to purchase hygienic latrines. After the Program’s
restructuring, 14,797 households received subsidies from the counterpart funds between 2021 and 2022. A
further 185,270 households went ahead and built hygienic latrines without receiving subsidies – a testimony
to the effectiveness of the Program’s BCC activities.

The effectiveness and sustainability of CWS was also reflected in the installation rate of these latrines. The
number of households achieving CWS status exceeded the target of 70 percent of total households in all
provinces, highlighting the effectiveness of the Program in building communities that were aware of the
importance of sanitation.

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Results-based Scaling Up RSWS Program (P152693)




The ICR provides data (p.18) from UNICEF’s Multiple Cluster Indicator Surveys indicating that between 2014
and 2021, regions targeted by the Program had a relatively higher increase in hygienic latrine coverage and a
decrease in open defecation. In addition, a high increase in use of improved latrines was also observed in
the Mekong Delta, which – though not targeted by the Program – received support from other national and
international organizations. All 21 provinces under the Program met or exceeded all sanitation targets, with
703 communes reaching CWS status, reaching 5,764,600 beneficiaries. In subsequent informal interviews
held in households, schools and health centers, satisfaction was expressed by all beneficiaries as regards the
quality and cost-effectiveness of these latrines.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
"To increase and sustain access to water supply in rural areas in the participating provinces”

Rationale
The Program was intended to support improvements in hygiene practices and increase in sustainable access
to WSS services in rural areas of the 21 poorest provinces in Vietnam by aligning with the GoV’s intervention
areas under the NTP/NRD for 2010-20. It was expected that this would enable the lessons learned from the
Program to inform that national strategy, helping the GoV to scale up sanitation promotion in rural areas.

Theory of Change (ToC)

The objective of increasing sustainable access to water supply in the rural areas of participating provinces
would be achieved through the following activities: (a) Identification of demand; (b) construction, rehabilitation
and repair of rural water supply schemes (treatment plants, distribution networks and household
connections); (c) application of sustainability criteria (including water quality, continuity, etc.); and (d)
implementation of operation & maintenance (O&M) models that were fit to the size of the schemes and would
enable cost recovery.

Towards this end, the following DLIs were identified in the context of PDO3:

   DLI 1.3: # of new or rehabilitated functioning water supply connections to households in the partipating
provinces
   DLI 2.1 # of households in the partipating provinces with sustainable water systems



 Outputs and Outcomes:




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Results-based Scaling Up RSWS Program (P152693)



The Program invested in water supply schemes and household connections through the NTP/NRD for 2010-
2020 and for 2020-2025, exceeding all PDO and Intermediate indicator targets, as seen from Table 3 below:

       Table 3     Achievement of Indicators linked to PDO3




No.               Indicator Name                    Target     Total                 Achieved (%)
                  # of new or rehabilitated
                  Functioning Water Supply
II-6/DLI 1-3                                        255,000    289,259               112
                  Connections to households in
                  the participating provinces
                  # of households in the
PDO -Indicator
                  participating provinces with      105,000    144,163               137
2/DLI 2-1
                  Sustainable Water Systems
                  Schools and health centers with
II-7              new and rehabilitated WSS         2,720      2,547                 94
                  facilities (#)


 As seen from the table, the Program provided 285,259 new water connections via 759 water supply
schemes, achieving 112 percent of the target. Because of the characteristics of the rural and mountainous
areas, most of these schemes were small in size, with 46 percent of schemes having a capacity of less than
100 cu. m. per day.

The Program implemented a fit-to-purpose management model for the schemes, depending on their
size. The largest share - 56 percent - of the schemes was operated under Commune People’s Committee
(CPC)-based management. The Provincial Center for Rural Water Supply and Sanitation (PCERWASS)
managed 26 percent of the schemes, and the private sector only 2.1 percent (mostly due to the low revenue
streams of most of these small schemes).

Nearly 97 percent of water schemes applied water tariffs under regulations supported by the
provinces. Since very schemes had water tariffs before the Program, this contributed to their
sustainability. Tariffs – which were set much lower than those in Hanoi, for instance - were regularly revised
to increase the sustainability of the schemes.

Institutional Strengthening:

Capacity building activities supported under Program resulted in a strengthening of ability to implement
activities at all levels and sectors, effectively. An Annual Capacity Building Plan was developed and delivered
at the district, commune and village levels. The number of Annual Program Plans and Program Reports
disclosed were 291, against an Intermediate Indicator target/DLI 3-1 of 215 – or 135 percent of target. The
number of Annual Capacity Development Plans implemented was 124, against a target of 105 – i.e. 118
percent achievement. GoV staff at all levels were trained on the Program Operation Manual (POM), on
community-based WSS, and similar topics. An aggregate 24,762 participants were covered through 648

                                                                                                Page 13 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Results-based Scaling Up RSWS Program (P152693)



  trainings in the 21 target provinces.

  According to the ICR (p. 21), the strong level of GoV ownership and implementation arrangements set up
  across many levels permitted the Program to develop and undertake communication activities at
  scale. These included news articles and reports, radio broadcasts, live media events, village meetings and
  development of a variety of communication materials (calendars, leaflets, posters, etc.).



  Rating
  High




 OVERALL EFFICACY
 Rationale
 Overall efficacy is rated High, based on the full achievement of all outcomes, with many targets
 exceeded. With the ownership and support shown by GoV, the Program was able to demonstrate high
 relevance and efficacy, supporting 6,935,556 direct beneficiaries (136 percent of target) in the most
 vulnerable and remote provinces of Vietnam.



 Rating
 High


5. Outcome

With the ownership and support shown by GoV, the Program was able to demonstrate high relevance and
efficacy, supporting 6,935,556 direct beneficiaries (136 percent of target) in the most vulnerable and remote
provinces of Vietnam. There were no shortcomings identified in the Program’s performance. The behavior
change communication (BCC) activities developed by the Program were fully incorporated in the nationwide
strategy, resulting in an exponential indirect positive impact on sanitation behavior in Vietnam. On this basis,
the project’s overall outcome is rated Highly Satisfactory.


    Outcome Rating
    Highly Satisfactory


6. Risk to Development Outcome

Political risks: This risk is assessed as Low. In principle, soft activities – such as BCC activities – face the
risk of ending at the close of Program. This risk appears to be low for this program, as GoV is fully
committed and is already scaling up the lessons learned and activities nationwide (e.g. MoH developed a

                                                                                                       Page 14 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Results-based Scaling Up RSWS Program (P152693)



BCC Program Plan based on the Program’s activities that directed all provinces and cities to develop and
implement BCC plans on personal hygiene, rural sanitation and clean water use.

Economic risks: This risk is assessed as Moderate. Though the Program successfully implemented water
tariffs for the first time in the target areas, providing a foundation for sustainability, rural water tariff rates are
still recognized as too low to ensure financial sustainability and serve as a reliable revenue stream for water
schemes. Water tariffs have been established at the provincial level by the PPCs, who have however made
efforts to increase tariffs gradually, so as to improve financial sustainability over time.




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
   The strategic relevance of approach was sound and the Program was well aligned with the priorities of
   the government in improving hygiene behavior and expanding access to WSS services in rural
   areas. The World Bank also successfully scaled up lessons learnt from previous projects in Vietnam,
   including the earlier PforR instrument in the water sector (focused on RWSS provision in the Red River
   Delta). Such lessons included the importance of results verification under PforR mechanisms in driving
   incentives for achievement of goals and institutional strengthening, and of well-designed disbursement-
   linked indicators (DLIs) in boosting RWSS sustainability, even in low-institutional capacity settings. The
   Bank also integrated the good practices and manuals developed from the TA pilot that had been
   implemented earlier in the Hòa Binh Province.

   According to the ICR (p.29), the appraisal documents were well developed and fully addressed the
   sectoral challenges and implementation risks, the DLIs being well-designed to incentivize the efficient
   and effective achievement of results. Technical, fiduciary, environmental and social documents followed
   the guidelines and were developed in close consultation with GoV. One minor issue however was that
   the requirements of the PforR turned out not to be fully compatible with the new Law of Public
   Investments that became effective right at the start of the Program, and caused a delay in its
   implementation due to initial low availability of counterpart funds – something that might have been
   anticipated during preparation (see ICR, Lessons, para 97).



   Quality-at-Entry Rating
   Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team conducted regular supervision missions: 18 in all, between 2016 and 2023. The ICR
 reports (p.29) that the presence of staff in the Hanoi office ensured continued support to the Government
 and a good understanding of the local context to guide the Program. Implementation progress was closely
 monitored and any issues arising were addressed in coordination with GoV. Implementation Results and
 Status Reports (ISRs) and Aide Memoires were all submitted in a timely manner.


                                                                                                            Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Results-based Scaling Up RSWS Program (P152693)



 The Bank team was able to provide substantial capacity building support to help the provincial
 implementation agencies in understanding and implementing the PforR mechanism during the initial
 years. The task team leader (TTL) clarified (in written communication) that the team had carried out
 regular technical missions in the provinces, especially those with poor implementation capability, providing
 among other things: (a) technical guidance to provincial implementing agencies, (b) meeting with provincial
 leaders to arrange for appropriate resources, (c) accelerating the province’s approval process of on detail
 design and bid documents. The continuity of some of the team members and high-level expertise provided
 by consultants were also among major factors ensuring the quality of implementation support. The ICR
 observed (para 89) that the team had managed to build a strong relationship with GoV based on trust and
 reliability, and its dedication and high-quality support contributed to the full achievement of Program
 targets. The Bank provided technical support to the National Center for Rural Water Supply and Sanitation
 (NCERWASS) in assessing the O&M models to provide recommendations to provinces for selecting the
 appropriate models for the water schemes.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Program had 7 DLIs, 5 PDO indicators and 11 intermediate outcome indicators that needed to be
 tracked and reported on annually. All indicators were well designed, with clear baselines and targets. The
 Coordination Unit had the mandate to compile information provided by various agencies (the Ministry of
 Education and Training, VIHEMA and NCERWASS), which - in turn – had the mandate to collect the
 relevant data from their provincial counterparts in the project area. The design of the M&E arrangements
 provided for a clear flow of information from the provincial to central governmental levels, and across
 sectors. It facilitated the monitoring of the Program’s progress and strengthening of national M&E capacity
 in the sector.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation was rigorous and was implemented successfully (ICR, p.26). Though data
  collection across the 21 provinces was challenging, no compliance or quality issues were observed. DLI
  achievements were recorded annually to monitor results and inform the subsequent annual plan. This
  reporting was formally accompanied by annual verification reports, which were transmitted to the World
  Bank. In addition, the Program also required and implemented quarterly monitoring reports to identify
  any implementation issues on a timely basis. Continuous support and trainings on M&E were provided
  by the Bank, as needed.




                                                                                                  Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Results-based Scaling Up RSWS Program (P152693)




c. M&E Utilization
  The verification of results carried out by the IVA provided the basis of which pre-determined
  disbursements in the matrix of DLIs could take place. It added thereby a robust audit of reported
  achievements, which served to inform Program management and decision-making.

  The Program’s M&E system was serving as the basis to establish a national M&E system for
  RWSS. Monitoring indicators for rural water supply, rural sanitation and WSS in schools were
  developed and tested with the technical support of the World Bank (ICR, para 77), and were used by
  GoV to upgrade the national M&E system.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

9. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social

   At Program preparation, there were no significant adverse, environmental or social impacts identified, and it
   was determined that any environmental or social issues could be addressed in the Program Action Plan
   (PAP) and Project Operations Manual (POM). Environmental and social aspects were in fact conducted
   satisfactorily (ICR, 27) during implementation support missions, notwithstanding some delays, and the client
   was proactive in addressing most pending issues.

   The final monitoring report confirmed overall compliance with the national regulations on environmental
   management. No major environmental problems were identified during Program
   implementation. Environmental Impact Assessments and an Environmental Protection Plan for all the water
   supply schemes were prepared and approved. Environmental considerations were taken into account
   during site selection and design of WSS schemes. Environmental requirements were included in bidding
   documents for construction works in the water and health sectors and monitored thereafter. By project
   closing, all WSS schemes had obtained wastewater discharge permits, as required. Overall, environmental
   reporting was found to have been adequately conducted in the water and health sectors. Overall
   environmental performance was compliant and assessed as Moderately Satisfactory – though reporting
   from the school sector was considered inadequate, and there had been delays in obtaining water
   exploitation permits.

   As regards land acquisition and resettlement, this had only minor impacts on local people, as most of the
   WSS schemes were constructed on public land. Some 10 of the 21 provinces did carry out land acquisition,
   which affected 174 households. All such acquisition and compensation were carried out in compliance with
   national regulations on compensation and resettlement support, and no complaints were raised during
   Program implementation.


                                                                                                  Page 17 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Results-based Scaling Up RSWS Program (P152693)



  The ICR reports (p.28) that reporting on social aspects by implementing agencies was compliant and
  reports provided adequate information, although delays in submission were often observed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM): The ICR reports (p. 28) that the fiduciary assessment carried out during
  preparation of the Program had identified substantial risks arising from the large volume of transactions in
  a large number of provinces. As such, the POM carried guidance to the provinces and agencies on
  fiduciary requirements and procedures, with specific guidance on the performance-based transfer system
  and funds-flow arrangements.

  FM performance and compliance was generally Moderately Satisfactory throughout most of the
  implementation period, largely on account of the shortage of IDA and counterpart funds allocation. The
  rating was upgraded to Satisfactory at project closing, as budget issues had been addressed.

  All required financial audit reports were submitted on a timely basis, with unqualified opinions and detailed
  recommendations for improvement.

  Procurement: The ICR reports (p. 28) that no major procurement issues were encountered. A total of
  5,349 contracts were signed with a total value of VND 3,949 billion. The implementation of these
  packages compiled with GoV and PAP procurement regulations. The last implementation support mission
  rated procurement performance as Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
  Gender: The ICR reports (p. 22) that the operation included a target (30 percent) for increased female
  participation. This was more than achieved: the Program reached 3,145,057 females, or about 45 percent
  of total beneficiaries. The majority of rural women being responsible for housework and childcare activities,
  the results meant that the opportunities for women and girls to have access to clean water and sanitation
  services positively impacted the health of their households.

  The Program placed considerable emphasis on reaching ethnic minorities (EMs). Target provinces had
  high rates of ethnic minority participation and a high incidence of poverty. The Committee on Ethnic
  Minority Affairs (CEMA) was an integral part of the Program’s implementation arrangements, ensuring
  special attention to the inclusion of EMs. A total of 3,567,996 EMs, or about 51 percent of the total,
  benefited overall from the Program.

  The ICR notes (para 59) that the mobilization of women in the water supply component was relatively
  limited compared to the sanitation and education component. The data show that women accounted for 24



                                                                                                   Page 18 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Results-based Scaling Up RSWS Program (P152693)



   percent of participants in the water sector capacity-building sessions, 44.6 percent in the health sector and
   57.8 percent in the education sector.

   Poverty Reduction and Shared Responsibility: The Program specifically focused on 21 of the poorest
   provinces in Vietnam, providing WSS services for their rural communities. Access to such basic services as
   clean water and latrines had been absent there prior to Program implementation. The Program also had an
   impact on local private sector development through the 564 SANCONs that were activated and served in
   the construction of latrines in 57,843 households. Additionally, 69,361 households built latrines with
   financial support (subsidies) from the Program.



10. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory
                                                                                 Minor shortcomings in
Bank Performance                Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory
                                                                                 preparation
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   High


11. Lessons

The ICR (paras. 93 to 97) lists a number of lessons from which IEG derives the following lessons
that are relevant for similar projects implemented in comparable environments:

1. Alignment with existing government strategies and well-organized implementation
arrangements can make it easier to achieve strong governmental ownership of a
Program: The Program had many cross-sectoral implementation arrangements and ownership at
both central (e.g. MARD, NCERWASS, MoH-VIHEMA AND CEMA) and provincial/commune levels
(PPC and commune representatives), which allowed good practices from the Program to be scaled
up by GoV. Examples include the BCC approach, which was applied nationwide since 2019, with
the goal of developing BCC plans in all communes and provinces of the country: to date, some 50
provinces had developed and approved such a plan. Looking ahead, the country could well benefit
from the integration of the lessons from the Program, such as the importance of including
sustainability criteria in development and operation of water schemes, and the demonstrated effect
of inter-sectoral collaboration between different implementing agencies. This lesson is consistent
with the key lesson emerging from the Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) for a similar
Results-Based Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program (P127435).

2. Developing standardized and adaptable training modules for clients on the PforR
mechanism could be useful for future operations: The provincial agencies reported difficulties
they encountered in the early years of the Program in understanding the PforR mechanism. For the
success of the Program, it was important for actors at the province, district and commune levels to
understand the mechanism fully. This problem has also proved relevant for other PforR operations.

                                                                                                   Page 19 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Results-based Scaling Up RSWS Program (P152693)



Though the detailed mechanism would be context-specific, the lesson is that the World Bank needs
to develop a common set of training materials and modules for government counterparts, which
could be tailored to country and project context.

3. While the PforR can be an effective mechanism, compatibility with the client’s internal
budget allocation and financing procedures needs to be carefully analyzed during the design
stage: The Program's requirements turned out to be not fully compatible with the GoV’s annual
budget allocation process, especially at the provincial level. The PforR’s requirements, such as the
prefinancing of investments and counterpart funds allocation, proved to be challenging as GoV’s
budget allocation was not results-based, and led to a delay in Program implementation during the
initial two years. A key lesson is that for the World Bank, future projects should analyze the
compatibility between the PforR approach and government procedures to set agreed guidelines in
the Financing Agreement and Program Action Plan.



12. Assessment Recommended?

  No

13. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written, clear, and candid, and generally complies with the relevant OPCS guidelines (except in
regard to length, which may however be justified to some extent by the complexity of the operation). The ICR
presents a clear theory of change with a good diagrammatic representation of the results chain from activities to
outcomes. The analysis, including of disbursement-linked indicators and conclusions, is detailed and well
supported by evidence.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                   Page 20 of 20
