     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Getting to Best in Education (P162089)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0023927

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P162089                                      Getting to Best in Education

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Liberia                                      Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A7093                                     30-Jun-2022                                        10,067,931.78

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 17-May-2018                                  30-Jun-2023

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             11,070,000.00                                   11,070,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              10,476,000.00                                   10,067,931.78

 Actual                                          10,075,306.46                                   10,067,931.78




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Shahrzad Mobasher            Salim J. Habayeb              Susan Ann Caceres             IEGHC (Unit 2)
 Fard




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to p. 4 of the Financing Agreement, the project development objective (PDO) was to: (i) improve
   equitable access to early childhood education, teacher quality in early childhood education (ECE) and primary
   education in targeted disadvantaged counties, and (ii) strengthen National School Accountability Systems. For
   this ICR Review, the PDO will consist of: (i) improve equitable access to ECE, (ii) improve teacher quality in
   ECE and primary education in targeted disadvantaged counties, and (iii) strengthen National School
   Accountability Systems.


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Getting to Best in Education (P162089)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Improving the quality and access to early childhood education in targeted counties
   (amount at approval: US$2.90 million; revised amount at 2022 restructuring: US$2.33 million; actual
   at project closing: US$2.90 million)

   1. Provide school improvement grants to all public schools with ECE in targeted counties to:

         Carry out preparatory activities for utilization of the School Improvement Grants including: (i)
          updating the school grants guidelines to align with the Education Sector Plan; and (ii) develop school
          improvement plans; and
         Implement eligible sub-projects.

   2. Provide training to community caregivers and support the establishment of at least 20 community-based
   ECE centers in remote areas that lack access to school based ECE in targeted counties.

   Component 2: Supporting teacher training and certification in targeted counties (amount at
   approval: US$1.60 million; revised amount at 2022 restructuring: 1.40 million; actual at project
   closing: US$1.40 million).

   Provide in-service ECE C certificate training to unqualified ECE teachers and in-service C certificate training
   to unqualified primary teachers in targeted counties.

   Component 3: Improving school management, accountability, and systems monitoring (amount at
   approval: US$2.00 million; revised amount at 2022 restructuring: US$1.92 million; actual at project
   closing: US$1.45 million)

   1. Improve the quality of schools through:

         Piloting of a school quality assessment tool, and developing national school quality standards; and
         Providing training to: (i) school principals on school management; and (ii) district education officers
          (DEOs) on the expertise and tools needed to play an effective monitoring, accountability and support
          role at the school level, and providing them with logistical support to visit the public schools on an
          annual basis.

   Component 4: Achieving better learning through improved equity, efficiency, and
   accountability (amount at approval: US$3.57 million; revised amount at 2022 restructuring: US$3.13
   million; actual at project closing: US$2.73 million)



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Getting to Best in Education (P162089)



  1. Increase the proportion of qualified ECE and primary teachers in targeted counties by replacing the
  unqualified teachers with qualified teachers.
  2. Improve payroll management including inter alia by publishing a register of teacher on government
  payroll.
  3. Improve the quality of the teaching workforce through provision of severance packages to functionally
  illiterate teachers.
  4. Establish a National Student Learning Assessment System to monitor students' learning outcomes at
  the primary school level.

  Component 5: Project management and sector program support and coordination (amount at
  approval: US$1.00 million; revised amount at 2020 restructuring: US$1.70 million; actual at project
  closing: US$1.65 million)

  1. Strengthen the capacity of the project delivery team to carry out project management activities,
  including developing and implementing a communication strategy to appraise communities and households
  of the benefits of ECE and the importance of age-appropriate enrollment to a child's long-term development
  and well-being; and financing of operating costs.
  2. Strengthen the capacity of the Education Management Information System (EMIS) unit staff through:
  (a) provision of technical assistance to: (i) carry out an assessment of data needs, improve data accuracy
  and utilization; (ii) utilize new information and communication technologies; and (b) provide monitoring
  services of an Independent Verification Agency to carry out the verification and the achievement of
  disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) under Part D of the Project.
  3. Provision of technical assistance to develop a National Learning Assessment System to measure
  progress in literacy and numeracy in students at primary school level.

  Scope of project targeting and selection of counties: The project targeted six counties—River Gee,
  Grand Kru, Sinoe, Maryland, Rivercess, and Bomi—based on the results of an index allocating a weight of
  25 percent to extreme poverty, 25 percent to severe stunting, and 50 percent to education indicators (net
  enrollment rates in primary and ECE, and percentage of unqualified teachers at the primary and ECE level)
  (PAD, p. 6).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost and Financing. The project was approved for US$11.07 million through a grant from the
  Global Partnership for Education (GPE). The actual cost at project closing was US$10.13 million. Under the
  GPE funding model, 30 percent of the grant was to be allocated as results-based financing against
  performance-based condition (PBC) targets for: (i) equity (PBC 1): increase in the proportion of qualified
  ECE and primary teachers in the targeted disadvantaged counties; (ii) efficiency (PBC 2): improve the
  system of teacher payroll management; and (iii) learning outcomes (PBC 3): establish a national primary
  student learning assessment system. The difference between the approved amount and the actual amount
  disbursed at closing is explained by: (i) the cancellation of US$444,000 given that the government partly
  met the target for PBC 2; and (ii) the cancellation of US$400,000 given that the government partly meeting
  the target for PBC 3.

  Dates. The project was approved on May 17, 2018, and became effective on June 25, 2018. A mid-term
  review was held on November 30, 2020. The project closed on June 30, 2023, a year later than envisaged.
  The project underwent one level 2 restructuring on June 16, 2022, to allow changes in the results

                                                                                                Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Getting to Best in Education (P162089)



   framework, changes in components and costs, a change in the loan closing date, the cancellation of
   financing, the reallocation between disbursement categories, and a change in the implementation schedule.
   P. 31 of the ICR explains that inflationary pressures on the economy leading to increased unit prices of the
   project's interventions constituted one of the leading factors behind the restructuring.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Access to education rose significantly in Liberia in the years leading to the project in line with the
rise in government allocations to education. The number of students enrolled in preprimary to senior
high school levels increased from 0.3 million to 1.5 million between 1981 and 2015, and the number of
teachers rose from 26,359 to 55,243 between 2007 and 2015, with the share of qualified ECE and primary
teachers reaching 49 percent and 62 percent, respectively. This was achieved in part by the rise in the
government’s allocation to education until FY15, which continued following the Ebola virus which
necessitated emergency recovery measures, with education spending equivalent to 14.4 percent of total
public spending in FY16 and 15.7 percent of total public spending in FY17.

Notwithstanding these accomplishments, a number of challenges persisted, including, (i) weak
learning outcomes; (ii) overage enrollment at the ECE and primary education levels; (iii) disparities in
access and completion at the basic education level; (iv) inadequately trained and inequitable distribution of
teachers; and (v) inadequate management and accountability systems at the central and school levels,
which can be summarized as follows:

      Weak learning outcomes. The mean score for Grade 3 students’ oral reading fluency was lower
       than 25 correct words per minute in assessments conducted over the 2008-2015 period, well below
       the MOE literacy benchmark of 45 correct words per minute. Further, only 46 percent of students
       sitting for the Grade 12 West African Examinations Council exam obtained a passing score overall in
       2014.
      Overage enrollment at the ECE and primary education levels. The results of the Education
       Sector Analysis revealed that approximately 250,000 children between the ages of 6-11 were
       enrolled at the ECE level due to delayed entry into primary school and interruptions in schooling. As
       a result, 82 percent of students in primary school were overage and 40 percent of students were
       more than three years overage.
      Disparities in access and completion at the basic education level. Disparities were largely
       explained by divergences in household income, urban-rural status, distance from school, and
       gender. Only 47 percent of youth between the ages of 10-19 reached grade 6 among the bottom
       two wealth quintiles compared to 88 percent among the top wealth quintile. Similarly, girls’ access to
       primary and junior high school remained far below their male counterparts.
      Inadequately trained and inequitable distribution of teachers. The results of the 2017
       MOE Teacher Verification and Testing Program revealed that 40 percent of primary school teachers
       did not possess the minimum required knowledge of English to be effective instructors at the primary
       level. Further, more economically prosperous regions were found to have a lower student-to-trained-
       teacher ratio and more qualified teachers than less economically prosperous regions.


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Getting to Best in Education (P162089)



                                       Inadequate management and accountability systems at the central and school levels. While
                                        an annual school census was carried out in the five years that preceded this project which fed into
                                        the Education Management Information System (EMIS), there were significant gaps in data
                                        collection, analysis, and dissemination of results in support of evidence-based policymaking. Most of
                                        the principals in Liberia were untrained and did not have the guidance, expertise, resources and
                                        support to effectively manage schools and teachers. District Education Officers (DEOs), which are
                                        tasked with school oversight and for the provision of technical support, did not have sufficient
                                        resources to visit schools on a regular basis nor the expertise to effectively monitor and enforce
                                        accountability. Further, school quality standards and tools for measuring school quality were non-
                                        existent, preventing the benchmarking and guided comparisons across schools or regions.

               The project was aligned with the government's education reform agenda. The project was aligned with
               the government's 2011 Education Reform Act, which aimed to support, among other things, the provision of
               quality education to every citizen at every educational level, promote equal access to education
               opportunities for all, reduce illiteracy, promote public confidence in the educational system, decentralize the
               education system, promote gender equity and equality, and ensure adequate governance and management
               of the education sector. The government's education reform agenda was informed by the results of the
               2016 Liberia Education Sector Analysis on education outcomes over the 2000-2015 period and led to the
               development of the Getting to Best in Education Sector Plan 2017–2021 (G2B-ESP). The G2B-ESP
               identified nine strategies across nine programs, which consisted of: (i) establish an effective school quality
               improvement and accountability system (School Quality Program); (ii) improve the efficiency and
               performance of the education management system (Education Management and Accountability Program;
               (iii) Improve access to quality ECE (Early Childhood Education Program); (iv) provide quality alternative and
               accelerated education pathways for overage and out-of-school children and young people (Overage and
               Out-of-School Program); (v) improve the efficiency, effectiveness and satisfaction of the teaching workforce
               (Teacher Education and Management Program); (vi) ensure that teachers have access to quality
               instructional materials and assessment tasks (Curriculum and Assessment Program); (vii) mainstream
               gender and school health across the education sector (Student Well-being Program); (viii) improve the
               quality and relevance of technical and vocational education and training (Technical and Vocational
               Education and Training Program); and (ix) leverage regional and international partnerships and expertise,
               target market demand for critical skills and increase the efficiency of education expenditure (Higher
               Education Program).

               The project was aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the Republic of Liberia
               for the period FY19-24. Pillar 2 of the Liberia CPF for the period FY19-24 (Building Human Capital to
               Seize New Economic Opportunities) included an objective on improved access to and quality of education.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Getting to Best in Education (P162089)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
Improve equitable access to ECE in targeted disadvantaged counties.

Rationale
The theory of change envisaged the provision of school improvement grants, the training of ECE caregivers
and the establishment of ECE centers in the six targeted counties. These outputs were expected to lead to
intermediate outcomes, including the provision of trained ECE caregivers being placed in community-based
ECE centers in targeted counties, and eventually to the intended outcome of the net enrollment rate in ECE
increasing in underprivileged targeted counties. Five of the six counties targeted by the project—River Gee,
Grand Kru, Sinoe, Maryland and Rivercess—had the worst composite index on poverty and education
indicators, while Bomi had the worst index after the counties of Bong, Grand Bassa and Lofa. IEG finds that
additional measures would have helped to demonstrate interventions were plausibly related to improved
equitable access to ECE in targeted disadvantaged counties

Outputs and intermediate outcomes.

A total of 523 schools covering 58,754 ECE students benefitted from school improvement grants over three
academic years, with grants amounting to approximately US$10 per ECE student. Some 92 percent of
eligible public schools received ECE grants in targeted counties by June 30, 2023, surpassing the target of 90
percent. The provision of school improvement grants supported a reduction or elimination in ECE fees which
disproportionately affected vulnerable segments of the population. The TTL clarified on March 8, 2024, that
during quality assurance visits conducted at the Ministry of Education, copies of receipts from the schools
showed a reduction in school fees from 3,500 Liberia dollars to 1,500 Liberia dollars, on average. IEG finds
that poor and vulnerable households would have continued to be disproportionately impacted by school fees,
limiting equitable access to ECE. The distribution of school improvement grants for ECE services, which were
introduced through the Global Partnership for Education Grant for Basic Education Project (P117662) and
were subject to schools abiding to the school grants guidelines, were updated by the project with regard to
the purpose of the grant, the eligibility criteria, the schedule of disbursement, the School Improvement Plan
(SIP) template, penalties for noncompliance, eligible expenditure list, and procedure for verification of grant
utilization. District education officers (DEOs) were charged with monitoring the use of school improvement
grants for ECE, with the local parent-teacher associations verifying that enrollment fees in ECE are reduced
following the provision of school improvement grants, with noncompliance in terms of fees charged potentially
leading to the cancellation of future funding for a school.

The ICR stated that the learning environment improved as schools had funds to purchase teaching and
learning materials. The TTL provided a picture of a classroom learning environment following the
disbursement of funds as an example of how the funds were used for teaching and learning materials and
monitored.

The project supported the training of ECE caregivers. This training was intended to improve teaching
effectiveness and provide caregivers with the skills to establish and operate their own community-based ECE
centers by relying on existing infrastructure provided by the community. The ICR reported that based on the
results published in WE CARE’s Final Narrative Report, only two of the 60 caregivers (representing 3 percent
of caregivers) did not meet the certification requirement. The same report revealed that the caregiver’s
performance in integrated lesson planning for ECE instruction and play-based teaching and learning
improved as a result of the training, with 80 percent of caregivers demonstrating an ability to plan and execute


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Getting to Best in Education (P162089)



lessons from the ECD teacher’s planner. According to this report, the presence of DEOs during the caregiver
trainings motivated caregivers as it demonstrated MOE’s commitment to the establishment of ECE centers.

A total of 60 trained ECE caregivers were placed in community-based ECE centers in targeted counties by
June 30, 2023, as targeted (100 percent achievement). The project provided a monthly stipend of
approximately US$80 to community-based ECE caregivers.

A total of 20 ECE centers were established, with the ICR reporting that they remained fully operational as of
November 2023 and continued to receive mentoring by the implementing firm and the MOE. The TTL
clarified on March 8, 2024, that community-based ECE centers were only established in communities where
there were no ECE schools and that these centers were managed by ECE caregivers rather than ECE
teachers, but that the caregivers received the same C Certificate training, and the same teaching and learning
materials as ECE teachers.

A total of 62,720 individually directly benefitted from the project’s interventions—comprised of ECE students
in targeted counties benefitting from ECE school grants, community caregivers benefitting from the
community ECE training and support, teachers benefitting from training to improve their effectiveness to teach
ECE and primary-level students, principals benefitting from principal certification training, and DEOs
benefitting from capacity building activities—, surpassing the target of 43,058. Of this number, 48 percent
consisted of female beneficiaries, surpassing the target of 47 percent.

The Bank team clarified (June 2024) that f the communication strategy to appraise communities and
households of the benefits of ECE and the importance of age-appropriate enrollment to a child's long-term
development and well-being was implemented with additional funds reallocated during 2022 project
restructuring to bolster community engagement and sensitivity to other issues such as sending girls to school.



Outcome

The net enrolment rate in ECE in targeted counties rose from a baseline of 23 percent on December 29,
2017, to 55 percent by June 30, 2023, surpassing the target of 47 percent. The ICR does not report on the
potential reduction in the number of overage children between the ages of 6 and 11 enrolled in ECE in
targeted counties as a result of the project’s interventions to address their specific learning needs.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve teacher quality in ECE and primary education in targeted disadvantaged counties.

Rationale
Improved teacher quality in ECE and primary education in targeted disadvantaged counties included two
outputs: the establishment of a nationally recognized ECE qualifications equivalent to the C certificate. These

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Getting to Best in Education (P162089)



outputs were expected to lead to intermediate outcomes including in-service ECE C certificate teacher
training for unqualified ECE teachers, and accelerated in-service C certificate teacher training for unqualified
primary-level teachers in targeted counties, and eventually to the outcome of an increased share of qualified
ECE and primary education teachers in targeted counties.

Outputs and intermediate outcomes.

The project relied on master trainers to from various sources, including, from the Rural Teacher Training
Institutes (RTTIs) to deliver the in-service training programs. While RTTIs provided training programs to public
school teachers and principals on (i) the ECE C certificate training for ECE teachers, (ii) accelerated C
certificate training for primary teachers, and (iii) the school leadership training for principals and school
administrators, the distance to RTTIs made it impossible for teachers and principals to attend training during
the school session. The project favored in-serve training through master trainers. In addition to the RTTIs
supplying master trainers for in-service training, the project supported the upgrade in RTTIs’ training facilities
and provided capacity development to their staff.

The project supported the establishment of nationally recognized ECE qualifications equivalent to the C
certificate, with teachers completing the training being assessed and receiving a certificate. The project also
supported the review and the update of the in-service C certificate program by the Bureau of Teacher
Education.

The ICR reports that the ECE and primary teacher trainings supported the acquisition of basic skills
development and subject content knowledge applicable at both levels and reflective of the needs of Liberian
students. P. 20 of the ICR clarifies that ECE and primary teachers were trained together given the presence
of overage students at both levels.

Teachers were also trained in strategies to support non-reading overage students such that they may be able
to transition from the ECE level to the primary level.

The primary in-service C certificate teacher training program also encompassed training pertaining to
effective school management for principals.

The number of teachers receiving ECE C certificate rose from a baseline of zero on December 29, 2017, to
380 by June 30, 2023, falling short of the original target of 560 (68 percent achievement) and surpassing the
revised target of 370.

The number of primary teachers receiving accelerated C certificate increased from a baseline of zero on
December 29, 2017, to 356 by June 30, 2023, falling short of the original target of 560 (64 percent
achievement) and surpassing the revised target of 345.

The number of school principals awarded certification rose from a baseline of zero on December 29, 2017, to
876 by January 9, 2023, falling short of the original target of 1,300 (67 percent achievement) and surpassing
the revised target of 850.

A total of 305 functionally illiterate teachers received severance packages to improve the quality of the
teaching workforce.




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Getting to Best in Education (P162089)



Support for the National Learning Assessment System to measure progress in literacy and numeracy in
students at primary school level was cancelled due to COVID pandemic.

Outcomes.

The share of qualified ECE and primary education teachers in targeted counties rose from 45.8 percent in
2017, to 69 percent on June 30, 2023, surpassing the target of 60 percent.

Additional information provided by the Bank team (June 2024) related to the C-Certification:

ECE C-Certification: the requirement was to complete the training course with at least a 90 percent
participation rate (training units focused on ECE learning foundations, ECESTEP 1, ECD pedagogy and
content, teaching practice, literacy, and numeracy) and pass a course completion test assessing participants
retention of the training course content as well as their literacy, numeracy, and pedagogical skills. There was
an intake assessment at the start of the training to assess participants’ baseline skills. The length of training
was 40 days of residential and cluster training (when school was not in session to minimize teacher absence)
and 600 hours of self-study and practice over a 9 month period with mentorship and regular check-ins built in
to the self-study period. 184 of the total trained teachers were certificated under cohort 1 in 2021 and an
additional 196 passed the certification exam in 2022.

Accelerated primary C Certification: the requirement was to complete the training course with at least a 90
percent participation rate (training units focused on teacher subject matter knowledge, competency, and
pedagogy for improving literacy and numeracy outcomes) and pass a course completion test specific to the
primary level training and expected competencies for primary teachers. teachers attended 53 days of
residential and cluster training and completed over 600 hours of self-study and practice over a 9 month period
with mentorship and regular check-ins built in to the self-study period. Of the 360 trained, 356 primary
teachers passed the certification exam.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Strengthen National School Accountability Systems.

Rationale
Strengthened National School Accountability Systems included four outputs: the adoption of National School
Quality Standards, the adoption of a School Quality Assessment tool, the training and support for DEO staff
on the protocol for collecting data during annual visits of public schools based on the School Quality
Assessment tool developed and the delivery of a school principal certification program for school principals in
public schools at the basic education level to improve school management. These outputs were expected to
lead to intermediate outcomes including public schools receiving feedback from a school quality assessment
visit annually in targeted counties, and eventually to the outcome of priority actions being adopted by public
schools.


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Getting to Best in Education (P162089)



Outputs and intermediate outcomes.

National School Quality Standards were established by June 30, 2023. The purpose of the National School
Quality Standards was to: (i) promote a systemwide understanding and measure of school quality, (ii) support
school quality improvement, including the identification of key barriers and high potential solutions, and (iii)
strengthen accountability at both central and school levels. With regard to (ii), the project financed the
development and delivery of a school principal certification program for school principals in public schools at
the basic education level, with training modules including topics such as school quality improvement, school
management and leadership, school administration, teacher supervision, management and support, parent-
teacher associations and community engagement and participation, and financial management. The ICR did
not provide, however, any evidence of the improvement in strengthening accountability at the central and
school levels from the school principal certification program delivered through the project.

A School Quality Assessment tool was developed to assess the 11 quality standards in the National School
Quality Standards, focusing on student support, school improvement planning, school infrastructure, etc., with
each of the quality standards being measured by a set of indicators. The share of public schools in targeted
counties having completed a School Quality Assessment report rose from a baseline of zero on December
29, 2017, to 79 percent on January 9, 2023, surpassing the target of 75 percent. The ICR reports that the
majority of participants agreed that the scores received in School Quality Assessment report cards were fair.
P. 21 of the ICR and clarifications obtained by the Bank in an email dated March 8, 2024, indicate, however,
that there is limited evidence to date to suggest that the management, feedback and accountability system
that the Ministry hoped to establish with the development of the School Quality Assessment tool, its piloting,
and the training and support of DEOs has been institutionalized. Some 220 schools, representing 84 percent
of total schools surveyed, indicated, however, that they had implemented priority actions agreed from the
School Quality Assessment (MOE, Feedback Report, 2022).

The project supported the training and support for DEO staff on the protocol for collecting data during annual
visits of public schools based on the School Quality Assessment tool developed. The Bank team reported in
June 2024 that DEOs were visiting schools regularly and working at the district level to increase school
accountability.

876 principals from 2,494 public primary teachers participated in principal training in school management and
quality improvement.

A total of five annual project progress reports were made publicly available, surpassing the original target of
four and meeting the revised target of five.

Teacher payroll management information and teacher register was captured in the final IVA report.



Outcomes.

The share of public schools receiving feedback from a school quality assessment visit annually in targeted
counties rose from a baseline of zero on December 29, 2017, to 55 percent by June 30, 2023, surpassing the
target of 50 percent.




                                                                                                  Page 10 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Getting to Best in Education (P162089)



                            The TTL clarified on March 8, 2024, that while Joint Education Sector Review (JESR) assessments were
                            conducted by the GPE Secretariat using GPE’s JESR indicator, these reports did not encompass sufficient
                            information to assess the enforcement of agreed priority actions. The TTL reported, however, that schools
                            which did not provide reports or accounts for funds disbursed did not receive additional school improvement
                            grants, and that schools and parent-teachers associations were also held accountable for the utilization of
                            grants. Further, school administrators were held accountable for the quality of the learning environment and
                            the quality of the instruction through the School Quality Assessment visits.

                            While the intended feedback process was established, exceeding its target, and has likely contributed to
                            increased accountability, the extent of the achievement and substantive improvements in school
                            accountability systems remain to be fully assessed. Therefore, this ICR Review considers the achievement of
                            this objective to be Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Objective 1 (Improve equitable access to ECE in targeted disadvantaged counties) andObjective 2 (Improve
                            teacher quality in ECE and primary education) were rated Substantial. Objective 3 (Strengthen National
                            School Accountability Systems) is rated Modest. Based on these ratings, overall efficacy is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency. An economic analysis was not performed at the appraisal stage. The economic analysis
   performed at project completion considered the benefit stream comprised of increased future earnings for
   beneficiaries through improved access to quality ECE (Objective 1), improved teaching and learning at primary
   level by trained teachers (Objective 2) and through improved school management, accountability, systems, and
   project management (Objective 3), as well direct project costs, and opportunity costs. The benefits of Objective
   1 were estimated to lead to a 6.5 percent increase in wage earnings as a result of the ECE intervention. The
   benefits of Objectives 2 and 3 assumed wage increases of 60 percent of those estimated in the literature. The
   results of the economic analysis pointed to a net present value (NPV) of US$17.07 million and an internal rate of
   return (IRR) of 15 percent. The benefit-cost ratio was estimated at 2.53. The results of the sensitivity
   analysis suggested that the project remains economically viable under less favorable scenarios, with the benefit-
   cost ratio estimated at 1.09 under the low-bound scenario. At the component level, the economic analysis
   performed on Component 1 activities pointed to an NPV of US$12.78 million and an IRR of 21 percent. The

                                                                                                                             Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Getting to Best in Education (P162089)



economic analysis performed on Component 2 activities pointed to an NPV of US$6.05 million and an IRR of 19
percent. The economic analysis performed on Component 3 activities pointed to an NPV of US$2.63 million and
an IRR of 15 percent. The benefit-cost ratio for Components 1, 2, and 3 are estimated at 6.39, 5.23, and 2.23,
respectively.

The ICR reported that while the project originally budgeted a cost of training of US$800 per teacher and US$660
per principal, the revised unit cost as of June 2021 were US$1,338 per teacher and US$1,350 per principal and
that as a result of increased costs and challenging logistics, cohort three training was canceled, resulting in
fewer trained teachers and principals. This not only adversely affected the project’s economic efficiency, but also
affected implementation efficiency as fewer teachers and principals were trained.

Implementation efficiency. Implementation proceeded in a challenging environment marked by exogenous
shocks, and the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as macro-fiscal constraints. The project relied on implementing
partner agencies to enhance efficiency (ICR, p. 27), which suggests problems with government and institutional
arrangements made at project design. and the use of the government’s system expedited the implementation of
school grants, although the ICR (p. 27) reported problems accessing the funds, with only designated banks
receiving the grant funds and access to the funds necessitating that appropriate document be provided. Training
activities encountered difficulties due to a combination of logistical challenges, weak capacity of the RTTI,
higher-than-budgeted training costs which cannot be attributed to inflation, and fiscal constraints, but improved
with subsequent cohorts (ICR, p. 28). The establishment of the Grievance Redress Mechanism was delayed.
Moderate shortcomings were also reported in financial management, and these are discussed in section 10.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        100.00
 ICR Estimate                                                15.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the objectives is rated High, given that the PDO was aligned with the government’s and the
World Bank’s priorities for the country. Overall efficacy is rated Substantial and efficiency of the project is rated
Modest. The project outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.




                                                                                                       Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Getting to Best in Education (P162089)



a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The key risk to sustaining development outcomes pertains to limited financial and human resources, with the
latter constraining equitable access, teaching quality and learning outcomes. This risk is being partially
mitigated through the forthcoming Excellence in Learning in Liberia Project (P181455), which supports an
improvement in foundational literacy instruction and equitable access to public primary schools, building
upon the activities introduced through this project such as, for example, providing teacher and principal
trainings, and a continuation of the use of school grants and the SQA tool. In addition, there are additional
risks associated to the lack of ability of the education system to coordinate actors across all levels of the
system to meet the objective of improved learning.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project design was adequately informed by the latest evidence on ECE and teacher professional
  development. The design and choice of interventions were suitable to address key development
  challenges described in section 3 on Relevance of Objectives, and benefitted from the experience of
  GPE-supported operations. Risks to sustaining development outcomes were adequately assessed and
  mitigated. Adequate provisions at the county and district levels were made to train county education
  officers, who oversaw DEOs in district offices, and DEOs.

  There were a number of moderate shortcomings in quality-at-entry, however. First, provisions for capacity
  building and technical assistance in financial management and procurement at the design stage were
  weak, which eventually led to project implementation delays. The ICR noted errors made in Interim
  Financial Reports and a lack of adherence to financial management policies, with financial management
  arrangements needing to be made to ensure that (i) the funds for the project are used for the intended
  purposes and are efficiently and effectively used, (ii) timely and reliable Interim Financial Reports for the
  project are produced, and (iii) the project’s assets are protected (ICR, p. 31). Second, the design of PBCs
  posed a problem, with ambitious targets being unrealistic for the first year of implementation, when the
  client would have needed additional support and time to build up capacity (ICR, p. 34), and the pricing
  structure of PBCs not appropriately incentivizing the government to meet disbursement targets. Third, the
  independent verification agency firms did not have the experience nor the capacity to appropriately verify
  PBCs, and subsequently necessitated support in delivering a report that was aligned with Bank standards
  (ICR, p. 33).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Getting to Best in Education (P162089)




b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank undertook regular implementation support missions to Monrovia, with the team comprised of
 education, procurement, financial management, and environmental and social safeguards specialists. An
 implementation action plan, which included bi-weekly meeting between the MOE and the Bank, along with
 regular support was provided by the Bank. Aide-memoires included a list of agreed actions on each of the
 sub-components to be implemented over the following six-month period. The was a total of seven project
 task team leaders supporting the implementation of the project, with only one of these task team leaders
 being consistently involved in the project since the project was approved in 2018.

 There were challenges with the preparation of the first cohort of teacher and principal trainings by the
 MOE. The World Bank undertook a hands-on approach to supervising subsequent teacher training
 activities. This included helping the MOE identify corrective measures for a number of logistical issues,
 such as organizing lodging, transport, and per diem for the trainees. The World Bank increased the
 frequency of its visits of the RTTIs, along with more frequent visits by the representatives from the central
 MOE. The implementation action plan expanded after the cohort one training, involving many more status
 meetings with all involved and trainee process evaluations throughout cohort two training. MOE and the
 World Bank team also adapted by working together to find alternative and innovative solutions to achieve
 results, such as by implementing virtual trainings, virtual M&E follow-up with CEOs and DEOs, and setting
 up virtual mentoring opportunities for teachers and principals via WhatsApp instead of in-person meetings
 (ICR, p. 23).

 The World Bank also encountered difficulties with the delivery of the Annual School Census (ASC), which
 was not capturing elements identified at project design or agreed revisions.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework indicators did not adequately measure progress toward the achievement of the
 objectives and there were weaknesses in the monitoring arrangements and data sources relied upon. None
 of the PDO level indicators adequately measured progress toward development outcomes. The M&E
 framework relied on the existing EMIS and monitoring arrangements with the EMIS Unit—which collected
 data from primary key data sources and official statistics from the Annual School Census—, as well as
 third-party assessments. The Bank was constrained with the M&E design given that the EMIS was
 relatively nascent, and the technology infrastructure impeded timely and efficient data collection, analysis,

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Getting to Best in Education (P162089)



 and reporting, undermining the quality and the reliability of data. Also, given that the M&E framework
 primarily relied on the ASC, which was behind schedule, the Project Delivery Team and the Bank relied on
 other data sources, delaying the monitoring of key indicators.

 In addition to monitoring progress toward the achievement of objectives through the results framework, the
 Bank also relied on Annual Progress Reports to monitor progress on the implementation of activities and
 financial disbursements.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR reported that the government struggled to collect high-quality data, notably, as it pertained to the
  net enrollment rate through the Annual School Census. Annual School Census data for 2019/2020,
  2020/2021 and 2021/2022 were collected and reported with some delay with the first being only delivered
  in 2022, and the latter two being only delivered in 2023. The quality of the Annual School Census data
  was also a concern and although the Bank provided several rounds of comments to improve the quality
  of the report to meet international standards, most of the comments remained unaddressed by project
  closing. While the MOE hired a firm to provide technical support to develop the digitized platform, train
  the enumerators and supply relevant equipment, the transition to a digitized platform for data collection
  proved unsuccessful. Data collection on results framework indicators also remained difficult. While the
  project relied on data from the School Quality Assessment and payroll data, it was impossible to conduct
  the household survey due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Three JESRs were held to assess progress
  toward the achievement of ESP progress indicator targets, however, the reports did not include progress
  on these indicators and did not meet GPE’s quality standard for monitoring and evaluation. Also, while an
  impact evaluation was scheduled to take place for the school accountability management interventions by
  relying on School Quality Assessments performed by DEOs, this was canceled as part of the project
  restructuring, given that MOE was implementing SQA as part of national data collection efforts and not a
  stand-alone activity (Restructuring Paper, p. 5).



c. M&E Utilization
  Reporting of Annual School Census data and tracking PBC indicators informed the status of project
  progress, despite related delays. Annual Progress Reports communicated progress on activities and
  associated expenditures. Further, subgrant compliance reports verified whether schools received the
  funds and provided some details as to how fiduciary and safeguard knowledge was being applied by
  school leaders.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues



                                                                                                   Page 15 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Getting to Best in Education (P162089)



a. Safeguards
  The project was classified as Category C for environmental safeguards at appraisal with no safeguards
  policies triggered. The environmental and social screening of project components did not identify potential
  negative impacts of significance. Minor impacts related to maintenance and repair works were to be
  addressed through the implementation of the Contractor’s Environmental and Social Management Plan.
  The Social Assessment that was carried foresaw largely positive social impacts. A Code of Conduct to
  support a safe learning environment for girls was enforced by MOE. Safeguards were monitored during
  implementation and were rated Moderately Satisfactory or Satisfactory in Implementation Status and
  Results Reports (ISRs). Weaknesses consisted of: (i) delays in hiring a safeguards specialist, (ii) delays in
  MOE’s signing of the code of conduct, and (iii) delays in establishing a centralized hotline to address
  complaints, resulting in limited mechanisms for managing complaints and accident incidences, as a
  Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was established only in February 2023. The environmental
  safeguards performance rating was upgraded from Moderately Satisfactory to Satisfactory following the
  closing mission that took place in April 2023.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management. Financial management performance was rated Moderately Satisfactory during
  project implementation, and the financial management risk was rated substantial at project closing. Interim
  Financial Reports (IFRs) could have been better prepared, reviewed and managed, with problems
  including errors being made in reporting and a lack of adherence to financial management policies.
  Financial management arrangements were introduced to improve communication and coordination
  between the MOE and the Project Financial Management Unit, namely, that (i) funds be used for the
  intended purposes for improved effectiveness and efficiency, (ii) timely and reliable IFRs be produced, and
  (iii) measures are introduced to protect the project’s assets. Inflationary pressures during implementation
  led to the project restructuring, with component allocations considered the revised unit costs. As of June
  21, 2023, there were US$400,696 of unused funds.

  Procurement. Procurement was consistently rated Moderately Satisfactory in ISRs. Procurement
  arrangements with the government were met during implementation. A national procurement consultant
  was hired to support project implementation and the international procurement specialist hired by IRISE
  trained MOE staff. The Bank's procurement specialists provided training to the Project Implementation
  Unit to enhance compliance with the Bank's procurement regulations. The MOE worked effectively with
  service providers to ensure that contracts were signed and executed. There were challenges to uploading
  documents on Bank’s Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement, which were gradually addressed
  with the Bank's support. Procurement plans were updated regularly and submitted to the Bank for review
  and clearance.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None noted.




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Getting to Best in Education (P162089)



d. Other
   None noted.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  While overall efficacy is rated
                                                                                  Substantial -one objective is
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                  modest- and efficiency is
                                                                                  modest.
                                                                                  Moderate shortcomings in
                                                                                  quality-at-entry pertaining to
                                                                                  provisions on financial
                                                                                  management and procurement,
                                                                                  the design of PBCs, and the
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory    capacity of the independent
                                                                                  verification agency, as well as
                                                                                  supervision pertaining the
                                                                                  training of teachers and
                                                                                  principals and the conduct of the
                                                                                  ASC.
Quality of M&E                   Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

The ICR highlights a number of lessons derived from this project, notably:

    1. Adequate financial resources to project activities, along with some flexibility in project
       allocations to manage unforeseen economic challenges such as inflationary pressures on the
       economy, can support the achievement of targets. In this project, estimated unit costs were
       not adjusted to reflect potential downside risks, resulting in less ambitious targets being
       adopted at restructuring.
    2. Project achievement can be supported by determining PBC targets based on feasibility
       assessments and some targets being only established in year two or three rather than at
       appraisal.
    3. A detailed and agreed upon M&E design and implementation arrangements can support
       project implementation. In instances where national statistical systems are lacking, adequate
       project provisions can fill the void in data collection and reporting. The project experienced
       difficulties in measuring progress in a timely manner, with one notable example including the
       calculation of the net enrollment rate in ECE in targeted counties given that the last
       population census was carried out in 2008.


                                                                                                    Page 17 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Getting to Best in Education (P162089)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

There were shortcomings in the ICR’s quality of analysis, with the ICR not adequately presenting evidence of
project interventions and how they resulted in attainment of the objectives, which was a factor in the disconnect
in ratings between IEG and Bank. In spite of these shortcomings, the ICR rated the project’s outcome
Satisfactory and subsequent information and clarifications were needed to finalize the validation by IEG. Also,
while the ICR rated performance on M&E design, implementation and utilization as Modest, Bank performance
is rated Satisfactory. IEG therefore finds a lack of internal consistency across the various ratings. Moreover, the
ICR did not provide a statement on whether or not financial management audits were clean. The ICR's main
text was lengthy.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                     Page 18 of 18
