     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET Productive Safety Nets Project 4 (P146883)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023858

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P146883                                     ET Productive Safety Nets Project 4

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Ethiopia                                    Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-55400,IDA-58770,IDA-60410,TF-           31-Dec-2020                                     1,030,430,734.87
 A1426,TF-A3267

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Sep-2014                                 30-Jun-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           877,247,287.15                                 277,247,287.15

 Revised Commitment                          1,085,347,287.15                                 277,247,287.15

 Actual                                      1,030,430,734.87                                 277,247,287.06




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Aliza M. Belman Inbal       Salim J. Habayeb              Susan Ann Caceres             IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project objective was to increase access to effective safety net and disaster risk management systems,
   and complementary livelihood and nutrition services, for food insecure households in the recipients’ rural
   areas (Financing Agreement, October 2014, p.5).




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET Productive Safety Nets Project 4 (P146883)



   The PDO can be parsed into four specific objectives, three of which were to contribute to an overarching
   objective of reducing household food insecurity as measured by average months annually of household food
   insecurity. The three sub-objectives that were supposed to contribute to this outcome were:

         To increase access to effective safety net systems for food insecure households in the recipients’
          rural areas.
         To increase access to effective disaster risk management systems for food insecure households in
          the recipients’ rural areas.
         To increase access to complementary livelihood services for food insecure households in the
          recipients’ rural areas.

   In addition, a fourth objective was to increase access to complementary nutrition services for food insecure
   households in the recipients’ rural areas.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Social Protection and Disaster Risk Management (DRM) Systems (Total financing US$144 million at
   appraisal and US$51.2 million at closing, of which US$40 million was to be in World Bank financing
   at appraisal with US$4.7 million in actual IDA financing disbursed at project close). This component
   was to support the transition from independent social protection and DRM programs to integrated systems,
   including targeting, registry, capacity development, MIS, early warning triggers and response mechanisms.

   Productive safety nets and links to livelihoods services (Total financing at appraisal US$3.03 billion
   and at closing US$2.75 billion. Bank financing at appraisal US$530 million and at closing, after two
   additional financings, $703.1 million disbursed) included three sub-components: (i) safety nets transfers
   to chronically food insecure households based on participation in public works and/or soft conditionalities, or
   permanent direct support for households without adult able-bodied labor; as well as support to develop a
   scalable response mechanisms for transitory needs; (ii) sustainable community asset creation through
   watershed development planning and public works, supplemented by soft conditionalities to promote access
   to nutrition and health services; (iii) enhanced access to complementary livelihoods services for client
   households through crop and livestock production (on-farm self-employment), off-farm income generating
   activities (off-farm self-employment), and labor/employment linkages. This sub-component was to improve
   access to finance through livelihoods grants to the poorest households and facilitated access to credit.

   Institutional capacity building and project management support (Total financing at appraisal $219
   million of which US$30 million in Bank financing, and at closing $193.8 million of which
   US$45.4 million in Bank financing) provided capacity development and institutional strengthening for the
   government to implement the Poverty Safety Net Program 4 (PSNP 4). It financed budgets at the federal
   and regional levels; planning, implementation, and technical oversight of program activities; and improved
   financial, commodity, and procurement management.


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET Productive Safety Nets Project 4 (P146883)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Costs: The total project cost estimated at appraisal was $3,411.5 million, including $600 million in
   World Bank financing. The total actual cost at the project’s end (after 2 additional financings addressing the
   effects of devastating droughts in 2015/16 and 2016/17) was $3 billion including $753.2 million in IDA
   financing.

   Project Financing: The original financing for PSNP 4 was complemented by two IDA-funded Additional
   Credits. The first Additional Financing (AF1, P158770), approved on June 17, 2016, included a credit from
   the IDA Crisis Response Window (CRW) in the amount of SDR 70.6 million (US$100 million equivalent) to
   bolster the PSNP in response to a severe drought. AF1 also revised the Project’s institutional arrangements
   to reflect the renaming of ministries following the May 2015 elections. The second Additional Financing
   (AF2, P163350) was approved on April 19, 2017, also under the IDA CRW, in the amount of SDR 79.7
   million (US$108.1 million equivalent), in response to another severe drought. In addition to IDA financing,
   there was $277.2 million in Trust Fund Financing and $1,397 million in non- World Bank financing from
   USAID, DFID, the Government of Ireland, UNICEF, WFP and the Austrian Development Agency.

   Key Dates: The project was approved on 30 September 2014, became effective on 3 February 2015, and
   closed on 30 June 2022. The project was extended three times from its original closing date of 31
   December 2020 for a total of one year and six months, to ensure achievement of the PDO (ICR p.12). The
   three extensions were: (i) from December 31, 2020, until June 30, 2021; (ii) from June 30, 2021, until
   December 31, 2021; and (iii) from December 31, 2021 until June 30, 2022. Extending the project closing
   dates allowed the closing out of three contracts that suffered implementation delays due to the COVID-19
   pandemic: (i) the delivery of 45,000 metric tons of wheat; (ii) the second phase of MIS development and
   data collection for the beneficiary household registry; and (iii) the end-line impact evaluation contracts. All
   financing had been disbursed by the original project closing date. As such, the project would have been
   closed if not for adjustments to finish outstanding work.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project builds on a decade of Bank support to Ethiopia’s PSNP. Established in 2005, PSNP has
become a model for social protection policy for other low-income countries in Africa and beyond. From
PSNP’s inception, the World Bank has been an important contributor to its success. Prior to this project,
IDA’s support to PSNP has been through an Adaptable Policy Lending instrument with three phases. This
support has been instrumental in achieving the program’s objectives of reducing household vulnerability,
improving resilience to shocks, and promoting sustainable community development in food insecure areas
of rural Ethiopia. Bank support has been informed throughout by lessons learned in previous iterations,
thereby assisting the government of Ethiopia in improving the efficacy of PSNP though (i) provision of
timely, predictable, and appropriate transfers to beneficiary households, for consumption smoothing and
avoiding asset depletion; (ii) creation of productive and sustainable community assets that contribute to the
large-scale rehabilitation of severely degraded areas; (iii) stimulation of local markets; (iv) responding to


                                                                                                      Page 3 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      ET Productive Safety Nets Project 4 (P146883)



               drought shocks to avoid increasing destitution among affected households; and (v) building assets,
               promoting productivity, and encouraging diversification at the household level (PAD p.3).

               The project was fully in line with the most recent Bank Country Partnership Framework (FY2018-
               2022). The PDO responded to Focus Area Two (Building Resilience and Inclusiveness). By increasing
               access to effective safety net and disaster risk management systems and complementary services for food-
               insecure households in rural areas, the Project contributed to the CPF’s Objective 2.1 (Improved
               Sustainability and Effectiveness of Safety Nets) which stated that World Bank assistance would support a
               sustainable and harmonized nationwide Social Protection (SP) system for poor and vulnerable groups by
               extending safety nets and improving the effectiveness of the government’s safety net program in rural
               areas, including in response to drought.

               The PDO was aligned with the development priorities of the Government of Ethiopia (GoE).
               Ethiopia’s most recent Growth and Transformation Plan II (2015-2020) included aims to promote household
               food security and strengthen DRM. The Plan included targets for number of PSNP beneficiaries, number of
               households graduating from PSNP, and number of chronically food insecure household heads (male and
               female) able to build assets through household-based credit package services.

               The two Additional Financings, which enabled timely response to two devastating droughts within
               the project period, were of crucial importance. Within the context of recurrent shocks, expansion of a
               rural safety net that responds to chronic and transitory needs, while at the same time building resilience to
               address the environmental impacts over the longer term was highly relevant.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase access to effective safety net systems for food insecure households in the recipients’ rural areas.

                             Rationale
                             This objective was to be achieved through funding transfer payments through the PNSP, as well as through
                             providing technical, financial and capacity building support for systems improvements such as introduction of
                             a management information system (MIS), single registry, electronic payments, grievance redress and social
                             accountability mechanisms.

                             Outputs and Intermediate Outcomes

                                        The target of percentage of Kebeles where poverty index is used to complement community targeting
                                          was not achieved. The project envisioned developing a new poverty index based on a proxy-means

                                                                                                                               Page 4 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  ET Productive Safety Nets Project 4 (P146883)



        test to supplement the existing community-based targeting system. However, according to the ICR
        (p.39) the community-based approach was found in the course of the project to be more effective in
        selecting the poorest households at the community level. Therefore, it was decided that the poverty
        index would be used for recertification/exit rather than for targeting. The poverty index was developed
        at the central level as of May 2020, but awaits planned single registry data to be rolled out. It is
        expected to be finalized and operationalized under PSNP 5.
       The percentage of clients receiving regular payments within the agreed timeframe was not achieved,
        with only 59.5% of clients receiving payments on time, as compared to a target of 90% and a baseline
        of 60%. The ICR (p.40) explains that timeliness of transfers was challenging, noting that while an
        improvement was noted in early 2020, this decline by 2022 “due to COVID-19, rising conflict and
        instability and government capacity constraints.” The ICR further reports that a phone study during
        COVID-19 estimated that only a third of households received transfers on time during the first year of
        the pandemic.
       The target of 70% of transfers received with a value of at least 15 kg of cereals and 4kg of pulses or
        cash equivalent was not achieved. According to the ICR (p.19) the value of the food basket was
        reduced during the 2017 Mid-Term Review (MTR) due to Program budget constraints which led to the
        reduced wage value and lowered cost efficiency in the final three years of the program.
       Only 14.29% of PSNP woredas met minimum PSNP staffing standards against a baseline of 80% and
        an original (not achieved) target of 90%. According to the ICR (p.47) the decline in the indicator
        was due to a change in data source.
       Only 30 percent of clients reported that they were aware of program objectives and entitlements, not
        achieving the target of 70 percent. According to the ICR (p.48), over 50 percent of households had
        heard of PNSP. However, the indicator was based on awareness of the maximum days per month
        that one person can work for the PSNP public works. This indicator was not adjusted when public
        works requirements were suspended from April to June 2020 due to the pandemic.
       The project did not achieve the goal of 75 percent of PSNP woredas where a MIS and single registry
        is operational. According to the ICR (p.14), while single registry and Management Information
        System (MIS) were established at the central level by project close, the registry and MIS were not yet
        operational at the woreda level, in part due to procurement challenges, early drought crises which
        shifted attention away from the systems agenda, and later COVID-19 and conflict crises which slowed
        data collection. Core systems improvements are continuing under the current phase of the PSNP
        (PSNP 5).

Outcomes

     The project served 7,997,218 PSNP beneficiaries, substantially achieving (96 percent) its target of
      8,300,000 direct project beneficiaries against a baseline of 7,200,000. The shortfall is attributed by
      the ICR (p.14) to insufficient program financing. Of program beneficiaries 52 percent were women,
      exceeding the target of 50 percent.
     38.8 percent of PSNP clients reported that they could provide adequate meals for their family for 12
      months a year, partly achieving the target of 50 percent. This indicator was intended to be calculated
      based on a weighted average between highlands and lowlands areas (75 percent highlands and 25
      percent lowlands). At midline, the value was 44.4 percent based on the weighted average. However,
      according to the IFPRI Endline Evaluation Report only lowlands data was reported at endline so that
      the reported achievement for this target is incomplete. No disaggregated information was available for
      female- versus male-headed households, despite the fact that the results framework had planned to
      include such data.

                                                                                                  Page 5 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ET Productive Safety Nets Project 4 (P146883)




      According to the endline evaluation report (Institute of Food Policy Research (IFPRI), PSNP4 Endline
       Evaluation Report, p.12), PSNP4 did not have statistically significant impact on three consumption
       expenditure measures, namely change in per capita food, change in per capita non-food, and change
       in per capita total expenditures.

Other achievements

The Program strengthened systems around electronic payments, grievance redress and social accountability
in the form of Kebele Appeals Committees (KAC), defined as a key elements of the Social Protection system
by the PAD. The use of electronic payment modalities expanded to cover more than one third of PSNP
woredas and 1.3 million households. KACs were established and functional by the end of the project, and
accessible to PSNP and non-PSNP households in all PSNP communities (kebeles) to handle project-related
grievances. The performance of KACs was monitored through rapid response missions, spot-checks, and
quarterly reports, which showed that 89 percent of complaints received by the KAC were successfully
addressed.

The Project Results framework has an implicit overall objective which builds on the achievements of
objectives sub 1-3, of reducing household food insecurity through the bolstering of systems and increase in
number of beneficiaries from the various social safety net programs. This implicit objective is reflected in the
PDI of average months annually of household food insecurity. This overarching objective was partially
achieved, with average months annually of household food insecurity dropping from a baseline of 3.20
months to 2.45, against a target of 2.00. This partial achievement was against the backdrop of severe
drought through much of the project period which put great strain on social safety net
resources.      According to the IFPRI endline evaluation (pp.ii, 9) however, the actual figure is lower. The
IFPRI evaluation found that PSNP reduced the food gap by 0.18 months (or six days per year) in the
Highlands with no statistically significant impact on the food gap in the lowlands. Specifically, IFPRI found
that in the Highlands, among PSNP households, the food gap fell from 2.8 to 2.6 months between 2016 and
2021. Over the same period, for non-PSNP households, it increased from 2.3 to 2.4 months. In the Lowlands,
it increased from 1.8 to 2.4 months for PSNP households and fell from 2.4 to 2.0 months among non-PSNP
households. In the non-PSNP households, mean food gap has remained relatively unchanged between
baseline and end-line except in Somali where it showed an increase from 1.9 to 3.1 months between the two
periods. The endline evaluation further found that, the PSNP4 did not have a statistically significant impact on
the Highland and Lowland household diet diversity scores (HDDS), consumption expenditures, or resilience
outcomes (measured by distress sale of productive assets for food and emergency cash
needs). Notwithstanding these partial achievements, IFPRI found evidence that PSNP4 gave important
support in times of crisis:

      During the COVID-19 period, PSNP was strongly associated with reducing the likelihood of food
       insecurity, with beneficiary households having lower increases in the food gap during this period than
       non-PSNP households (IFPRI p.5). According to IFPRI, “Participation in the PSNP is strongly
       associated with offsetting a significant portion of the increase in food insecurity during the COVID-19
       year. Specifically, the likelihood of PSNP households becoming food insecure is reduced by 20
       percentage points and the size of their food gap is reduced by 0.83 month (about 25 days).”
      The IFPRI report (p.6) found that, during the PSNP 4 period, “Overall, the food insecurity situation of
       PSNP households stands at much better position than their non-PSNP counterparts: the likelihood of
       food insecurity for a PSNP household has increased only by 18 percentage points (compared to non-
       PSNP households that experienced a 37 percentage points increase in the likelihood of becoming


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ET Productive Safety Nets Project 4 (P146883)



       food insecure) and the food gap increased only by 0.22 months (about 7 days) (compared to non-
       PSNP household that has experienced an increase in food gap by about a month).”

Overall, IFPRI (P.63) found that in the Highlands, PSNP4 had "significant impacts in reducing food gap at
the household level – the number of months the household has been unable to feed itself-, increased
livestock assets- measured by tropical livestock units- and reduced the likelihood of being categorized as
poor. In contrast, the PSNP did not have statistically significant impact on any of these outcomes in the
Lowlands. Moreover, the PSNP did not have statistically significant impact on a number of other outcomes in
both the Highlands and Lowlands, including per capita consumption expenditures, dietary diversity, resilience,
and subjective wellbeing.”

The ICR (p.33), confirms that PSNP 4 achieved gains in the Highlands, while having modest impact in the
Lowlands. The ICR explains this discrepancy as resulting from different climate and livelihoods
characteristics, as well as different levels of shock vulnerability, as shown by the greater impact of droughts
on lowlands areas. The ICR also notes implementation challenges in the lowlands related to targeting, social
accountability and GRM, design of public works and livelihoods interventions, and relatively weaker
implementation capacity.




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase access to effective disaster risk management systems for food insecure households in the
recipients’ rural areas.

Rationale
This objective was to be achieved through funding of food and cash transfers through the Humanitarian Food
Assistance (HFA) program for drought-affected households, alongside PSNP ‘contingency budgets’ to
supplement humanitarian resources to cover transitory needs. In addition, technical and financial assistance
were provided to establish building blocks of an effective DRM system, including development of early
warning systems to identify people in need in a timely manner, and support for contingency planning and
financing to improve response mechanisms for transitory needs

Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes

      Reductions in the time taken from issuing a drought warning to identifying and agreeing number of
       people in need was partly achieved, with time reduced from a baseline of 180 days to 100 days,
       against a target of 60 days. According to the ICR (p.39) the partial completion is in part a reflection of
       the large scale of the dual drought crises, which overburdened existing response mechanisms given
       the scale of humanitarian need.
      85 percent of clients received contingency resources within 60 days of identification of need,
       surpassing the target of 75 percent. According to the ICR (p.42), data for this indicator was from

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  ET Productive Safety Nets Project 4 (P146883)



     December 2019 with undocumented improvements happening subsequent to the last instance of data
     gathering on this indicator.
    According to the Government ICR (p.69), The proportion of households that sold an asset to cope with
     food shortage increased for male headed households (MHH), from 25.3% in 2015 to 44.3% in 2019,
     while, for female headed households (FHH), it reduced from 44.3 percent in 2015 to 38.3 percent in
     2019. Land renting to cope with food shortage was reduced from 22.6 percent for MHH and 38.5
     percent for FHH in 2015, to 11.2 percent for MHH and 13.1 percent for FHH in 2019.

Outcome

    The project was able to partly implement improved early warning triggers and response
     mechanisms. According to the ICR (p.15), a comprehensive review of the existing early warning
     system (EWS) was conducted, including recommendations to streamline early warning and disaster
     response through the identification of appropriate early warning triggers and response mechanisms.
     PSNP 4 made strides in the integration of food and cash delivery in response to shocks and
     incentivized the shift towards cash. This included addressing inconsistencies across food and cash
     delivery in terms of transfer value, delivery, and beneficiary targeting. However, the existence of
     parallel systems (HFA and PSNP) led to inefficiencies and gaps in coverage. In the first year of the
     PSNP 4, the cash transfer value was set to match the equivalent food transfer value under the HFA to
     promote the shift to cash. The national Integrated Cash-Food Response Plan (ICFRP) developed in
     2017/18 focused on the coordination of cash and food delivery in response to transitory food
     insecurity, which created a platform to promote accountability and transparency across GoE and DPs
     by reflecting needs and resources and allowing the GoE to prioritize reaching the most
     vulnerable. Despite these achievements, as noted above, according to the ICR (p.13) planned
     improvements to existing disaster risk management systems fell short of targets due to drought crises
     that affected the capacity of the GoE to invest in system alongside changes in institutional
     arrangements in 2015 that worsened coordination between social protection and disaster risk
     management actors.
    A second PDI attributed in the ICR to this objective "beneficiaries of safety net projects" was
     substantially achieved with 7,997,218 beneficiaries, substantially achieving (96%) its target of
     8,300,000 direct project beneficiaries against a baseline of 7,200,000. However, there is a lack of
     clarity about this target and its achievements, for which reason it has been disregarded in the rating of
     this objective. First, as the baseline, targets and achievements of this PDI are identical to those
     ascribed to Objective 1 under the indicator of "direct project beneficiaries", it does not appear that the
     indicator provides any information on the extent to which access was increased specifically to disaster
     risk management systems. Second, while the ICR results framework associates this indicator with
     Objective 2, the table on p. 49 of the ICR associates it with Objective 1. Third, while the results
     framework (and the final ISR) report the achievement of 7,997,218 beneficiaries, the text of the ICR
     cites a different figure of 10,297,218 beneficiaries.
    As reported in the ICR, (p.15), PSNP4 provided life-saving support to PSNP and non-PSNP
     households in the dual drought crises of 2015/16 and 2016/17 . Efforts coordinated by the GoE with
     World Bank and donor partner support demonstrated the shock-responsive capabilities of the existing
     safety net. The transitory caseload included both vertical expansions to provide additional support to
     existing PSNP beneficiaries, and horizontal expansion to reach non-PSNP beneficiaries affected by
     shocks in PSNP woredas. The AFs processed by the World Bank reached approximately 1.4 million
     existing PSNP 4 clients and 2.3 million non-PSNP clients through disaster response mechanisms.
     Therefore, a total of nearly 10.3 million chronic and transitory food insecure people were reached

                                                                                                 Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ET Productive Safety Nets Project 4 (P146883)



       during PSNP 4 (PDI 2). For existing clients, continued coverage by PSNP rather than being shifted to
       the humanitarian appeal (supported by the HFA) allowed households to receive regular support to
       protect household assets. In total, an estimated cumulative 18 million beneficiaries received transitory
       support through the PSNP and/or the HFA in 2015/16 and 2016/17. Significant donor resources were
       mobilized towards the response and World Bank donor coordination efforts facilitated the delivery of
       both financial and technical assistance, including additional contributions by USAID, DFID, WFP and
       UNICEF.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To increase access to complementary livelihood services for food insecure households in the recipients’ rural
areas.

Rationale
Rationale: The project financed livelihood services, through linkages to crop and livestock production, off-farm
income generating activities, and labor/employment services. This included stronger links to extension
services for client households, such as on-farm extension, mentoring and coaching in business and technical
skills training for diversification into off-farm activities/entrepreneurship, and linkages to employment services.
In addition, PSNP 4 provided livelihood transfers as grants, while supporting improved access to appropriate
financial services, such as voluntary savings promotion, livelihoods transfers and linking households to micro-
level financial institutions (PAD p.11). Finally, in addition to livelihood services, the project supported public
works by able PSNP beneficiaries for the development of sustainable community assets and watershed
planning. However, implementation was reported by the ICR (p.19) to be challenging. The ICR notes that
quality of livelihood support was hampered by a limited budget, poor training capacity, and challenges in
providing access to finance. According to the ICR, this resulted in a lack of awareness about program
components and a lower uptake of off-farm self-employment and wage employment pathways.

Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes

      The project substantially achieved the target of percentage of public works sub-projects selected
       and implemented following GoE’s Community-based Participatory Watershed Management
       Guidelines or Rangeland Management Guidelines, achieving 84.5 percent as compared to a baseline
       of 75 percent and a target of 90 percent.
      45% of client households reported that their livelihoods have benefitted from public work created
       assets, substantially achieving the target of 50 percent against a baseline of 20 percent. The data
       was not disaggregated by gender, as originally planned in the results framework.



                                                                                                     Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ET Productive Safety Nets Project 4 (P146883)




     72.66 % of clients developed business plans in the context of the project, partly achieving the target
      of 90 percent. The IFPRI Endline Evaluation Report reported that business plans were generally
      perceived to be useful for livelihood clients to determine necessary inputs, resources, and skills to
      develop their own businesses, but ongoing technical support and supervision is needed to facilitate
      business success.
     11.61 percent of client households received livelihoods transfers, partly achieving the target of 27
      percent. According to the ICR (p.46) the 2017 Mid-Term Review reduced the target for PSNP
      households receiving livelihoods transfers from 20 percent to 10 percent due to the budget shortfall,
      however this change was never formally made to the Project results framework.
     16.41 percent of clients received employment related skills training, partially achieving the target of
      30%. According to the ICR (p.46), the wage employment pathway (WEP) was introduced as a pilot
      and opportunities were found to be extremely limited in rural areas. Uptake was further hampered by
      poor implementation quality and low technical assistance capacity. The WEP has therefore been
      reshaped under PSNP 5.

Outcomes:

     The project did not achieve the target of 30 percent of PSNP households reporting a new income
        source as a result of program support. According to the ICR (p.44), there was no new reporting
        against this indicator as compared to midline (2018). According to the IFPRI Endline Evaluation
        Report – Highlands, there was no statistically significant change in income diversification between
        baseline and endline. No information was provided for the lowlands.
       67.7 percent of households reported saving regularly, surpassing the target of 50%. Across the
        livelihoods pathways, the ability to save regularly is an important milestone for households to access
        loans and develop and implement business plans.
       According to the ICR, the project partially achieved the objective of increase in average value of
        household assets, with, on average, a 20% improvement against a target of 30%.
       The IFPRI endline evaluation reported that PSNP resulted in a 25% increase in livestock assets
        measured by Tropical Livestock Units (TLU) in the Highlands, with no statistically significant impact on
        livestock assets in the lowlands. The endline evaluation further found that PSNP4 did not have a
        statistically significant impact on consumption expenditures or resilience outcomes (measured by
        distress sale of productive assets for food and emergency cash needs).
       The IFPRI endline evaluation (p.24) also found that household graduation during PSNP4 showed low
        performance compared to previous phase (PSNP3). The following factors were contributing to limited
        performance in Graduation: (i) lack of clarity by woreda or kebele authorities on how to conduct
        graduation (process and procedure), (ii) limited knowledge and skill on how to process evidence-
        based graduation, (iii) shortage of funds (small size of livelihood transfers, low coverage), (iv) lack of
        integration of packages that could make the interventions more successful and, (v) drought
        phenomena of el nino- climate change.

Other Outcomes

The public works component of PSNP 4 brought about significant positive environmental and climate
impacts (ICR p.22). Public works sub-projects use a community-based approach to integrated watershed
management and follow the government’s Community-Based Participatory Watershed Development
Guidelines. In many cases, this has contributed to the rehabilitation of entire community watersheds,
improving agricultural productivity and livelihoods. All five public works impact assessments (PWIAs)

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ET Productive Safety Nets Project 4 (P146883)



conducted to date estimate that area closure combined with natural resource management under the PSNP
has introduced significant carbon sequestration in treated areas. Analyses of soil samples from these PSNP
public works sites have confirmed this and identified up to 300 percent increase in sequestration rates,
together with markedly improved soil fertility. In addition, the 2019 PWIA found that the ten
watersheds/rangeland areas sampled were sequestering 183,000 tons of CO2/Annum as a result of the
PSNP, in a PW program covering a total of around 12,000 watersheds. In addition, the 2019 PWIA found
that across 8 sampled watersheds, soil erosion declined by 36 percent, woody biomass in non-pastoral
watersheds increased by 169 percent, and carbon sequestration due to increased vegetation cover increased
from 3.25 to 4 MT Co2 per hectare between 2015 and 2019. This translated into livelihoods and health
benefits for agricultural households: crop yields in sample watersheds grew by 24 percent, irrigated crop
production rose from 12 to 26 percent of households (including 6 to 12 percent for female-headed
households), and access to safe water increased to 100 percent in several watersheds. Incidence of diarrhea
fell by 3.6 percent between 2015 and 2019. According the ICR, there is evidence of spillover effects as other
farmers adopted SWC technologies and access road construction increased the proportion of households
within 30 minutes’ walk of a main road from 78 to 90 percent.




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
To increase access to complementary nutrition services for food insecure households in the recipients’ rural
areas.

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective was simple and held that the enhancement of community-based
nutrition interventions, specifically counselling services, would increase access to complementary nutrition
support.

Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes

The ICR noted that the project had no IRIs for this objective, but reported that nutrition awareness-raising
activities reached a total of 1,214,215 clients

Outcomes

      The percentage of clients who received community-based nutrition counseling increased from a
       baseline of 40 percent in 2015 to 84 percent in 2022, exceeding the target of 80 percent.
      In terms of differences in breastfeeding knowledge between PSNP and non-PSNP mothers, the IFPRI
       endline evaluation found that 65% of PSNP mothers knew about immediate initiation of breastfeeding
       as compared to 62% of non-PSNP mothers, and 61% of PSNP mothers knew about exclusive
       breastfeeding till 6 months as compared to 58% of non-PSNP mothers.


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 22
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               ET Productive Safety Nets Project 4 (P146883)




                                  The IFPRI endline evaluation found no statistically significant impact of the PSNP on mid-upper arm
                                   circumference  among children or women, nor on the prevalence of moderate and severe acute
                                   malnutrition among children. 
                                  The endline survey also found that in the Highlands, the mean household dietary diversity score
                                   increased between baseline and end-line among both the PSNP (from 3.9 to 4.4 food groups) and
                                   non-PSNP (from 4.3 to 4.7 food groups) households. In contrast, in the lowlands, mean household
                                   dietary diversity  declined between baseline and end-line among PSNP (from 5.4 to 4.1) and non-
                                   PSNP (5.3 to 4.2) households.
                                  The project results framework did not include outcome-level measures of knowledge or behavioral
                                   effects of these nutrition related services and activities. The IFPRI endline evaluation found no
                                   statistically significant impact of the PSNP on mid-upper arm circumference among children or
                                   women, nor on the prevalence of moderate and severe acute malnutrition among children. The only
                                   difference in knowledge found between PSNP and non-PSNP mothers was in breastfeeding. 65% of
                                   PSNP mothers know about immediate initiation of breastfeeding as compared to 62% of non-PSNP
                                   mothers. And 61% of PSNP mothers know about exclusive breastfeeding till 6 months as compared to
                                   58% of non-PSNP mothers.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall, the project substantially achieved objectives 2 (access to effective disaster risk management
                            systems) and 4 (increase access to complementary nutrition services) and recorded modest achievements on
                            objective 1 (access to effective safety net systems) and 3 (access to complementary livelihood services). On
                            the basis of these findings, as well as the above analysis of project achievements per objective, the ICRR
                            finds substantial achievement of the PDO, which is notable given then unprecedented challenged faced
                            access to complementary livelihood services for food insecure households by Ethiopia during the project
                            period. 



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The project was efficiently implemented. While there were three changes to the closing date, to allow the
   closing out of three contracts that suffered implementation delays due to the COVID-19 pandemic, 60 percent
   of project funds were disbursed in the first sixteen months of the project in order to address the dual drought

                                                                                                                          Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ET Productive Safety Nets Project 4 (P146883)



crisis. Institutional changes in responsible Ministries in 2015 impacted the overall trajectory of PSNP 4 by
strengthening management of the livelihoods component but weakening coordination of the systems-building
components (ICR p.24) however, were shifted to these system building aims were shifted to RPSNP, with
remaining project funds being fully disbursed, primarily to support vulnerable households during the drought.

A Value for Money (VfM) assessment conducted in July 2020 covering the original five-year period of the
PSNP 4 (2015 – 2020 found the program to be cost-effective, providing good value for money (ICR p.18).
Targeting effectiveness measured by beneficiary incidence was comparable to international experience,
although the assessment found that there was room for improvement. The VfM assessment included program
caseload and costs, cost-efficiency and cost-effectiveness of the main program components with respect to
program objectives. Cash and food transfers constituted 85 percent of total public costs, alongside public works
capital costs (6 percent), livelihoods component (2 percent) and administration costs (7 percent). The total cost-
transfer ratio (TCTR) based on administration and transfer costs compared to the market value of transfers at
the delivery point was 1.11, which, according to the ICR is considered reasonably good for a mature social
transfer program. With the inclusion of client opportunity costs, the TCTR rises to 1.38, and with all costs, the
TCTR is 1.48. The main factors that reduced cost-efficiency included the falling value of wages, food price
inflation, and timeliness of transfers.

The 2018 Public Works Impact Assessment completed in the context of PSNP 4 found that public works
were cost effective (p.11). The assessment included a cost-benefit analysis of soil and water
conservation structures, irrigation schemes and carbon dioxide sequestration as part of PSNP’s public works
projects. The result of the cost benefit analysis of soil and water conservation activities in targeted watersheds
revealed that at 10% discount rate the net present value (NPV) of all micro-watersheds was positive and the
related benefit cost ratio (BCR) was above one. Similarly, the economic analysis of an irrigation scheme at
Frikeba micro watershed had positive NPV and BCR greater than one. With regard to carbon sequestration, the
analysis showed that in all watersheds the NPV was positive and corresponding BCR was high, ranging from
13.31 for Kechin to 23.5 for Faragosa.

 The PAD noted the likely economic benefits of public works in the context of the project, from both soil
and water conservation activities and through direct contributions to livelihoods (p.29). A 2015 Public
Works Impact Assessment (PWIA) of PSNP estimated that the economic benefit-cost ratios, based on a
combination of field data and secondary data sources on soil loss, forage, woody biomass, and carbon
sequestered, exceeded 20 for several watersheds. The 2013 PWIA found benefit-cost ratios for water
subprojects ranging from 1.61 to over 20.23 The 2015 PWIA estimated that, on average, a 9.1 percent increase
in crop yields could be attributed to the impact of PW SWC measures. However, this analysis did not compare
the estimated returns of PW with other options and the ICR (p.18) notes that a PW approach is less cost-
efficient due to the inclusion of private opportunity costs the PW component is cost-effective in terms of climate
change mitigation and adaptation. Despite this, the ICR determined that the benefit-cost ratios for soil and
water conservation, irrigation and carbon sequestration activities ranged from 2.0 to 3.4 with positive net present
values for all sampled watersheds. Furthermore, both social transfers and public works have been found to have
multiplier effects in the local and national economy, including income and production multipliers that generate on
average US$2.08 per US$1 transfer.

Program design was meant to bolster efficiency of Ethiopia’s safety net program in several ways,
although not all were achieved by the program close. The shift from food to cash, improving cash-food
parity, and incorporating innovative transfer mechanisms including e-payments was prioritized by the
program. Uptake of the e-payment system is expected to improve transfer timeliness and cost efficiency during



                                                                                                     Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ET Productive Safety Nets Project 4 (P146883)



PSNP 5. (ICR, p.19). The program also aimed at harmonization of PSNP and HFA, although for reasons
detailed in section 8, this was not accomplished during the program period.

The ICRR concurs with the ICR’s efficiency rating as Substantial, or comparable to what would be
expected in the operation’s sector. According to the ICR (p.19), when comparing real multiplier effects for
Ethiopia PSNP to other social transfer programs in Africa, PSNP exceeds nearly all comparator country
programs (Lesotho, Kenya, Ghana, Zambia, and Zimbabwe). While low implementation capacity affected the
efficiency of the livelihoods’ component, the associated costs are relatively small compared to the core safety
net, so the Substantial rating is maintained.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of PSNP4 objectives is rated high, as objectives were aligned with both government and Bank
goals in Ethiopia, as well as being highly relevant to addressing the multiple crises in the project
period. Efficacy is rated substantial, but with mixed results as two objectives had modest
achievement. Efficiency is rated substantial, including when compared to similar projects in other countries. The
above ratings are consistent with a moderately satisfactory outcome.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Risk to development outcome is small given the demonstrated commitment of both the Government
of Ethiopia and donors to the PSNP program. Ethiopia’s PSNP has a proven track record of weathering
multiple extreme shocks throughout its twenty years history. Moreover, the Bank’s commitment to the
program remains firm, with the follow-on PSNP 5 project presently operation. According to the ICR (p.31),

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET Productive Safety Nets Project 4 (P146883)



primary factors in the program’s resilience over time have been the policy prominence of the PSNP within the
GoE’s key development strategies, institutionalization over time, broad support among donor partners, solid
results, strong and consistent contributions from the World Bank, and ability to adapt and adjust to key
challenges.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The design of PNSP 4 reflected lessons learned from previous PSNP phases and the long-term
  vision of Ethiopia’s DRM and Social Protection policies (ICR p.23). Over time, PSNP built on the
  lessons of previous phases to improve the program, including expanding into new regions, improving the
  timeliness of transfers, enhancing the quality of PW and linking public works to livelihood investments,
  prioritizing cash transfers over food, investing in social accountability tools to improve service delivery
  and improving risk financing and coordination mechanisms. In addition, best practices were integrated
  into the design process based on lessons learned from previous phases. At entry, the design of PSNP 4
  incorporated these learnings, which translated into an ambitious agenda for systems-building and risk
  financing alongside the development of a comprehensive set of livelihoods interventions that had shown
  promise in contributing to productive asset-building.

  Establishing mechanisms for management, institutional support, donor coordination, and
  financing were priorities at entry. The institutional arrangements within the GoE were considered
  appropriate based on existing coordination and common goals between key actors. In addition, the World
  Bank was a key broker in bringing together donors with different priorities cutting across safety nets,
  livelihoods, and humanitarian response. The World Bank was willing to take on a robust donor
  coordination role from the outset, which ‘crowded in’ the participation of other donor partners. The World
  Bank set norms around collaboration, resourcing, and institution building, and invested resources to
  establish a strong framework and robust coordination mechanisms. The end result of the design process
  – eleven donor partners and government actors supporting an ambitious, reform-based safety net
  agenda – was a considerable accomplishment (ICR, p.29).

  Program design was ambitious given the level of risk. PSNP 4 was seen as an opportune time to
  pursue a reform agenda including a shift towards the systems-oriented approach, and the GoE was
  willing to support this ambitious agenda. However, the risks identified during appraisal – high overall
  implementation, stakeholder and capacity risks and substantial governance, design and social
  environmental risks – were not adequately reflected in the scope and scale of program design. When
  asked by the IEG to elaborate on the ways in which project design could have better mitigated these
  risks, the team responded, "The financing available at appraisal was not enough to implement the
  program as designed for the life of the project (both in terms of scope and scale). There was an
  assumption that the financing gap would be filled, however for multiple reasons discussed in the ICR, it
  was not, which affected implementation. The government was also unwilling to reduce the caseload to
  reflect lower financing. The risks were therefore not adequately incorporated into the project scope
  (different types of activities/components being implemented) as well as scale (number of households that
  could be reached)….Considering the risks, the fluid context and the financing gap, the project design was
  probably over ambitious."


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET Productive Safety Nets Project 4 (P146883)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team responded in a timely and flexible manner to multiple crises during the
 project period. In particular, a dual drought crisis in the earlier years of the project led to repurposing of
 project funds intended to be disbursed over the entire project period to meet the critical immediate needs of
 the drought-affected population. In order to respond to these crises, the 2017 midterm review led to a
 significant redesign of the project and the approval a new World Bank project, the RPSNP, which would
 contribute to the same PSNP 4 Program, addressing funding shortages and to contributing to better
 coordination between PSNP and HFA. Among the crises which arose during the project
 period, Subsequent to the drought, the project team was faced by the challenges of the COVID-19
 pandemic and locust plague. The project adopted several measures to respond including an extension of
 the project closing date and suspension of public works requirements from April to June 2020.

 According to the ICR (p.30), the Bank team responded to the multiple crises by stepping up their
 supervision and support, however, administrative steps were not taken to adjust the Program to
 reflect changes. Joint review and implementation support missions (JRIS), organized every 6 months and
 with representatives across government, donor partners, World Bank, and other implementing partners,
 served as a venue to discuss, review, and document progress, implementation status and challenges.
 Detailed Aide Memoires were prepared for each JRIS, outlining key progress, remaining challenges, and
 clearly identifying action items and responsible parties. The ICR, however, states that while aide-memoires
 gave a clear picture of the situation on the ground, ISRs tended to under-report the extent of challenges
 faced and the impact on progress. The Project was consistently rated Satisfactory or Moderately
 Satisfactory despite evidence that a number of results framework indicators could not be met due to
 Program-wide challenges. Poorly formulated or overly ambitious indicators and targets in the results
 framework were not adjusted accordingly. As a result, key decisions to adjust the Project and results
 framework in response to challenges were not made. For example, when the drought crisis shifted
 priorities away from institutional strengthening/systems pieces and towards humanitarian response, many
 activities under Component 1, as well as some of the livelihood support and nutrition activities were
 delayed or deprioritized, leading to non-achievement of a substantial portion of project intermediate and
 outcome indicators. However, while this was apparent early on in the project, no attempts were made to
 modify the results framework to be more reflective of the evolving project.

 It is unclear the reasons for some of the key administrative decisions regarded the project. Notably,
 according to the ICR (p.30) it is unclear why the RPSNP was introduced as a new project rather than an AF
 (to address the financing gap) or a restructuring (to address the shift in institutional arrangements) ND why
 the PSNP 4 was not closed concurrently with the introduction of the RPSNP other than for the
 management of the Bank-supervised TFs.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET Productive Safety Nets Project 4 (P146883)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 M&E design was based on the GoE’s established M&E system for the PSNP. The key elements of
 this M&E system included: (i) regular program monitoring based on a combination of progress, which
 includes core administrative data and financial reporting; (ii) periodic process assessments of key aspects
 of the program (such as annual livelihoods and PW reviews and review of the grievance and redress
 mechanisms); (iii) household survey and impact assessment to be carried out every two years to assess
 program progress toward achieving its stated outcome and the contribution of the PSNP to its higher-level
 goals.

 Improvements to the M&E system of the PSNP were to be introduced by the project, to address
 lessons learned from former phases of the PSNP. These measures included: (i) the introduction of
 external spot-checks to review program implementation in a random sample of woredas in all eight regions
 quarterly, with a specific emphasis on Afar and Somali regions, where data collection had been weak; (ii)
 upgrading the Payroll and Attendance Sheet System to create a more comprehensive database of clients
 at the woreda level and stronger fiduciary controls around the payment processes, as the program-based
 MIS is rolled out; (iii) extending the M&E system to the scalable component of the rural safety net (HFA) to
 introduce assessments of targeting accuracy, time lines of payments, and financial and commodity audits.

 The PDO indicators were, with some exceptions clearly stated and appropriate to the goals of the
 PDO. PDO level indicators were either (i) numeric targets for numbers of beneficiaries served (PDI 1, 2
 and 7), as appropriate for a PDO aiming at “increasing access to” various programs and benefits; (ii)
 systems-level indicators to track the extent to which key systemic changes that were to underlie expanded
 access occurred (PDI 4 and 5); or, (iii) higher-level indicators of welfare of beneficiary households (PDI 3
 and 6) to gauge program effectiveness . However, it is unclear what was represented by some of the PDI
 level indicators. Specifically, there are two separate PDIs which, given that they have the same baselines,
 targets and results, seem to be counting the same things: PDI1 Direct Project Beneficiaries and PDI2
 Beneficiaries of Safety Net Systems. It is unclear from the PAD or the ICR what is being counted in these
 PDIs. In fact, the ICR at one point attributes PDI 1 to PDO sub-objective 1 “Increased access to social
 safety net systems” (p.13) and at another point attributes PDI 1 to PDO sub-objective 2 “increased access
 to effective disaster risk management systems” (p.49) and vice versa for PDO 2. In addition, for the sub-
 PDO of “increased access to complementary nutrition support” it might have been useful to incorporate
 some measure of efficacy of nutrition support rather than only counting how many beneficiaries received
 counselling.

 According to the ICR, M&E at design was overly ambitious. The ICR assessed that “the envisioned
 outputs around systems-building were not realistic or reflective of potential institutional, political or capacity
 risks.” The ICR also found that “the existence of multiple M&E systems for PSNP 4 across the World Bank,
 GoE and development partners created inconsistencies in measurement and reporting. This also increased
 the burden on project staff to report against indicators included in the results framework. The RF for PSNP



                                                                                                       Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET Productive Safety Nets Project 4 (P146883)



 4 was overly complex and ambitious, and the government was unable to adequately monitor a number of
 indicators.” (p.34).

 In addition to the project results framework, an extensive endline evaluation report and was
 compiled by IFPRI, providing more extensive data on the impact of the PSNP on beneficiary
 populations. Evaluation design from longitudinal household surveys from the Highlands, repeated cross-
 section household survey data from the Lowlands, and key informant interviews from both Highlands and
 Lowlands, all conducted at baseline (2016), midline (2018), and end-line (2021) a telephone survey, and a
 randomized controlled trial to determine the impact of the livelihoods support component of PSNP4 (IFPRI,
 p.ii).




b. M&E Implementation
  PDO-level indicators were adequately tracked during project implementation, however, there were
  data collection challenges with many of the intermediate-level indicators. In particular, data
  collection was hampered by COVID-19 related restrictions, leading to postponement by a year of data
  collection for the endline evaluation. In addition, several of the results framework indicators were lacking
  endline data or used proxy indicators which insufficiently reflected the actual indicator, including (i)
  percentage of clients receiving regular payments within the agreed timeframe; (ii) percentage of clients
  reporting that they can provide adequate meals for their family 12 months a year; (iii) percentage of client
  households reporting that their livelihoods have benefitted from public work created assets; iv)
  percentage of PSNP households reporting new income source as a result of program support; (iv)
  percentage of PSNP woredas meeting minimum PSNP staffing standards (v)percentage of clients that
  report they are aware of program objectives and entitlements. Similarly, the ICR (p.27) asserts that, “a
  number of indicators were not systematically tracked or reported against, as shown in project
  Implementation and Status Reports (ISRs). For example, for several outcome-level indicators, data from
  the highlands areas was not reported, which likely contributed to an under-reporting of results.” It is
  unclear the extent to which data gathering shortcomings arose from unrealistic expectations of
  government data collection capacity at design, and to what extent shortcomings were due to
  unforeseeable circumstances such as COVID-19.

  The Project did not adjust the Results Framework despite significant factors which affected the
  achievement of results and their reporting. From early on in the project, funds were shifted away
  from systems-building aspects of the project to meet immediate famine-related needs. However, at no
  point was the project results framework updated to reflect this change in project design and
  scope. Furthermore, the results framework was not revised after the RPSNP was introduced in 2017,
  even though both projects supported the same government Programs. Instead, RPSNP included several
  indicators identical to those in the PSNP, but with downwardly revised targets.



c. M&E Utilization


                                                                                                   Page 18 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET Productive Safety Nets Project 4 (P146883)



  Despite implementation challenges, utilization of available M&E results was strong. Results from
  the assessments and evaluations were considered in fine-tuning various elements of the PSNP 4
  operation. For example, targeting methodologies were adjusted after the 2019 Poverty Assessment of
  Ethiopia showed that targeting the extreme poor, rather than food insecure households, would be a
  more effective mechanism.

  There was some hesitation on the part of institutional actors to accept some of the endline
  evaluation findings, and to incorporate them into program adjustments. According to the Bank
  project team, to resolve these differences, development partners and the GoE agreed to compare data
  collected by IFPRI with administrative data from regions which resulted in narrowing down the
  discrepancies. On the other hand, process evaluations often led to significant and productive
  discussions at the regional and federal level on how to improve program performance, and overall
  contributed to constructive dialogue among key program actors. Recommendations from both impact
  and process evaluations were taken into account during design of PSNP 5.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   PSNP4 was classified as an Environmental Assessment Category B operation in accordance with
   OP/BP 4.01, and triggered seven out of the ten safeguard polices, primarily due to risks associated
   with performance of public works. Specifically, the following policies were triggered: Environmental
   Assessment OP/BP 4.01; Pest Management OP 4.09; Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11; Indigenous
   Peoples OP/BP 4.10; Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12; Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37; and Projects in
   Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60.

   The PAD included a wide range of mitigation measures which, according to the ICR (p.28), were
   implemented as planned. Amongst the measures planned and implemented: the Environmental and
   Social Management Framework (ESMF) included: (i) a public works ESMF to develop site-specific
   Environmental Management Plans before implementation of sub-projects, and (ii) a Livelihoods
   Strengthening ESMF to develop woreda-level environmental profiles and guidance covering mitigating
   measures for household-level activities. The ESMF also included procedures to identify potential direct
   negative social impacts of public works subprojects and livelihoods support interventions, and to propose
   appropriate mitigating measures. Social safeguards issues were assessed through an Enhanced Social
   Assessment and Extensive Consultation Plan with potential beneficiaries and project-affected peoples,
   including those identified as vulnerable and underserved. A Resettlement Policy Framework identified
   preventative and mitigating measures for sub-projects involving involuntary loss of assets or access to
   assets. During preparation, consultations with potential project beneficiaries from different socio-cultural
   groups helped to ensure that issues such as potential adverse impacts and culturally appropriate services
   were addressed in project design. The ESMF screening rate in all regions was 100 percent with the
   exception of Afar, where screening for some sub-projects had not been completed, bringing the national




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ET Productive Safety Nets Project 4 (P146883)



  total down to 99 percent. Overall, according to the ICR (p.28) 60% of public works sub-projects included
  mitigating measures in their Environmental and Social Management Plans.

  No negative environmental or social impacts were registered in the course of the project. According
  to the ICR (p.28) there were “anecdotal reports” that some occupational safety incidents may have taken
  place. In response, a set of questions was added to the annual national spot-checks relating to accidents
  and fatalities. The government began to include a question on accidents and fatalities in the sub-project
  completion handover notes. The preliminary spot-checks results indicates that one severe accident and two
  serious injuries related to public works occurred in the woredas sampled. In terms of overall compliance,
  the Overall Safeguards Rating was assessed as moderately satisfactory, as also recorded in the Operations
  Portal.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  PSNP 4 applied the government’s Financial Management (FM) procedures, and the PSNP’s FM
  arrangements have improved significantly over the years. The project utilized the government’s
  budget, accounting, internal control systems, funds transfer and audit procedures, and counted on
  government staffing for the FM function. Amongst improvements in government financial management
  noted by the ICR (p.28): the submission of timely and quality Interim Financial Reports and timely and
  clean audit reports, the use of IBEX computerized accounting software to produce financial reports, the
  use of the Payroll and Attendance Sheet System to strengthen internal control over the payroll of
  beneficiaries, the expansion in the use of electronic transfers to beneficiaries, and improvements in internal
  control and supervisory roles. The ICR did not provide conclusive information about overall fiduciary
  compliance.

  The project funded institution-building support, including capacity development for improved
  budget and financial management, as well as improved food, commodity and procurement
  management. However, problems persisted, in particular with food management. Commodity Food
  and Utilization Reports and Qualified Commodity Audit Reports were submitted with delays and had quality
  issues. In addition, there were delays in addressing audit findings. Weaknesses in food management
  included lack of capacity, lack of staff within the commodity management chain, missing stock monitoring
  documents, lack of reconciled yearly inventory counts, and poor condition of warehouses. While the Bank
  team has worked with the government to strengthen commodity management, including with the
  government’s adoption of an automatic commodity tracking system and standardized forms, but progress
  has been slow and uneven. The GoE has agreed to strengthen the food management system by
  establishing a Commodity Management Coordination Office to manage HFA and PSNP food resources,
  and developed a comprehensive Commodity Management Action Plan to address challenges.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

                                                                                                   Page 20 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET Productive Safety Nets Project 4 (P146883)




11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons from the ICR:

Pronounced differences between regions may substantially affect outcomes where a
differentiated approach is not taken to administering social safety nets. Public works and other
social safety net projects should achieve clarity on salient differences between regions at appraisal.
This may include insights on how to enhance the appropriateness and effectiveness of public works
and adapt the livelihoods program for pastoral areas, including around livestock development and
off-farm and wage employment pathways.

Optimal higher level outcome measures are likely to vary between safety net programs. For
example, during PSNP 4 it was found that the focus on the extreme poor for social safety
net support, rather than food insecure households, would be more effective in reducing poverty and
vulnerability. Furthermore, progress was made against poverty, gender and resilience. Given these
priority areas, measures of poverty reduction, gender and resilience might have better reflected
program goals and achievements than the chosen outcome-level measures of food security and
nutrition.

Social safety net projects in fragile and conflict-affected situations are likely to encounter
unanticipated challenges that necessitate mid-course program adaptation. The extent of
challenges that arose over the course of PSNP 4 highlighted the need to continuously reassess
assumptions and respond to contextual risks. The project’s planned ambitious systems-building
agenda was superseded by the challenging context which overstretched technical and budgetary
capacities of implementing structures. While this shift was fully justified, it would have been useful
had there been established mechanisms to assess and communicate risks and challenges as they
arose and to correctly adjust the results framework in response.

Where financing is uncertain, lack of flexibility in results targets may result in unrealistic
objectives. Where project achievements are partially dependent on unpredictable streams of donor
financing, financing gaps need to be reassessed regularly, based on a common understanding that
program goals and features may change over time as challenges arise and resources become




                                                                                                    Page 21 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ET Productive Safety Nets Project 4 (P146883)



available. Where this does not occur, there is a danger of misalignment between project resources
and targeted results.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR presented a concise, thoughtful review of the strengths and shortcomings of the project. Evidence
was presented in a coherent manner consistent with the guidelines. Quality of analysis was constrained
somewhat by the availability of evidence and the quality of the results framework, a challenge acknowledged in
the body of the ICR. ICR lessons and recommendations were insightful and well-founded, providing guidance
for future projects. There were instances of inconsistency between data for a PDI cited in the body of the ICR
and in the results framework which impacted the assessment.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                Page 22 of 22
