     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023877

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P163438                                     Rural Productive Safety Net Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Ethiopia                                    Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D2330                                   31-Dec-2020                                       593,548,275.27

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 14-Sep-2017                                 30-Jun-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            600,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                             600,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                         593,548,275.27                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Aliza M. Belman Inbal       Salim J. Habayeb              Susan Ann Caceres             IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (p.4), the PDO was to support the Government of Ethiopia in improving
   the effectiveness and scalability of its rural safety net system. This PDO can be broken down into two
   separate objectives: (i) To support the government in improving the effectiveness of its rural safety net
   system; and (ii) To support the government in improving the scalability of its rural safety net system.




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Safety net transfers for food insecure households in rural areas. (Total financing: US$1592 million; IDA
   financing: US$515 million equivalent at appraisal. Total expenditures for component 1 and 2 combined
   US$520.09 million). The component was to finance safety net transfers to selected households that
   participate in labor-intensive public works, with the aim of developing community assets and facilitating
   access to mainstream health and nutrition services. The component supported chronically food insecure
   households through manual cash payments, cash e-payments, and food transfers. Households were to be
   selected to participate in the program through a community-based targeting process to identify those who
   are chronically food insecure. Households with able-bodied adult members were planned to receive safety
   net transfers each month for a total of six months, in exchange for work carried out on public works
   subprojects. Households whose members are elderly or disabled and lack any able-bodied adults or
   female-headed households with high dependency ratios, were to receive direct transfers each month
   throughout the year. This component also aimed to support the provision of safety net transfers in response
   to shocks, by supplementing the woredas’ contingency budgets (PAD p.18).

   Enhanced access to complementary livelihood services. (Total financing, US$53 million equivalent;
   IDA financing at approval US$17 million equivalent.) This component supported the Productive Safety Net
   Program’s (PSNP) existing livelihood interventions for chronically food insecure households, including
   tailored support for core PSNP clients and provision of livelihoods grants. The Rural Productive Safety Nets
   Project (RPSNP) was to provide livelihoods support through three pathways: (i) on-farm self-employment;
   (ii) off-farm self-employment; and (iii) linkages to wage employment.in the form of skills training, business
   planning, savings promotion, and credit facilitation. Tailored support was to include referrals to microfinance
   institutions and the provision of livelihoods grants in pilot locations to the most vulnerable households to
   facilitate asset accumulation, livelihoods development, and access to credit. The component also financed
   an impact assessment of the livelihoods grants, as piloted in eight woredas. The assessment identified
   higher-level results from the livelihoods the livelihoods grant pilots. (ICR p.13).

   Institutional support to strengthen systems for the rural productive safety net (total financing US$210
   million equivalent; IDA financing, US$68 million equivalent at approval and US$73.4 million at close) was
   designed to strengthen the government’s institutions, human resources, and systems to deliver social safety
   net programs. This component supported activities to enable (i) the effective targeting of safety net
   resources to both chronically and transitorily food insecure households; (ii) the timely delivery of predictable
   safety net support in the form of cash or food; (ii) scaling-up of safety net support in response to drought to
   eligible households; (iv) increase of the productive nature of the program, specifically the quality of the
   public works and delivery of livelihood support; (v) operationalization of an effective system for managing
   complaints (grievance redress) and processes to hear feedback from beneficiary communities (social
   accountability); and (vi) robust M&E of these systems and the impacts of this support on households and
   communities.

   Amongst the support provided by this component: (i) woreda administration and program management
   budgets at federal and regional levels, to be used to support the annual planning of program activities,
   technical support to lower-level implementers, monitoring, training, and follow-up; (ii) government agency

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438)



   capacity building, including training for staff, particularly at regional and woredas levels, and activities to
   support mentoring and coaching, among other capacity-building activities; and (iii) activities (including
   consultancy services and hardware) to strengthen the administrative systems of the rural safety
   net including: (i) putting in place a program-based management information system (MIS); (ii) improving the
   Payroll and Attendance Sheet System to track payments in cash and food for core clients and those
   receiving temporary support in response to drought and to begin to create a household registry of safety net
   clients; and (iii) strengthening the Government’s early warning systems to better inform a scaling-up of the
   safety net.

   A major aim of this support was to be integration of the PSNP and Humanitarian Food Assistance (HFA)
   program into a common framework, including use of PSNP’s targeting, payment, reporting and auditing
   systems.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost and financing: Total project cost as estimated at appraisal was $1,766.1 million of which
   XDR 426.3 million (US$600 million equivalent) was to be in IDA grant financing and $1,166.1 million in
   financing from the GoE, multilateral trust funds, and individual donor contributions. In total, the actual project
   cost was $1,988 million, including 100% disbursement of IDA financing.

   Borrower contribution: The borrower contribution was originally planned at $621 Million with the actual
   contribution amounting to $426.8 million (ICR p.2)

   Project dates: RPSNP was approved on September 14, 2017, became effective on October 23, 2017, and
   closed on 30 June 2022. The original closing date of December 31, 2020 was extended three times due to
   implementation delays following the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, including for the
   finalization of the second phase of MIS development, continued data collection for the beneficiary
   household registry, and close out of the end-line impact evaluation contracts (ICR p.10). According to the
   first restructuring paper, at the time of the first restructuring, the IDA credit and trust funds commitments had
   been fully disbursed, but additional time was needed due to the reduced rate of implementation. The
   project was restructured three times to delay the closing date. In the first restructuring (December 2020), the
   project closing date was delayed to June 30, 2021, in the second restructuring (June 2021) the delay was
   until December 31, 2021, and the third restructuring (December 2021) delayed the project close for a final
   six months to 30 June 2022. No other changes were made to the project design as part of the
   restructurings.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project scope reflected over a decade of shared learning between the Bank and the GoE on the
PSNP and other associated safety net programs in Ethiopia. While the previous Bank project
supporting the PSNP, Ethiopia Productive Safety Nets Project 4 (P146883), had the more restrictive aim of
“increasing access to effective safety net and disaster risk management systems,” this project PDO aimed
at “improving the effectiveness and scalability of its rural safety net system.” This change reflected a

                                                                                                       Page 3 of 23
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438)



growing understanding of the institutional reforms needed to achieve the GoE’s vision of an adequate
safety net for all. In particular, the government-led response to the drought of 2015 and 2016 revealed that
reliance on the separate programs: HFA, PSNP and the Urban Productive Safety Net Program led to
coordination difficulties and gaps in coverage. When the PSNP was launched in 2005, there was an
expectation that the need for the Government to issue humanitarian appeals for food assistance would
reduce. In fact, flows of HFA to rural areas have continued to be significant, reaching a high of 10.2 million
people in 2016 in response to the El Niño-induced drought. Although the PSNP supports chronically food
insecure households and the HFA supports households that are transitory food insecure because of
drought and other shocks, the target populations reside in the same communities and are supported with
food and cash transfers through similar delivery modalities (see Annex 4). Integrating these two programs
under a common framework would thus provide a strong foundation for a national safety net system in rural
areas (PAD p.11). While not specifically referred to in the results framework, this was a major aim of the
project.

The project was fully in line with the Bank Country Partnership Framework (FY2018-2022), which
remained in force throughout the project cycle. The PDO responded to Focus Area 2 (Building
Resilience and Inclusiveness). By increasing the effectiveness and scalability of Ethiopia’s safety net and
disaster risk management (DRM) systems, the Project was intended to contribute to the CPF’s Objective
2.1 (Improved sustainability and effectiveness of safety nets), committed to supporting a sustainable and
harmonized nationwide social protection system for poor and vulnerable groups by extending safety nets
and improving the effectiveness of the government’s safety net program in rural areas, including in
response to drought. In addition, through the public works component, RPSNP contributed to other
objectives of Focus Area 2, particularly, ‘enhanced management of natural resources and climate risks.
This relevance was maintained throughout project implementation. Finally, RPSNP addressed the CPF’s
gender goals by supporting “women’s contribution as entrepreneurs, farmers, and employees” and building
their human capital through cash transfer conditionalities on use of health services (CPF p.20).

The PDO was also aligned with the development priorities of the Government of Ethiopia (GoE).
Ethiopia’s Growth and Transformation Plan II (2015-2020) highlighted the government’s commitment to
promote household food security and to strengthen DRM, as elaborated in its social protection and DRM
policies and strategies. The Project supported the government’s longstanding aim to establish a rural social
safety net that could scale up in response to shocks, improve food security and nutrition and promote asset
creation, and protect and rehabilitate the environment to support household livelihoods. Central to this
vision was the GoE’s intention to self-finance safety net support to the chronically food insecure population
in rural areas by 2025, increase financing for scaling up transfers during periods of crisis, and adopt other
risk financing strategies to improve the predictability of financing for crisis response through national
systems. Therefore, the focus of the PDOs on enhancing effectiveness and scalability were directly in line
with the GoE’s priorities and vision for the rural social safety net (ICR, p.10).




Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 23
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438)




EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To support the government in improving the effectiveness of its rural safety net system.

               Rationale
               The RPSNP was one of two Bank-financed projects which ran concurrently with the shared aim of supporting
               Ethiopia’s safety net system. RPSNP was primarily launched to address a budgetary shortfall in the PSNP 4
               project due to extreme drought in the first years of the project. However, while the budget of the PSNP 4
               project was almost fully disbursed by the time RPSNP was launched, PSNP’s closing date was maintained on
               the same date as RPSNP’s closing, and both were considered as one funding stream by the Government of
               Ethiopia, whose project ICR provided an account of the achievements related to both projects, without
               distinguishing between the two. The two projects had distinct PDOs, with PSNP 4 aiming to increase
               access to effective safety net and disaster risk management systems and RPSNP aiming to improve the
               effectiveness (Objective 1) and scalability (Objective 2) of Ethiopia’s rural safety net system. However,
               the majority of RPSNP funding (Component 1) was allocated to increasing access by funding transfer
               payments, rather than institutional improvements to improve effectiveness and scalability (Components 2 and
               3). Moreover, there is not a full correlation between each project’s PDO and their respective indicators,
               including PDO level indicators. Indeed, some PSNP 4 indicators are more useful to judge effective
               achievement of RPSNP’s PDO, while other indicators are identical between the two projects, with the only
               difference being that RPSNP lowered the targets originally established in PSNP 4. Given these complexities,
               and in line with IEG guidance for ICRRs, efficacy for both projects was evaluated by extent of achievement of
               PDOs rather than achievement of the various indicators in the projects’ results frameworks. As such, where
               indicators from PSNP 4 were useful for evaluating the PDO of RPSNP, they were used here as evidence.

               According to the PAD (p.15), the aim of the PDO's goal of improved effectiveness of Ethiopia’s rural safety
               net system was defined as: “progress in the performance of the core aspects of a safety net that are central to
               achieving results" particularly:

                     Selecting the correct people into the program,
                     Delivering transfers on time and in a predictable manner, and
                     Using robust payment systems to ensure that transfers reach the right people.

               The ICR (p.9) in its reconstructed theory of change, defines the following targeted elements of effectiveness:

                     Predictable and timely safety net transfers to core clients, both for regular transfers and in response to
                      shocks,
                     Public works sub-projects support the creation of sustainable community assets and an improved
                      enabling environment for livelihoods,
                     Improved livelihoods productivity and resilience for PSNP households.

               For the purposes of assessing the efficacy of Objective 1, both the PAD and the ICR definitions of targeted
               aspects of improved effectiveness will be used.



                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438)



To achieve objective 1, the project supported a range of activities including technical assistance, capacity
building and financing of systems development. In an IEG interview, the Bank team was asked to identify
what institutional improvements were conducted in the context of the project (as opposed to the concurrent
PSNP 4 project) to improve efficacy. The following achievements were cited by the Bank team: E-payment
modality was expanded to more woredas, the Payroll and Attendance Sheet System (PASS) was upgraded to
include HFA transfers, the HFA was audited for the first time and HFA performance evaluation was also
carried out. In addition, the project continued technical assistance and capacity building initiatives that began
under the PSNP4 project, providing resources to pay the salaries of technical experts who worked on specific
thematic areas. Additionally, a dedicated capacity building program called Technical Assistance to Strengthen
Capacity was developed and financed through both projects with the objective of providing high quality
experts and expertise at federal and regional level.

Targeting/selecting the correct people into the program

      The intermediate results indicator of “percent of sampled kebeles where targeting of PSNP core
       caseload and transitory transfers are targeted using one committee structure” was not achieved, with
       only 61% achieved against a target of 90%.
      The PDI target of 90% of households in the beneficiary list categorized as poor based on the national
       food poverty line was not achieved, with only 58% categorized as such at endline.
      The International Food Policy Institute's (IFPRI) endline evaluation report (Productive Safety Net
       Program IV Endline Evaluation – Main Findings, p.23) found that in the Highlands, targeting of the
       PSNP4 was implemented well, while in the Lowlands, targeting was assessed as poor at baseline,
       with efforts to improve targeting throughout the course of the project, including training, collaboration
       with kebele social workers and NGOs, and closer supervision, particularly to minimize the influence of
       kebele officials over the targeting committee. The evaluation report noted, however, that the absence
       of a major re-targeting exercise, together with the prohibition of Focus Group Discussions with
       community members due to COVID-19 made it challenging to assess perceptions of fairness and
       accuracy at endline.
      According to the ICR (p.11), progress was made towards improving targeting accuracy and inclusion
       of poor households in the beneficiary list. This approach represented a shift in earlier phases from a
       focus on food insecure households to poor households based on findings from the Ethiopia Poverty
       Assessment (EPA, 2019) which noted the decreasing relevance of food insecurity as a defining
       characteristic of the poorest. Subjective measures showed that at baseline, 80 percent of PSNP
       households considered themselves to be among the poorer households in the village (76 percent at
       endline), compared to 58 percent of non-PSNP households (54 percent at endline). Only subjective
       measures were available for the lowlands; at endline, 67 percent of PSNP households considered
       themselves poor compared to 63 percent of non-PSNP households. The 2019 EPA found that one-
       third of PSNP beneficiaries were found to be in the poorest 20 percent and 60 percent in the poorest
       40 percent.

       Predictable and timely safety net transfers

      Only 59.5% of core safety net transfers were paid on time, as compared to a target of 85% and a
       baseline of 60. The ICR (p.29) attributes non-achievement of this PDI target to COVID-19, rising
       conflict and instability, and government capacity constraints.
      85% of transitory clients received humanitarian food assistance resources within 60 days of
       identification of need, surpassing the PDI target of 75%. However, the ICR notes that this number is

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438)



         not based on data collected but rather is an estimate by government as “there has been no update to
         this indicator since December 2019 (ICR p.30)" The estimate was based on a proxy measuring the
         percentage of cash transferred to clients out of the total cash transferred to woredas, which varied
         year-on-year and between food and cash. A study of timeliness (2018/19) commissioned by the World
         Bank highlighted delays in submitting completed PW attendance sheets which is a precondition for
         release of cash payments. Several adjustments were made over the course of implementation to
         improve transfer timeliness, including the introduction of e-payments for cash transfers. In 2020, it was
         estimated that 60 percent of cash transfers and 67.5 percent of food transfers, on average, were
         delivered on time (ICR p.12).
        The IFPRI Endline Evaluation found that in both the highlands and the lowlands, payments were “not
         timely or predictable” with only 44 percent of PSNP clients receiving five or six payments (p.16),
         however, the report noted more positively that that delivery of payments was maintained even after
         the onset of the pandemic (p.63).
        The Government of Ethiopia’s Project ICR for PSNP 4 and RPSNP (p.40) found that timeliness of
         cash transfers to beneficiaries in the highlands exhibited “significant improvement” over the life of the
         PSNP 4 program, with the best performance in 2020, although lagging afterwards somewhat. Data
         reported in the Government ICR suggests gradual improvement in the timeliness of cash transfers,
         with more uneven results for timeliness of food aid.
        Both the Government ICR and the IFPRI Endline Evaluation found that clients did not receive their
         complete entitlement. According to the Government ICR (p.42), on average, Public Works households
         received 57 percent of their entitlement and Permanent Direct Support household received 39
         percent.
        The goal of 95 percent of PSNP core transfers with a value of at least 15 kg of cereals or its cash
         equivalent was not achieved. Despite the baseline of 80 percent actual achievement at completion
         was 0%. The ICR explains that based on analysis of CPI data and reflecting adjustments to the
         transfer amount over time, the existing wage could purchase an average of only 9.4kg of
         cereals. According to the TTL, in kind beneficiaries did get 15 kgs of cereals, however, the program
         was not able to establish parity between cash value and in-kind because of extremely high food
         inflation. The program was unable to increase the cash value because lack of resources.
        The new rural safety net MIS was designed but only partially piloted. The ICR notes that MIS
         development reached the user testing stage, but roll-out at the woreda level was suspended due to
         the impacts of COVID-19 on data collection capacities.

Using robust payment systems to ensure that transfers reach the right people:

      The PASS payroll system was upgraded to RPASS in 2018, including provisions to prepare payrolls
       for both PSNP and HFA clients, improved reconciliation features, and the means to record the timing
       of transfer delivery. The number of woredas using the upgraded system by project close was 326,
       partly achieving the intermediate goal of 431.
      93 percent of rural safety net woredas had all payrolls for PSNP core beneficiaries administered by
       the Woreda Office of Finance and Development (WOFED) using the PASS, surpassing the target of
       90% against a baseline of 75 percent. Efforts went into ensuring the use of PASS at the woreda level
       for payroll administration including technical support and troubleshooting for the PASS software and
       training to woreda level staff. These efforts, according to the ICR (p.35) significantly increased
       utilization of PASS software in all PSNP regions.



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438)




      2,770,188 PSNP core beneficiaries received their cash payments through e-payments, against a
         baseline of 420,000, considerably surpassing the PDI target of 2,000,000.

Public works sub-projects support the creation of sustainable community assets and an improved enabling
environment for livelihoods.

      85 percent of rural safety net public works sub-projects met a common standard, substantially
         achieving the PDI target of 90 percent (this PDI is associated with Objective 2 in the results
         framework but is nonetheless relevant also for Objective 1).
        84.5 percent of public works subprojects were selected and implemented according to the
         government’s management guidelines, against a baseline of 75 percent, substantially achieving the
         85 percent target. The ICRR notes that the same indicator appeared in the PSNP results framework,
         but with a higher target of 90%, so that the target was effectively, if not formally, downwardly revised.
         (This IRI is associated in the results framework with Objective 2, and thus also reported below.).
        The 2019 PWIA found that across ten watersheds and rangeland areas sampled, 183,000 tons
         CO2/Anum were sequestered, as well as substantial improvements in watershed resource
         management. Across 8 sampled watersheds, soil erosion was reduced by 36 percent, woody biomass
         in non-pastoral watersheds increased by 169 percent, and carbon sequestration resulting from
         increased vegetation cover increased from 3.25 to 4 MT Co2 per hectare between 2015 and 2019.
         This translated into livelihoods and health benefits for agricultural households: crop yields in sample
         watersheds grew by 24 percent, irrigated crop production rose from 12 to 26 percent of households
         (including 6 to 12 percent for female-headed households), and access to safe water increased to 100
         percent in several watersheds while incidence of diarrhea fell by 3.6 percent between 2015 and 2019.
         There is evidence of spillover effects as other farmers adopt SWC technologies on their farms. Finally,
         access road construction increased the proportion of households within 30 minutes’ walk of a main
         road from 78 to 90 percent. Challenges remain in lowlands areas for households with pastoral
         livelihoods, as limited improvements were noted in livestock assets and milk production.
        The Government ICR (p.74) highlighted problems in management and maintenance of public works,
         including creating ownership and responsibility for managing the created asset, maintenance and
         sharing of benefits among users. Similarly, the final Public Works Impact Assessment of PSNP 4,
         dated November 2019 (p.98) confirms that there was inadequate supervision and monitoring of
         projects and that for “some” public works operation and maintenance committee were not active, and
         others for others there was no committee at all.
        The IFPRI Endline Evaluation reported that 52 percent of clients felt that public works subprojects
         “had benefits for their households” and 45 percent of clients reported that public works sub-projects
         had benefits for their community.

         Improved livelihoods productivity and resilience for PSNP households

      An impact assessment for the livelihoods component was designed and implemented as planned.
      541,066 PSNP core clients had a livelihood business plan financed, surpassing the outcome target of
         300,000. According to the ICR, tailored support included referrals to microfinance institutions and the
         provision of livelihoods grants to the most vulnerable households (bottom 10 percent) to facilitate
         asset accumulation, livelihoods development, and access to credit (ICR p.13). According to a World
         Bank funded PSNP Livelihoods Pathway Tracer Study (Final Report, p.4), among the 65 percent of
         households that obtained a credit, a high proportion also reported starting and running a successful
         business. Across regions, about 90% of households that received a credit reported investing in a new

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438)



       business activity. Participation in livelihood activities under PSNP 4 was also associated with
       significantly higher rates of savings, as well as greater ability to raise credit and start new business
       activities. Conversely, the assessment found “little evidence” linking participation in the PSNP
       livelihoods activities, to changes in the asset ownership and sources of income, which according to
       the PAD, was the ultimate goal of the livelihood activities.
      IFPRI’s Endline Outcomes Report for the Highlands found that there was no statistically significant
       change in income diversification over the project period, although IFPRI did find a positive impact of
       the program on income diversification for households that had lower Total Livestock Unit holdings at
       the PSNP 4 baseline.
      IFPRI’s Endline Evaluation Report found that “virtually no” graduation, which was a principle aim of
       livelihoods support, has taken place since the mid-line survey in 2018 (p.24). According to the
       Government ICR (p.98) external factors for low graduation performance include: reshuffling of
       leadership, drought, and conflicts in some areas targeted by the program, with internal factors
       including lack of accountability, low graduation screening capacity, limited access to credit (despite
       RPSNP meeting targets for business plans financed) and small loan sizes.

In sum, these were the overall achievements of the five sub-objectives listed above:

      Targeting: There is evidence that targeting improved in the highlands, but not in the lowlands with the
       overall PDI target not achieved. Despite this, the shift from targeting on the basis of food insecurity to
       poverty is noted as a positive step forward that may improve future targeting under PSNP5;
      Predictable and timely safety net transfers: PSNP core payments were neither predictable nor timely,
       with the PDI target for such not achieved. Conversely, according to government estimates, the PDI
       target for transitory clients receiving humanitarian food assistance resources within 60 days of
       identification of need was surpassed, although the lack of verifiable data on this was noted, with no
       update to the indicator from December 2019; Using robust payment systems: Substantial progress
       was made on use of robust payment systems, with the PDI target surpassed;
      Public works sub-projects support the creation of sustainable community assets and an improved
       enabling environment for livelihoods: PDI targets for public works of sub-projects were substantially
       achieved, with evidence from a Public Works Impact Assessment pointing to the positive impact of the
       scheme on sustainable community assets;
      Improved livelihoods productivity and resilience: Targets for business plan financing were surpassed,
       with evidence of use of this financing for new business activity and with significantly higher savings
       rates. However, evaluative evidence suggested that these measures did not lead to changes in asset
       ownership and sources of income.




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To support the government in improving the scalability of its rural safety net system.

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438)




Rationale
According to the PAD (p.15) improved scalability was to be achieved through expected benefits of
consolidating the PSNP and HFA delivery systems and procedures into a single framework led by the
Government. Consolidation of PSNP and HFA was meant to bring these two operations under one body,
with one targeting methodology, delivery system, grievance redress mechanism and M&E system. More
specifically, the PAD refers to the following systems to be consolidated:

      the biannual needs assessments that will determine the food needs of households, including those in
         the PSNP;
        the selection of households into the PSNP and HFA using the same targeting and appeals structures;
        the adoption of common payment procedures (use of Payroll and Attendance Sheet System [PASS],
         role of Woreda Office of Finance and Economic Development [WOFED]);
        the waiving of PW requirements during severe droughts; and
         the adoption of common reporting formats, audits, and evaluations.

These consolidation measures were intended to ensure that whenever a large shock would hit a given PSNP
woreda, the PSNP would be able to scale up vertically (for extended months of support for the core clients)
and horizontally (to more beneficiaries) to address greater needs of PSNP households as well as the needs
of transitory non-PSNP food insecure people. Efforts to harmonize the PSNP and HFA delivery systems
(targeting, grievance redress, payment systems, etc.) were expected to improve the overall cost-effectiveness
and cost efficiency of the rural safety net through savings in administrative cost and more efficient spending
on transfers. Consolidation was meant to take place on two levels: through harmonization of procedures and
the woreda level, and consolidation of the two programs into a single national framework.

Outputs/intermediate outcomes

The following intermediate level indicators for Objective 2 were incorporated in the results framework.

      The target of 80 percent of rural safety net woredas where payrolls for humanitarian food assistance
         clients were administered by WOFED using PASS was not achieved, with the ICR explaining that
         progress was not reported against this indicator.
        The planned design and implementation of a “Hydromet” pilot to improve the delivery of multi-hazard
         early warning services was not achieved, as in June 2018, it was decided that the project would no
         longer finance the pilot. However the project results framework was not revised to reflect this change.
        71.3 percent of rural safety net woredas made use of core Commodities Management Procedures
         Manual (CMPM) formats for food management, slightly short of the target of 75 percent. The
         purpose of this target was to coordinate commodity management of the program.
        84 percent of sampled rural safety net kebeles achieved a functional KAC operating for both PSNP
         and humanitarian food assistance, surpassing a target of 75 percent.
        84.5 percent of public works subprojects were selected and implemented according to the
         government’s management guidelines, against a baseline of 75 percent, substantially achieving the
         85 percent target. The ICRR notes that the same indicator appeared in the PSNP results framework,
         but with a higher target of 90 percent, so that the target was effectively, if not formally, downwardly
         revised.



                                                                                                  Page 10 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438)




      84% of PSNP Joint Action Plans developed through the Ethiopia Social Accountability Program were
       implemented surpassing a target of 80% and 84% of sampled rural safety net kebeles had a
       functional Kebele Appeals Committee (KAC) operating for both PSNP and humanitarian food
       assistance, surpassing the target of 75 percent. However, the IFPRI endline evaluation (p.31) points
       to significant shortcomings in operation of these committees, stating that “very few households are
       aware of KACs and what they do…in more than half (55.8 percent) of the kebeles in the sample report
       no appeals were successful and another 27 percent report that less than half were successful. This,
       together with the fact that few households are aware of KACs, suggests that these social
       accountability mechanisms are functioning poorly... The study’s qualitative data suggest that the
       involvement of various community constituents, while advantageous in terms of transparency and
       local knowledge, has some downsides, where these individuals are too busy to attend to KAC
       functions.” Additionally, the evaluation found that knowledge of rights and entitlements under the
       program was low. On the positive side, the Impact evaluation reported that in the Lowlands, links
       between formal social grievance structures and traditional authority figures appear to be working
       increasingly effectively.
      The target of 85 percent of sampled kebeles where the Kebele Food Security Task Force had two or
       more female members was not achieved, with only 45 percent of kebeles meeting this target, against
       a baseline of 80 percent. In general, according to IFPRI’s Impact evaluation (p.15), in almost all
       woredas, the composition of the Kebele Food Security Task Forces (KFSTF) “increasingly” did not
       resemble what was envisaged in the Project Implementation Manual. Shortcomings included
       reductions in representation from members of the kebele council and of technical experts, such as
       Health Extension Workers and Development Agents, and reductions in civil society groups such as
       elders or youth.

Outcomes:

Progress was made at the woreda level in consolidating systems, including with regard to financial
management and e-payments, and several intermediate measures were accomplished . PASS was upgraded
to include HFA transfers, joint biannual needs assessments to determine the food needs of households were
instituted as planned, the selection of households using the same targeting and appeals structures was
achieved, the HFA was audited for the first time and an HFA performance evaluation was carried out.
However, the goal of streamlining HFA and PSNP at a national level was not achieved during the project,
largely due to delays is governmental decision making. The GoE decision in May 2020 to consolidate PSNP
and HFA did not lead to concrete governmental action in the project period due to delays related to ministerial
restructuring following the 2021 elections, COVID-19 and conflict.

Two PDIs were associated in the results framework with Objective 2. However, as explained in section 9a
only one (percentage of public works projects meeting a common standard) was found to be attributable to
actions undertaken to support Objective 2. The second PDI, “number of person months of safety net support
provided in response to shocks” was not considered relevant for judging efficacy as, in the words of the ICR
(p.15), “this is more a reflection of the shocks that affected Ethiopia during the implementation period and
level of need among RPSNP households, rather than performance of the shock response mechanism.”

      85 percent of rural safety net public works sub-projects met a common standard, substantially
       achieving the PDI target of 90 percent. According to the ICR, previously, planning and
       implementation of PW sub-projects through the PSNP or HFA was carried out separately. New
       common standards for PW across PSNP and HFA included screening according to the GoE’s


                                                                                                Page 11 of 23
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438)



                                    Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), common planning procedures and
                                    safeguards, and a clear set of triggers for when PW would be suspended during
                                    shocks. Standardizing public works activities also included the application of the GoE’s community-
                                    based public works management guidelines.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            In all, the project only partially met all its PDI targets for targeting, predictable and timely safety net transfers,
                            use of robust payment systems and consolidation of HFA under PSNP systems. Of the four PDO level
                            indicators associated with Objective 1 (including the measure of timeliness of emergency food aid moved by
                            the IEG from Objective 2 to Objective 1), one was surpassed (number of PSNP core beneficiaries receiving
                            their cash payments through e payments), one was reported surpassed but on the basis of outdated data
                            from three years before project close (percentage of transitory clients receiving humanitarian food assistance
                            resources within 60 days of identification of need) and two were not achieved (percentage of core safety net
                            transfers paid on time and percentage of households on the beneficiary list who are poor). The one PDO
                            level indicator associated with Objective 2, was substantially achieved (85 percent as compared to a 90
                            percent target). The ICRR notes however that significant steps were taken toward consolidation of PSNP and
                            HFA systems, although not all these were measured in the results framework.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Implementation efficiency was affected by several unforeseen challenges. Government spending and
   investment suffered from declining revenues and pressures on social services increased. Border closures,
   quarantines, and market, supply chain and trade disruptions likely impacted food security further. The pandemic
   resulted in delays to several key activities under the RPSNP, notably testing and MIS deployment, data
   collection for the social registry and the endline impact evaluation. The COVID-19 pandemic overlapped with a
   locus plague, which impacted livelihoods and food security in more than 156 woredas across six regions. An
   increase in conflict and civil unrest led to internal displacement, rising food insecurity and reduced incomes for
   affected households. Given the severity of the crisis in Tigray, a blanket distribution of food was provided to all
   households in PSNP woredas to address the critical food security situation and the significant disruption to
   normal sources of income. The COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 affected implementation and contributed to project



                                                                                                                                   Page 12 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438)



delays and an 18 month closing extension. Despite these disruptions, the project was able to fully disburse its
funds, most of which went towards transfer payments supporting vulnerable households.

Shifts in governmental support meaningfully affected implementation efficiency. A principle aim of the
project was to improve social safety net program efficiency through consolidation of PSNP and HFA
operations. The PAD, refers to two key elements of the government's goal to bring together HFN and PFNP in a
common framework (i) the responsibility of and accountability for food management of the PSNP and HFA is
consolidated; and (ii) the delivery of cash for HFA will be moved to the Ministry of Economic
Cooperation. However, due to ministerial restructuring following the 2021 elections, COVID-19 and conflict
which shifted government priorities the expected decision did not materialize, and these two key policy shifts did
not happen. Despite these challenges and setbacks, the project was able to progress at the woreda level
towards consolidation of systems.

At appraisal, PSNP’s cost-transfer ratio compared favorably with international benchmarks. The cost-
transfer ratio, including the capital budget for public works, was US$0.15, meaning that transferring US$1 of
benefits carried an administrative cost 15 cents (ICR p.15). This cost was lower (9 to 10 cents) when capital
costs are excluded. The 2016 Ethiopia Public Expenditure Review concluded that when longer-term food
security objectives are taken into account, the PSNP is “almost certainly more cost-effective than relief.” Another
aspect for the efficiency analysis at appraisal was the public works component, which had high rates of cost-
effectiveness. The 2015 Public Works Impact Assessment estimated that the economic benefit-cost ratios
exceeded 20 for several watersheds and, on average, a 9.1 percent increase in crop yields was attributed to the
impact of PW soil and water conservation measures.

There was a decline in transfer costs 2017-2020 but a rise in the ratio of costs to transfer value due to a
decline in the real value of transfers due to food price inflation and falling value of wages (ICR
p.16). Cost-efficiency analysis for the project compared total costs based on transfer value to client households
at the delivery point, finding that (i) total transfer cost and administration costs compared to transfer value
averaged 1.11; (ii) total transfer and client costs, notably public works opportunity costs, and administration
costs compared to transfer value averaged 1.38; and (iii) all PSNP costs (transfer, administration and client
costs, public works capital costs and livelihoods component costs) compared to transfer value averaged 1.48.
All three TCTR metrics rose between 2017-2020 due to a decline in the real value of transfers compared with
overall cost.

The public works component was generally cost-effective in terms of climate change mitigation and
adaptation. Generally, public works are relatively cost-inefficient as a mechanism for effecting social transfers,
but bring about other environmental, climate and livelihoods benefits which justify their use. By international
standards, the project’s public works had low costs per workday and were highly labor intensive (ICR p.15).
Under RPSNP, public works sub-projects were found to reverse land degradation, raise productivity, enhance
social infrastructure, and address gender disparities. The benefit-cost ratios for various public works activities
ranged from 2.0 to 3.4. While challenges persisted around maintenance and social costs, especially related to
women’s participation, the ICR found that productivity benefits generally outweighed the costs. Both social
transfers and public works found to have multiplier effects in the local and national economy, including income
and production multipliers that generate on average $2.08 per $1 transfer.




Efficiency Rating

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438)



Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

RPSNP objectives were assessed to be highly relevant to country strategies and needs. Efficacy was rated
substantial, but with mixed achievements The project was cost-efficient as compared to other international
benchmarks, although some aspects of implementation against a backdrop of political shifts, civil unrest, a
locust plague and COVID-19 somewhat reduced overall project efficiency .




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The PSNP has benefitted from strong stakeholder support over many years and is likely to remain a
government priority in the foreseeable future. PSNP’s central prominence in the government’s policy
priorities, institutionalization over the years, broad support among donor partners, solid results, strong and
consistent contributions from the World Bank, and proven ability to adapt and adjust to key challenges make
risks to development outcomes relatively low (ICR p.25). Continued government commitment is also
evidenced by significant increases in the government’s financial contribution over the past few
years. Similarly, two follow-on projects have been launched to build on achievements to date with an
increased focus on climate change adaptation, resilience, and shock-responsive social protection.

Ethiopia remains extremely vulnerable to a range of shocks which could put increased pressure on
the mechanisms introduced through the project to increase the effectiveness and scalability of
Ethiopia’s social safety net. Renewal of conflict in the country, as well as increased frequency of climate
shocks, notably drought, could exacerbate existing vulnerabilities among households benefitting from
Ethiopia’s social safety net and strain humanitarian response needs. Macroeconomic risks related to fiscal
space and inflation could impact the program. The project introduced several measures to mitigate the


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438)



effects of high inflation on cash transfer value, including annual reviews of the wage rate and use of the
Consumer Price Index to inform the wage rate starting in 2017. High macroeconomic vulnerability could
undermine the government’s focus on program sustainability and adequacy of benefits. According to the ICR
(p.26), the government’s commitment to increase its share of program financing coupled with the introduction
of indicative targets on PSNP spending in its program with the International Monetary Fund are expected to
mitigate this risk, but trends will need to be closely monitored.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project design was directly influenced by recommendations of a 2017 Midterm Review of PSNP
  4. Against a backdrop of less available financing and higher needs than at appraisal of PSNP 4, as well
  as institutional weaknesses identified in the MTR, RPSNP incorporated several adjustments, including: (i)
  lowering the transfer value with the removal of pulses from the benefit package; (ii) lowering the
  proportion of poor households who receive the livelihood grants from 30 percent to 10 percent; and (iii)
  focusing on core systems-building activities related to PSNP-HFA harmonization while scaling back the
  disaster risk management component. According to the ICR (p.20), RPSNP was more practical and
  realistic in its design than PSNP 4, corrected some of the overly ambitious aspects of the PSNP 4 project
  (including through downward revision of PSNP4 targets) and aimed to consolidate progress made while
  addressing operational challenges to program delivery.

  The decision to launch RPSNP as a separate project from PSNP 4 rather than as additional
  financing to PSNP made assessment and attribution of the results of both projects more
  difficult. While RPSNP’s primary purpose was to continue support that was originally allocated under
  PSNP 4, the two projects had fundamentally different PDOs. PSNP 4’s PDO was: ‘To increase access
  to effective safety net and disaster risk management systems, and complementary livelihood services
  and nutrition support for food insecure households in rural Ethiopia’ whereas RPSNP’s PDO was “To
  support the Government of Ethiopia in improving the effectiveness and scalability of its rural safety
  net system.” This change in objectives primarily reflected the introduction of a new set of activities whose
  aim was to integrate HFA within PSNP systems in order to improve coordination and efficiency, as well
  as some programmatic reforms to the PSNP. This confusing structure of two concurrent projects with
  different PDOs, but funding, for the most part, the same activities resulted in challenges for results
  management and accountability, in a number of ways, as documented in Section 9a. In addition, the
  results framework is lacking adequate indicators in order to establish the extent to which the project
  achieved its objectives of improved effectiveness and scalability of Ethiopia’s rural safety net system (see
  Section 9a).

  While the overall risk rating was substantial, the PAD failed to recognize and discuss possible
  mitigation measures for one of the risk elements that greatly affected the project. The PAD
  recognizes the governance risk as high, and the technical design risk as substantial as "reform requires
  cooperation across a range of ministries and DPs, which has proved problematic in the past". However,
  it proposes no mitigation measures for the technical design risk, and does not consider under governance
  risk the possibility that government support for the consolidation agenda would wane. In the end, both of
  these risks came to pass, meaningfully affecting project outcomes. This failure to address such
  eventualities in project design are reflected in the ICR's determination that the project needed to “better

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438)



  reflect institutional and political economy considerations in terms of program design, to also ensure that
  the approach taken is operational, realistic, and flexible should implementation arrangements shift.”
  (p.27)

  As noted in Section 9a, the M&E framework was inadequate for assessing the project's theory of
  change.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 RPSNP was beset by a range of destabilizing factors that slowed implementation and necessitated
 a high degree of involvement of Bank staff to ensure continued program functioning. These factors
 included, COVID-19, a locust plague, outbreak of conflict and civil unrest in the country, unusually high
 food price inflation and a 2019 governmental restructuring which eroded internal governmental support for
 the planned consolidation of HFA under PSNP. In response, difficult decisions had to be made with regard
 to the degree of support to be given to households against a backdrop of limited budgets and rapidly rising
 needs. In addition, the pandemic resulted in delays to several key activities under the RPSNP, notably
 testing and deployment for the MIS, data collection for the social registry and the endline impact
 evaluation. According to the ICR (p.25), it was challenging to prioritize systems-building and policy
 development in the context of recurrent crises, and the level of effort allocated towards supervision of the
 RPSNP – notably in terms of human resources – was substantial. This included regular supervision,
 technical assistance, continuous research and evaluation, donor coordination efforts, government
 engagement and capacity building.

 According to the ICR (p.20), the World Bank played a strong leadership role in ensuring continued
 and streamlined donor support, including both technical and financial assistance, despite
 persistent challenges arising from recurrent crises. Progress, implementation status and issues,
 including challenges and needs arising from recurrent crises, were reviewed, discussed and documented in
 semi-annual Joint Review and Implementation Support missions or ad-hoc meetings as required, with
 participation of government officials at the federal, regional and woreda levels, donor partners and other
 stakeholders. Under the supervision of a rotating donor chair, the donor coordination team fulfilled four
 primary responsibilities as indicated in Annual Reports: (1) provision of core analytical work informing
 donor-government dialogue; (2) provision of advice, training and hands-on technical assistance to the
 government; (3) planning of all regular joint donor-government activities; and (4) donor working group
 coordination and harmonization of donor policy and practice with the government.

 As detailed in Section 9b, a substantial percentage of results framework indicators were not
 properly monitored and reported on over the course of the project. There were significant challenges
 to data collection, which were partly attributable to COVID-19 and partly attributable to weak M&E
 capacity. According to the ICR (p.22), the project chose to rely largely on government M&E systems in
 order to build institutional capacity, but despite progress during the project period, routine monitoring
 continued to be weak at the woreda level. The government faced difficulties in collecting data as defined by

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438)



 the indicator descriptions in the RF, resulting in some indicators not regularly reported against. The
 administrative data provided through regular reports often lacked adequate verification mechanisms and
 was collected through telephone calls, with delays and incomplete reporting to the federal level.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 M&E design provided several tools for assessing the higher- level outcomes and impact of the
 combined efforts of RPSNP and PSNP4. RPSNP was designed to include a number of studies and
 assessments to determine whether the program was on track to achieve its objectives and identify any
 needed adjustments. Several independent evaluations were intended to be carried out every two years: (i)
 impact evaluations of safety net transfers and livelihood grants for households, and (ii) PWIA to capture the
 impact of the assets created through public works sub-projects. in addition, IFPRI was commissioned to
 compete an endline impact evaluation, which included a Telephone Survey Report; the Program
 Performance Report; two reports on Progress towards Outcomes; and the Humanitarian Food Assistance
 Report.

 The project results framework did not adequately reflect Objective 2 of the PDO. The PDO included
 two objectives: (i) to support Government of Ethiopia in improving the effectiveness of its rural safety net
 system and (ii) to support Government of Ethiopia in improving the scalability of its rural safety net
 system. The project results framework included six PDIs, the first four linked in the framework to the
 objective of effectiveness and the last two linked to scalability:

       PDI 1.1: Targeting accuracy, measured as the percentage of households on the beneficiary list who
        are poor.
       PDI 1.2: Timely transfers, measured as the percentage of core safety net transfers paid on time
        (PSNP) and percentage of transitory clients receiving humanitarian food assistance resources
        within 60 days of identification of need (HFA).
       PDI 1.3: Robust payment modalities, measured as the number of PSNP core beneficiaries receiving
        their cash payments through e-payments.
       PDI 2.1: Percent of transitory clients receiving humanitarian food assistance resources within 60
        days of identification of need.
       PDI 2.2: Integrated public works planning, measured as the percentage of rural safety net public
        works sub-projects meeting common standards.



                                                                                                   Page 17 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438)



 The PDIs for effectiveness provided, for the most part, good indicators of progress. With regard to
 scalability, however, the indicators were less than optimal. According to the PAD (p.4), improved scalability
 refers in the PDO to "the expected benefits of consolidating the PSNP and HFA delivery systems and
 procedures into a single framework led by the Government." Consolidating the PSNP and HFA delivery
 systems into a single framework involves streamlining of systems at the woreda level and consolidation of
 both programs into one national framework. PDI 2.2 provides an adequate measure of one aspect of
 streamlining systems at the woreda level, as it reflected one of the systems to be streamlined as part of the
 project, although it is unclear why this indicator was chosen as an outcome measure when other equally
 relevant indicators, such as percentage of rural safety net woredas where payrolls for humanitarian food
 assistance clients are administered by WOFED using PASS. Conversely, there is insufficient basis for
 associating achievement of PDI 2.1 with Objective 2. While it is possible to infer that this PDI was meant
 to measure the effect of consolidation of payment systems, it was a poor measure of such as success does
 not seem to be attributable to steps taken to consolidate programs. As such, it was shifted in Section 3
 from Objective 1 Moreover, there was no measure in the results framework associated with the overarching
 goal of program consolidation, and thus the lack of achievement of program consolidation during the
 project framework is not reflected in the results framework.

 There is, in places, misalignment between the PDOs and results frameworks of the Bank's two
 concurrent social safety net projects in Ethiopia. As a result, RPSNP’s results framework as designed
 does not always give adequate information to assess achievement of RPSNP’s PDO, while at other times
 there seem to be duplicate indicators between projects drawing on the same data. For example, while
 RPSNP had the explicit goal of “improved livelihoods productivity and resilience for PSNP
 households” none of the results framework indicators tracked livelihoods productivity and resilience
 (instead relying solely on the intermediate level indicator of number of business plans
 financed). Conversely, PSNP 4’s results framework, although the PDO merely aims at “increased access
 to livelihood support”, has several important indicators tracking improved productivity and resilience,
 including percentage of client households reporting that their livelihoods have benefitted from public work
 created assets, households reporting a new income source as a result of program support and percentage
 increase in average value of household assets.




b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (p.22), M&E was implemented as designed, however many of the results
  framework indicators were lacking updated data in the ICR . As noted in Section 8b, the ICR
  attributes data gaps primarily to government difficulties in collecting data as defined by the indicator
  descriptions in the results framework, resulting in some indicators not being regularly reported
  against. The ICR further notes that PSNP’s focus on M&E since its inception has been strengthened,
  including over the course of the RPSNP, both through implementation support as well as through
  technical assistance and financing for system improvements. Over the course of the RPSNP,
  investments were made in various M&E systems that will enhance M&E implementation and utilization
  including the program MIS, social registry and payroll system.

  Indicators not measured or without up-to-date data included:




                                                                                                   Page 18 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438)



        Percentage of core safety net transfers paid on time (PDI). The ICR reports that timeliness of
           transfers was not measured consistently, and instead a (inadequately aligned) proxy measure of
           "share of money transferred to beneficiaries out of the money transferred to woredas" was used;
          Percentage of transitory clients receiving humanitarian food assistance resources within 60 days
           of identification of need (PDI). Reported endline data was from 2019, 2.5 years before project
           close.
          Percentage of households in the beneficiary list who are poor (PDI). Data reported was based
           only on the highlands, and not on the lowlands.
          Beneficiaries of social safety net programs. This was supposed to include both PSNP and HFA
           but only core PSNP beneficiaries were reported as exact numbers of the humanitarian food
           assistance beneficiaries was unknown.
          Percentage of sampled kebeles where targeting of PSNP core caseload and transitory transfers
           are targeted using one committee structure. Reported achievement based on outdated data.as
           this question was not included in the 2021 HFA assessment or the 2022 PSNP performance
           report.
          Percentage of rural safety net woredas where payrolls for humanitarian food assistance clients
           are administered by WOFED using PASS. Progress not reported on this indicator.
          Percentage of sampled kebeles where KFSTF have 2 or more female members. According to the
           ICR, the performance evaluation at endline did not measure against the exact formulation of this
           indicator (2 or more female members).



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p.22), the program’s monitoring reports, together with the numerous
  assessments and evaluations have provided a wealth of factual data, insights and feedback on
  the performance of RPSNP. Over the years, M&E findings have provided a solid basis for reviewing
  implementation status and issues in semi-annual JRIS missions, and for ensuring that technical support
  is made available to help address bottlenecks or to make evidence-based decisions on needed
  adjustments to the RPSNP’s implementation. In addition, the ICR notes that learnings for RPSNP have
  provided a basis for design of the PSNP5 follow-on project.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B in accordance with OP/BP 4.01, Environmental
   Assessment, as it needed to ensure that planned public works sub-projects would be
   complementary, provide continuity to the landscape approach to watershed development, and avoid
   negative environmental impacts. Public works and livelihoods activities were screened following the
   Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that included: (a) a public works ESMF to
   develop site-specific plans prior to implementation of sub-projects and referral for an Environmental and

                                                                                                 Page 19 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438)



  Social Impact Assessment, as needed, and (b) a Livelihoods Strengthening ESMF to develop woreda-level
  environmental profiles, the potential impact of each type of activity, and environmental guidance on
  mitigating measures. The project triggered other safeguard policies, including Pest Management (OP 4.09),
  Physical and Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), Safety of Dams
  (OP/BP 4.37) and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) that were addressed in the ESMF or
  through advice to potential affected parties (ICR p.22). In terms of overall compliance, the Overall
  Safeguards Rating was assessed as moderately satisfactory, as also recorded in the Operations Portal.

   The ESMF covered procedures to identify potential direct negative social impacts of PW
  subprojects and livelihoods support interventions, and appropriate mitigating measures. Although
  physical relocation of households was not eligible under RPSNP, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
  was prepared to guide consultations, and preventative and mitigating measures for sub-projects involving
  involuntary loss of assets or access to assets were developed. During preparation, consultations with
  potential project beneficiaries, including those of different socio-cultural groups, produced a series of
  recommendations to ensure that their needs would be addressed. The ESMF screening rate in all regions
  was 100 percent with the exception of Afar, where screening for some sub-projects had not been
  completed, bringing the national total down to 99 percent, and 60 percent of public works sub-projects
  required mitigating measures.

  The Indigenous Peoples policy (OP/BP 4.10) was triggered as the physical and sociocultural
  characteristics of the PW sub-project sites, as well as the people living in those areas, met the
  policy’s requirements. The social safeguards issues relating to this policy were assessed in detail through
  an Enhanced Social Assessment and Extensive Consultation Plan with potential beneficiaries and project-
  affected peoples, including those identified as vulnerable and underserved groups. The plan was
  implemented in compliance with OP 4.10, specifically: (i) reviewing and strengthening targeting in pastoral
  areas; (ii) carrying out a five-year review of the roving appeals audits that informed the development of the
  GRM manual; (iii) implementing an expanded social accountability pilot in 19 woredas (including Somali and
  Afar); and (iv) increasing communications and improving the awareness of both clients and non-clients. The
  appeals process for RPSNP includes a KAC in each kebele, as described in the Efficacy section above.

  Occupational Health and Safety procedures were designed for the public works program, and no
  incidents were reported formally. However, in view of anecdotal reports that some incidents may have
  taken place, a set of questions was added to the national spot-checks and the government began to
  request that local government include a question related to accidents and fatalities in the sub-project
  completion handover notes. The preliminary results of spot-checks indicate that one severe accident and
  two serious injuries related to PW happened in the woredas sampled.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  According to the ICR (p.23), the government made a concerted effort to strengthen financial
  accountability and transparency at all levels over the course of the project. Improvements included
  more timely submission of quality Interim Financial Reports and timely and clean audit reports, the use of
  IBEX computerized accounting software to produce more reliable financial reports, the use of the PASS
  system to strengthen internal control over beneficiary payroll, the expansion in the use of electronic
  transfers, and improvements in the program’s internal control and supervisory role. The Ministry of
  Economic and Financial Cooperation and the Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources provided

                                                                                                 Page 20 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438)



   supervision in FM-related issues to the Somali and Afar regions to address issues identified in the audits
   and FM assessments and provided training for staff in the Afar region.

   The main FM challenge during project implementation related to food management. The ICR (p.23)
   cites several challenges including lack of management capacity, lack of staff at various levels within the
   commodity management chain, insufficient timeliness and quality of reporting, lack of action on audit report
   findings, missing stock monitoring documents, lack of reconciled yearly inventory counts and poor
   condition of warehouses. Several efforts were made over the project’s duration to strengthen commodity
   management, including the government’s adoption of an automatic commodity tracking system and
   standardized forms, but progress has been slow and uneven.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 There was modest achievement
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   of one objective used in the
                                                                                 assessment of overall efficacy.
                                                                                 The project did not anticipate
                                                                                 and plan for the critical risk of
                                                                                 changes in government support
Bank Performance                 Highly Satisfactory   Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                 for project goal of consolidation.
                                                                                 Significant shortcomings in
                                                                                 M&E.
                                                                                 Inadequate measurement in the
                                                                                 results framework of
                                                                                 achievement of Objective 2.
                                                                                 M&E design inadequately
Quality of M&E                   High                  Modest                    captures achievement of
                                                                                 Objective 2 and complete,
                                                                                 updated data was lacking for
                                                                                 many results framework
                                                                                 indicators.
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons




                                                                                                    Page 21 of 23
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438)



Lessons from the ICR:

Where national social safety net projects cover diverse geographical regions, lack
of differentiated approach can limit project results. In the case of RPSNP, implementation
quality and outcomes varied considerably between highlands and lowlands regions. While RPSNP in
the highlands has achieved gains, the impact of PSNP in the lowlands is more modest. Lowlands
and highlands areas have different climate and livelihoods characteristics – the highlands are
primarily agricultural whereas lowlands are primarily pastoral – as well as different levels of shock
vulnerability, as shown by the greater impact of droughts on lowlands areas. This is combined with
implementation challenges in the lowlands related to targeting, social accountability and GRM,
design of public works and livelihoods interventions, and relatively weaker implementation
capacity. Mindful consideration of how regional differences are likely to affect project performance,
and, where possible, provision of varying levels of support where needed and disaggregated
reporting of data from different regions could have helped maximize achievement.

In highly shock-prone contexts, closing the gap between humanitarian and development
actors and approaches can increase efficiency of safety nets. While superficial distinctions can
be made between chronic and transitory risks, in reality, these challenges affect the same people
over time in similar ways. This is particularly relevant to advancing the adaptive social protection
agenda in which social protection systems are designed to scale up in response to shocks. The
RPSNP brought together several distinct but overlapping sectors – social protection, disaster risk
management, environmental protection and livelihoods development – to overcome the losses that
arise from tackling these areas separately.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clearly and concisely written and gives a good picture of the project's accomplishments. It provides
several useful lessons which identify insights that are likely to be useful for the follow-on project. However, at
times, the ICR makes insufficient use of available evidence from the range of impact evaluations in order to fully
assess project efficacy in achieving PDOs. Instead, its analysis is based primarily on evidence from a flawed
results framework, while key evidence and conclusions from the IFPRI Endline Evaluation, as well as the Public
Works and Liveihoods Impact Assessments were not reflected in the ICR.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 22 of 23
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438)




                                                                             Page 23 of 23
