     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EVENT II (P163018)



                                                                             Report Number: ICRR0024004

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P163018                                  EVENT II

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Nepal                                    Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-61420                               15-Jul-2022                                        53,421,777.51

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Sep-2017                             16-Jul-2023

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           60,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Revised Commitment                            56,500,000.00                                           0.00

 Actual                                        53,421,777.51                                           0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz        Salim J. Habayeb           Susan Ann Caceres             IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (page 4) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 6), the
   project objectives were as follows:

           To improve equitable access to market relevant training programs and to strengthen the
           technical and vocational education and training (TVET) sector service delivery in Nepal.



                                                                                              Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EVENT II (P163018)



   The project objectives remained as above for the entire project period; however, several targets were revised
   downward during the June 2020 restructuring, including a key outcome indicator target and therefore a split
   rating methodology is applied.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Support to Results-based Financing (Appraisal: US$ 54.0 million; Actual: US$ 49.8 million): This
   component aimed to incentivize results related to strengthening technical and vocational education and
   training (TVET) service delivery. Activities eligible for financing included: performance-based quality
   improvement grants (to be used for minor civil works for classrooms and facilities, curricula-related
   equipment, teaching and learning materials, teacher training, industry visits, guest lectures, tracer studies,
   and job placement services) to select public and private institutions offering Technical School Leaving
   Certificate (TSLC) and Diploma courses; quality assurance manual to ensure minimum quality standards
   and processes; leadership and management training for heads of institutions; instructor training; skills test
   assessor training; revision and development of curricula; pro-poor scholarships for students to attend
   TSLC/Diploma programs; performance-based funding of short-term training programs with a special focus
   on disadvantaged youth; testing and certification for prior skills acquisition; and pilot programs for job
   placement and apprenticeship programs. The component was structured around three Results Areas and
   reimbursed through the following seven disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs): Strengthened quality and
   relevance of technical education; Improved service delivery and modernizing curricula in technical
   education; Pro‐poor Scholarships; Share of female and disadvantaged youth completing market relevant
   short‐term training; Percentage of trainees employed/self-employed within 6 months of completion of
   short‐term training; Testing of Prior Skills; and Apprenticeship programs.

   2. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (Appraisal: USS 6.0 million; Actual: US$ 4.3 million):
   This component aimed to support project management and implementation. Activities included: a joint
   monitoring mechanism for short-term training programs; preparation of a national skills strategy; and a
   Training Management Information System linking all TVET institutions.

   3. Contingent Emergency Response (Appraisal: US$ 0; Actual: US$ 0).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 14
 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
 EVENT II (P163018)



     The project cost at appraisal was US$ 60.0 million and later revised to US$ 56.5 million. The actual
        project cost at completion was US$ 53.4 million.

Financing

     The project was financed by an IDA Credit of US$ 60.0 million, and later revised to US$ 56.5 million.
     At the time of the May 2023 restructuring, SDR 2.59 million was cancelled from the Credit due to (a)
      exchange rate gains on the SDR, (b) some DLI targets that were unlikely to be completed in the
      remaining months of project implementation, and (c) funds expected not to be utilized from
      Component 2.
     US$ 53.4 million disbursed by project closing.

Borrower contribution

     There was no planned Borrower contribution.

Dates

     September 2017: Project approval.
     February 2018: Project effectiveness.
     June 2020: The project was restructured in response to the COVID-19 shutdowns. The pandemic
        led to stoppage of most project-implementation activities for around 18 months through 2020-2021.
        The restructuring included the following: the short-term training related DLIs were adjusted to allow
        for multiple training rounds to take place within any calendar year; information and communications
        technology (ICT) support to technical schools was included to help build their digital capabilities;
        inclusion of a zero value Contingent Emergency Response Component; reduction in the key
        outcome indicator target for quality improvement grants from 100 to 60; reduction in the target for
        scholarship support for economically poor students to attend TSLC/Diploma programs from 6,500 to
        6,000; and inclusion of the development of e-learning materials and facilities and putting COVID-19
        protocols in place.
       November 2020: Mid-Term review.
       December 2021: The project was restructured as follows: adjustment of several disbursement linked
        indicators to align with the revised project implementation period; revision of the verification protocol
        for the labor market status of short-term trainees from ‘within 6 months of completion of training,’ to
        ‘within 3-6 months of completion of training,’; introduction of a new results indicator under DLI 1 on
        ICT support to technical schools. The project closing date was extended from July 2022 to July
        2023.
       May 2023: The project was restructured as follows: an amount of approximately SDR 2.59 million
        was cancelled from the Credit, reductions in targets for DLI 6 and DLI 7 from 30,000 to 26,500 and
        from 1,500 to 1,401, respectively.
       July 2023: Project closing.




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      EVENT II (P163018)



   3. Relevance of Objectives

               Rationale
               The country of Nepal, with a population of approximately 28 million, is undergoing a demographic
               transition. The workforce and youth populations are growing, with 41 percent of the population between 16
               and 40 years of age. However, there is substantial underemployment at 43 percent and informal
               employment comprising 90 percent of all jobs. Most new labor market entrants take low-income jobs in the
               informal sector or in unskilled jobs abroad, while rural migrant youths (who move to more central districts to
               pursue employment opportunities) are at a disadvantage in competitive urban economic environments due
               to lower levels of education and skills. Therefore, an increased focus on skills and employability was
               adopted as a strategy to spur social and economic development. The technical and vocational education
               and training (TVET) sector in Nepal is playing an increasing bridge between youth and the labor market, as
               reflected by the number of TVET graduates, the number of technical schools offering Technical School
               Leaving Certificate (TSLC)/ Diploma programs, and the number of certifications by the National Skills
               Testing Board (NSTB) all increasing significantly in recent years. However, there remain challenges in the
               TVET sector in terms of quality (facilities, management, instruction), equity (low access for rural, socially
               disadvantaged, females, and migrants), and relevance. The prior Bank operation (Enhanced Vocational
               Education and Training I (P104015)) had as its primary objective to increase the supply of skilled labor
               through quality training programs; this current operation built upon that objective by adding a strong focus
               on increasing the demand for relevant skilled labor through linkages with employers.

               The objectives were highly relevant to government and Bank sector strategies. The government adopted
               national TVET policies in 2007 and 2012, the latter of which aimed to provide skill-oriented and labor
               market-oriented education and training, expanded training opportunities, and access for women, ethnic
               populations, and disadvantaged communities. The Bank's Country Partnership Strategy for FY2014-18
               identified a key pillar to increase inclusive growth and opportunities for shared prosperity, with more
               equitable access to education and skills development, including higher quality and relevance, as a key
               outcome. The more recent strategy for FY2019-23 continues this focus on access to quality education and
               skills development for employment, though there are no explicit outcomes or indicators associated with the
               TVET sector.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve equitable access to market relevant training programs


                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EVENT II (P163018)




Rationale
The theory of change was clear. The planned activities of pro-poor scholarships and enrollment incentives for
short-term vocational training were likely to lead to the intended outcome of expanded access to formal long-
and short-term TVET programs for youth (defined as the 16-40 year old age group). Increased equity in
access for females, migrants, and disadvantaged groups in particular was to be achieved through the above
targeted interventions.

Outputs

      Provision of pro-poor scholarships to 6,067 disadvantaged students for TSLC/ Diploma programs
       (original target: 6,500; revised target: 6,000). Youth who were longer in the TVET system due to
       financial constraints and youth located in rural areas were to be given preference. Scholarships were
       paid directly into beneficiary bank accounts in two installments, with the second installment released
       conditional on students maintaining sufficient attendance in their programs. The ICR (page 4) reported
       that the scholarships target was reduced because after two years of implementation, it became clear
       that the pool of eligible candidates was considerably smaller as candidates were unable to clear the
       entrance examinations requirements. Also, as the duration of Diploma programs is 36 months, 2019
       was the last year in which students could be selected for receipt of scholarships for Diploma
       programs, thereby reducing the scope for fulfilling the original target in the later project years.
      Performance-based funding for 142 short-term vocational training providers, which covered 68 of the
       77 districts across the country. The training courses (which were at least 390 hours in duration) were
       to have special focus on disadvantaged and rural youth with at least functional literacy, women,
       migrants, and hard-to-reach youth such as former bonded labor. Training providers were
       competitively selected and reimbursed (either directly or through vouchers given to trainees) on the
       basis of milestones achieved, with incentives (higher reimbursement rate) to select trainees from
       these disadvantaged groups. Training content was determined through rapid market appraisal
       conducted by training providers and validated by employers and chambers of commerce. 111,062
       youth enrolled in and completed the programs, which included for example: plumbing, construction,
       cooking, mobile repair (target: 115,000).
      Provision of Testing of Prior Skills assessments/ certifications for youth for formerly acquired skill
       levels 1 (basic), 2 (semi-skilled) and 3 (high skilled). 25,561 youth completed the Level 1/Level 2 skills
       test for certification of prior skills (original target: 30,000; revised target: 26,500).
      Piloting of initiatives to help youth bridge the gap from pre-employment training to work through
       workplace-based learning apprenticeships and job placement services. More than 5,000 youth in 150
       TSLC/Diploma programs received job placement assistance through human resource service
       providers (target: 3,000). 1,346 youth successfully completed apprenticeship programs of 24 months
       duration and 1,303 youth completed one year on-the-job training programs (original target: 1,500;
       revised target: 1,401).

Outcomes

      In the short-term vocational training programs, females and disadvantaged youth comprised 87.2%,
       84.0%, 86.6%, 89.9% and 78.3% in each of the five rounds of training, respectively. This was an
       overall increase from 50.0% in 2017 to 78.3% in 2023, surpassing the target of 65%. Furthermore,
       according to the Region, "The percentage of trainees employed/self-employed within 6 months of
       completion of their training programs was 70 percent, 75 percent, 83 percent, and 82.3 percent in four


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EVENT II (P163018)



         training rounds, respectively (overachieving project targets in each round including the final target of
         70 percent)."



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen the technical and vocational education and training (TVET) sector service delivery (original
targets)

Rationale
The theory of change was clear. Activities to improve the quality of training programs in the TVET
institutions - in the areas of facilities, management, instruction, and curriculum - were likely to lead to the
intended outcome of strengthened TVET service delivery. Sector wide programs such as the national
strategy and monitoring systems were also likely to strengthen the TVET sector.

Outputs

      Provision of performance-based quality improvement grants to 58 selected technical schools offering
         TSLC/Diploma courses (original target: 100). Grant funds were used to support improvements
         through minor civil works (classrooms, workshops, laboratories), machinery and equipment, furniture,
         teaching-learning materials, teacher training, student and teacher industry visits, guest lectures, tracer
         studies, job placement and career services, and soft‐skills training. At the end of Phase 1, 60
         TSLC/Diploma offering institutions (19 private and 41 public) were found eligible and selected to
         receive the grants through four installments conditional on achievement of agreed-upon targets. By
         the end of Phase 2, all 60 selected institutions received the first instalment, 58 received two
         instalments (96.7%), 47 received three instalments (78.3%), and 29 institutions (48.3%) were able to
         claim all four installments. According to the ICR (page 6), the differences in institutional performance
         were due to variable capacity across institutions, implementation delays by some institutions, and the
         loss of implementation time due to COVID lockdowns.
        Quality assurance manual to establish minimum quality assurance standards (including indicators)
         and processes.
        Training for 403 management and leadership of heads of technical schools (target: 400). The
         curricula for management and leadership training were a mix of classroom-based and own site-based
         project work, covering both practical and real-world components.
        Training of 861 TVET instructors and 798 skills test assessors, especially in trades with high
         demand (target: 1,660).
        Revision of 40 curricula to improve quality, relevance, and practice content (target: 40), of which 38
         were adopted by project closing.
        Preparation of the National TVET Strategic Framework, which is intended to serve as the underlying
         framework for programmatic development of the TVET sector through domestic and external support.
         Other development partners including the European Union, Asian Development Bank, and the Swiss
         Agency for Development and Cooperation also provided support in preparing the national plan.

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               EVENT II (P163018)




                                  Establishment of information and communication technology labs and equipment in 159
                                   TSLC/Diploma institutions to facilitate remote connections, and training of teachers in the use of the
                                   equipment and pedagogy.
                                  Two rounds of beneficiary satisfaction surveys and two tracer studies for NSTB certified youth for prior
                                   skills completed and for TSLC/Diploma students.

                            Outcomes

                                  The percentage of TVET trainees employed or self-employed within six months of completion of
                                   training increased from 60% in 2017 to 83% in 2023, surpassing the target of 70%.
                                  The pass rate in TSLC/Diploma programs was 63.5% in 2021, but decreased to 62.6% in 2022 due to
                                   institutional shut-downs for 18 months during COVID. This fell short of the target of 70%.




                            Rating
                            Modest


                            OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective
                            To strengthen the technical and vocational education and training (TVET) sector service delivery (revised
                            targets)

                            Revised Rationale
                            For the key output of the provision of performance-based quality improvement grants, 58 selected technical
                            schools offering TSLC/Diploma courses received grants (revised target: 60). According to the ICR (page 4),
                            the government had initially requested the 100 schools be distributed on a population-proportional basis
                            across the seven provinces, however, as the number of eligible schools in the fixed numbers required were
                            not available in some of the provinces, the target had to be reduced.

                            Due to achievement of the revised target of 60 schools receiving quality improvements grants, achievement
                            of this objective is rated Substantial.




                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY

                                                                                                                             Page 7 of 14
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             EVENT II (P163018)




         Rationale
         Achievement of the first objective to improve equitable access to market relevant training programs is rated
         Substantial due to the increased participation of females and disadvantaged groups in short-term vocational
         training programs, which surpassed the target. Achievement of the second objective to strengthen the TVET
         sector service delivery is rated Modest due to significant shortfall in implementing the key project activity to
         provide quality improvement grants to TSLC/Diploma institutions.



         Overall Efficacy Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Achievement of the first objective to improve equitable access to market relevant training programs is rated
         Substantial due to the increased participation of females and disadvantaged groups in short-term vocational
         training programs, which surpassed the target. Achievement of the second objective to strengthen the TVET
         sector service delivery is rated Substantial due to implementation of key interventions to improve quality and
         evidence of increased employability.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The PAD (page 17) cited an economic analysis which presented a prospective assessment of the cost-benefit
analysis of one aspect of the project - the short-term vocational training for disadvantaged groups. Benefits
were considered as higher employment rates and higher earnings for the estimated 115,000 trainees for 30
years. The costs were calculated as direct project costs for the training (US$ 41.1 million) and indirect costs
such as foregone wages (US$ 207 million). The internal rate of return was estimated at 12.8 percent with a net
present value of US$ 4.25 million.

At completion, the ICR (Annex 4) provided an updated cost-benefit analysis, with the higher earning
premiums more variable according to actual average incomes reported in project data. The internal rate of return
ranged from 7 percent to 32 percent, with corresponding net present values as US$ 12.58 million US$ 51.0
million. This compares favorably to the appraisal estimates.

With regards to implementation efficiency, the project achieved most of its targets and outputs with 90 percent of
financing utilized, even despite the 18-month stoppage in activities due to COVID-19. There was a one-year
project closing extension. However, there was uneven utilization of quality improvement grants due to variable
capacity of institutions, implementation delays by some institutions and COVID shutdowns. Also, pass rates in
TSLC/Diploma programs were lower than targeted due to COVID-19 shutdowns and the ICR (p. 11) reported

                                                                                                             Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EVENT II (P163018)



that the Project Director changed four times during the project implementation and that incoming Directors
needed time to familiarize themselves with the project, thus slowing down implementation for a few weeks
during each change. Thus there were some shortcomings in project efficiency.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     77.00
 Appraisal                                                 12.80
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     77.00
 ICR Estimate                                              19.50
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Overall outcome (original targets) - Satisfactory

Relevance is rated High due to strong alignment with country conditions, Bank and country strategies. Efficacy
is rated Substantial due to Substantial achievement of the first objective to improve equitable access to market
relevant training programs and Modest achievement of the second objective to strengthen the TVET sector
service delivery due to significant shortfall in implementing the key project activity to provide quality
improvement grants to TSLC/Diploma institutions. Efficiency is rated Substantial due to favorable cost-benefit
ratio with some implementation shortcomings.

Overall outcome (revised targets) - Satisfactory

Relevance is rated High due to strong alignment with country conditions, Bank and country strategies. Efficacy
is rated Substantial due to Substantial achievement of the first objective to improve equitable access to market
relevant training programs and Substantial achievement of the second objective to strengthen the TVET sector
service delivery. Efficiency is rated Substantial due to favorable cost-benefit ratio with some implementation
shortcomings.

Combined outcome - Satisfactory

According to IEG/OCPS harmonized guidelines, the overall outcome for a restructured project is weighted
according to the proportion of the Credit that disbursed before and after the restructuring. At the time of the
June 2020 restructuring, US$ 12.6 million of the Credit had been disbursed. As the outcome is rated
Satisfactory for both before and after, the overall combined outcome is also Satisfactory.


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EVENT II (P163018)




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project supported quality improvements that are likely to be sustained over time, including in the areas of
infrastructure, instruction, leadership, as well as institutional linkages to increase relevance. Sector
management interventions such as the preparation of the national strategic framework and the management
information systems are also likely to ensure outcomes are maintained in the medium term.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project utilized effective institutional arrangements from the prior TVET project (P104015),
  particularly a functional and fully-staffed Project Secretariat headed by the Project Director, a well-
  designed and effective management information system (MIS) adapted to the new operation, and a well
  set-up grievance redress mechanism (GRM) proven to work efficiently (ICR, page 10). Also the Project
  Implementation Manual and the short-term training model from the prior project served as ready models
  to facilitate a quick start. Lessons learned from the prior project were also applied to the current
  operation, including institutionalization of quality assurance processes as a critical key step in the
  long‐term development of the TVET sector, a demand-driven approach utilizing a monetary incentive
  scheme for training providers and performance grants for institutions based on agreed targets to
  generate greater accountability, increased participation of women in non-traditional trades, expansion of
  TVET access to traditionally disadvantaged groups in a cost-effective manner; and effective partnership
  with other donors particularly concerning joint monitoring mechanisms of short-term training (ICR, page
  10). Given the lack of an overarching TVET reform program and the need to tie funding more closely to
  results, the choice of instrument with Disbursement Linked Indicators was highly appropriate.

  Institutional arrangements built upon the existing Project Secretariat structure from the prior Bank
  operation, which was expected to continue with day-to-day management of the project. The overall risk
  was appropriately assessed as Moderate, although significant risk of the COVID-19 pandemic that
  materialized could not have been foreseen. Political and governance risk was rated High due to the
  results-based financing approach. The M&E design and arrangements built upon existing well-
  functioning systems but greater attention to monitoring the quality of the training provided under the
  project would have been helpful.

  There were some shortcomings noted in the ICR (page 14) with regards to project design: the
  government had initially requested the 100 schools for quality improvement grants be distributed on a
  population-proportional basis across the seven provinces, however, as the number of eligible schools in
  the fixed numbers required were not available in some of the provinces, the target had to be reduced; the


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EVENT II (P163018)



  projected number of trainees in the training and testing programs were too high because they did not
  account for drop-outs and no-shows (and the government accounting and audit system did not have the
  flexibility to accommodate adding an initial buffer number of potential beneficiaries higher than the target
  to make up for any shortfalls later).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Bank supervision was intensive, with regular six-month supervision missions staffed by the appropriate mix
 of staff, as well as monthly technical meetings with the Project Secretariat teams to discuss project
 progress and address implementation bottlenecks. Delays due to COVID were handled flexibly, by
 adjusting targets and timelines for implementation and achievements and shifting some activities to virtual
 mode.

 Project reporting was regular and candid. The Bank team also worked effectively with other donor partners
 to jointly monitor key elements of the project and to ensure harmonization.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design and arrangements built upon those existing from the prior project. The results chain was
 clear with relevant and clearly identified indicators and baseline and target figures to measure project
 progress. The web-based decentralized MIS was expanded and updated to the requirements of the current
 operation, and the joint monitoring mechanism with other donors was continued. The M&E design
 also included stakeholder surveys, tracer studies, evaluation of pilot activities (such as the on-the-job
 training model). There were some shortcomings in the selection of target figures, which had to be changed
 upon implementation experience. These included the number of TSLC/Diploma offering institutions eligible
 for QIG support, the number of poor students supported with scholarships, and the number of trainees who
 would complete training or testing.




                                                                                                    Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EVENT II (P163018)



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E was effectively carried out by an experienced and adequately staffed project monitoring unit in the
  Project Secretariat. The MIS was regularly updated with monitoring and reporting data from all project
  activities including disaggregated information (by gender and disadvantaged groups) on short-term
  training, skills testing, scholarships, apprenticeships program, and on-the-job training; however, there is
  insufficient information on the methodology used for the various sources of evidence (MIS, stakeholder
  surveys, tracer studies). Also, more attention to collecting evidence on the quality of training would have
  been helpful. The planned evaluative activities were carried out, including five stakeholder feedback
  surveys, three tracking studies, and an impact evaluation of the on-the-job training activity.



c. M&E Utilization
  Due to the results-based financing nature of the project, with financing tied to the achievement of
  disbursement-linked indicators, M&E data was key in determining eligible reimbursements, such as
  payments to the training providers only after milestones were verified. M&E data on performance and
  results were also utilized during supervision missions and technical meetings for decision-making,
  preparing for restructurings and as evidence of progress in achieving outcomes.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environmental Assessment Category "B" project due to minor civil works
   anticipated through the quality improvement grants. Safeguard policies on Environmental Assessment
   (OP/BP 4.01) and Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) were triggered. An Environmental and Social
   Management Framework was developed to ensure proper environmental screening and any mitigation
   actions, as well as a Vulnerable Community Development Framework, to ensure that interventions are
   accessible to vulnerable communities. There were delays in hiring the environmental and social specialist in
   the Project Secretariat, undertaking screening prior to starting construction, and shortfalls in reporting in the
   early part of implementation, all of which improved continuously over the project period with the Project
   Secretariat conducting regular reviews. The ICR (page 12-13) reported that the project was compliant with
   both safeguard policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management: According to the ICR (page 13), the Project Secretariat maintained adequate
   financial management arrangements including staffing, planning, budgeting, accounting, funds flow,
   reporting, and internal controls. Interim unaudited financial statements were submitted regularly on time.
   External audit reports were unqualified and submitted on time. Minor shortcomings included lengthy time

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EVENT II (P163018)



   taken to complete and submit internal audits and project expenditures being lower than the government
   approved annual budget in some years.

   Procurement: The Project Secretariat had sufficient procurement experience, and the project was not a
   procurement-intensive operation with mostly small value contracts under Component 2. These included
   goods (office furniture), consulting services (specialists, studies/surveys, monitoring team) and non-
   consulting services (website, IT). As reported in the ICR (page 13), there were some procurement related
   shortcomings (such as incomplete documentation) but in general there was compliance with World Bank
   procedures and guidelines.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  High                  High

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (page 15):

      A performance-based funding modality for service providers can provide the versatility and
       flexibility to accommodate a range of development objectives but requires a robust M&E
       structure. In the case of this project, there were important gains achieved in increasing
       equitable access to services for women and disadvantaged groups, by incentivizing their
       participation with higher reimbursement rates. The strong M&E design, which built upon the
       prior operation helped provide the necessary evidence for releasing funds and also
       contributed to transparent accountability mechanisms.
      Project design can effectively include both public and private training providers if appropriate
       adjustments are made to account for differing institutional rules. In the case of this project,
       private TSLC/Diploma offering institutions performed relatively better in being able to receive
       all four grant instalments, while public institutions are more rules bound and require both
       policy changes and capacity building support for institutional development.


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       EVENT II (P163018)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was internally consistent, consistent with guidelines, and concise. It was results-oriented, with clear
analysis of the results chain and how project interventions contributed to the achievements although there was
lack of information on the methodology underlying M&E. Furthermore, greater attention to the quality of training
would have been helpful. The implementation narrative and lessons were informative for using a results-based
financing approach in the TVET sector.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 14
