     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cabo Verde Education and Skills Dev. (P164294)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023796

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P164294                                    Cabo Verde Education and Skills Dev.

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Cabo Verde                                 Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-63310                                  31-Jan-2023                                            9,520,381.75

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Oct-2018                                31-Jan-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            10,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             10,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                          9,520,381.75                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Katharina Ferl              Salim J. Habayeb             Eduardo Fernandez               IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. 1) and the Financing Agreement of December 12,
   2018 (p. 5) the objective of the project was “to strengthen foundational skills in education and improve the
   relevance of training programs to the recipient’s strategic development plan”.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
                                                                                                    Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cabo Verde Education and Skills Dev. (P164294)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Support to the Basic Education Reform (appraisal estimate US$6.4 million, actual
   US$5.2 million): This component was to finance the expansion of the basic education system from six to
   eight years and subsequent curriculum revision through a results-based financing approach (RBF). The
   component will support the following activities:

         i. Priority area 1: Revision of Curriculum and Pedagogical Practices: This area was to focus on the
             revision of the curriculum for basic education, taking into account the transition from six to eight
             years.
         ii. Priority area 2: Establishing and operationalizing a Student Assessment System: This area was to
             support the establishment and operationalization of a student assessment system. This were to
             include the following tasks: i) establishment and operationalization of a semiautonomous unit
             responsible for assessment; ii) development of detailed curriculum standards (minimum
             competencies to be reached by pupils) to guide assessment development; iii) training of teachers
             with skills in formative and summative assessment; iv) implementation of national large-scale
             assessments to monitor the overall quality of learning and help inform policy making; and v)
             dissemination of the results of learning assessments in schools to be used to improve teaching and
             learning.
        iii. Priority area 3: Support to basic education teachers: This area was to focus on activities related to
             the development of in-service teacher training models and increasing a support system for infield
             coaching and mentoring of teachers, to equip all basic education teachers with the skills to
             understand and successfully teach the new curriculum for basic education.
        iv. Priority area 4: Empowering actors throughout the education system with more autonomy and
             responsibility: This area was to support the decentralization process and provide local level
             delegados with increased autonomy and budget to more effectively address local-level issues,
             including capacity building for both local and central level staff focused on strategic management,
             educational planning, M&E, and administrative and pedagogical management of schools.

   Component 2: Support to demand-based training financing schemes (appraisal estimate US$2.0
   million, actual US$1.8 million): This component was to support the government in operationalizing the
   Skills Development Fund (SDF). Through two sub-components:

   Sub-component 2.1: Skills Development Grants: This subcomponent was to finance Skills Development
   Grants (Grants) to public and private training providers to cover the costs associated with the elaboration
   and delivery of training programs for the priority skills to be identified for two industries (tourism and ICT).
   The Grants were to be awarded by Sectoral Technical Committees to individual vocational and technical
   training or higher education institutions, or to consortia of such institutions based on their existing capacity
   and potential to deliver the required training programs.

   Sub-component 2.2: Scholarships: This sub-component was to provide scholarships to about 2,000 young
   Cabo Verdeans in priority training programs. Beneficiaries were to be selected based on the new criteria
   and procedures elaborated with support from the technical assistance (TA) provided under Subcomponent
   3.2 of the project. The project was to also support the SDF (Subcomponent 3.2), in the following areas: i)

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cabo Verde Education and Skills Dev. (P164294)



  strengthening the identification of skills needs in two priority industries (demand-side); ii) promoting a
  training system that is responsive to the industry needs (supply-side); iii) establishing a scholarship
  mechanism that is sustainable and promotes equity and employability; and iv) developing a financing model
  for the skills development system that is sustainable in the medium and long terms.

  Component 3: Support to the Education and Skills Development Reforms and Project Management
  (appraisal estimate US$1.6 million, actual US$2.6 million): This component was to finance technical
  assistance to support activities planned under Components 1 and 2, as well as specific costs related to
  project management. This component included three sub-components:

  Subcomponent 3.1: Support to the education reform: This sub-component was to finance the following
  activities: i) development of specific training modules to develop socioemotional skills for Grades 7 and 8
  students; ii) support to the reform of secondary education (Grades 9–12) curriculum; iii) development of an
  in-service teacher training and professional development strategy; iv) capacity building to the newly created
  assessment unit and support to the decentralization pilot; and v) capacity building of the MoE to monitor the
  implementation of the school infrastructure plan.

  Subcomponent 3.2: Support to the skills development sector: This sub-component was to finance the
  following activities: i) support to the tourism and ICT sector committees to be created under the project in
  identifying priority job profiles and defining related competencies profiles; ii) support to training providers
  invited by the sector committees to deliver the training programs for the identified priority job profiles; iii)
  design of a sustainable financing scheme for skills development; iv) redesign of the student financing model
  for skills development; v) support to the operationalization of the government leadership Cabo Verde Bolsa
  Global program24; and vi) development of a human capital projection model.

  Subcomponent 3.3: Support to Project management: This sub-component was to finance audit, verification
  of the achievement of DLIs, and contribution to the Special Project Management Unit (Unidade de Gestão
  de Projectos Especiai, UGPE) operational costs.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost: The project was estimated to cost US$10.0 million. Actual cost was US$9.5 million.

  Financing: The project was financed by an IDA credit in the amount of US$10.0 million of which US$9.5
  million disbursed.

  Borrower contribution: It was not planned for the Borrower to make any contribution.

  Dates: On November 17, 2020, the project was restructured to: i) revise the Results Framework such as
  reducing the number of students benefitting from scholarship programs by 50 percent due to insufficient
  financing, add the corporate indicator on large-scale learning assessments completed, and replace the
  indicator on results based management practices in education; ii) assign the responsibility of managing the
  funds for the grants and scholarship programs to the Skills Development Fund (FPEF); iii) reallocate
  funds between the Performance Based Conditions (PBCs) under Component 1 (to address the COVID-19



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 15
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Cabo Verde Education and Skills Dev. (P164294)



                       emergency and conduct an international learning assessment) and the TA under Component 3 (list of TA
                       activities was updated).

                       The project was approved on October 31, 2018, and became effective on April 4, 2019. The project closed
                       on its original closing date on January 31, 2023.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. According to the PAD (p. 8), Cabo Verde made significant progress in
expanding access to education and had achieved nearly universal access to primary education over the
past decade before project appraisal. The net enrollment rate (NER) in primary education increased from
91.7 percent in 2006 to 98 percent in 2014. Cabo Verde’s indicators were among the highest education
indicators in Sub- Saharan Africa. Targets of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) on primary
education access had been achieved since 2012. The school-life expectancy was, on average, 13.5 years,
and 98 percent of the population between the age of 15 and 24 was literate.

However, learning outcomes at the primary level remained relatively low. Even though access to secondary
education had improved, it remained lower than the government had hoped for. Also, dropout and repetition
rates had been relatively high at the secondary level. Furthermore, relevant skills development
opportunities were limited and often did not meet the needs of the economy. The high percentage of
students leaving the secondary level before graduation resulted in a large amount of young people without
sufficient qualifications and competencies. As a result, youth unemployment had been rising over the past
years, especially in urban areas.

Alignment with the Government Strategy. The objective of the project supported the government’s
Education Strategic Plan (2017-2021) which identified three main challenges in the education sector: i) low
learning outcomes; ii) high dropout rates in secondary education leading to high youth unemployment; and
iii) inefficiencies in the management of the education sector. To address these challenges, the Education
Strategic Plan identified three priority areas: i) increase access to education; ii) improve education quality
and relevance; and iii) enhance education sector efficiency and management. The objective of the project
also supported the government’s National Strategy for Sustainable Development (2020-2030) “Ambição
2030”, which emphasizes the importance of strengthening human capital over the next 10 years.

Alignment with the World Bank Strategy. The objective of the project was in line with the World Bank’s
latest Country Partnership Strategy (FY20-25), especially with the CPF’s Results Area 1 (“accelerate
human capital for inclusive, service-led growth”).

The objectives of the project were pitched at an appropriate level to address a critical development
problem.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating


                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 15
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Cabo Verde Education and Skills Dev. (P164294)



               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To strengthen foundational skills in education

                Rationale
                Theory of change: The project’s theory of change stated that project activities/inputs such as developing and
                distributing teaching materials for grades 1-8 for Math, Portuguese, and Science and grades 5-8 foreign
                languages, conducting a national standardized learning assessment in basic education schools, recruiting
                and training of teachers as well as building capacity for both local and central level staff focused on strategic
                management, educational planning, M&E, and administrative and pedagogical management of schools were
                to result in several outputs. These outputs were to include teaching materials in key subjects being developed
                and distributed, a national standardized learning assessment in basic education schools being conducted,
                teachers being recruited and trained as well as capacity at the local and central level being built. These
                outputs were to result in the outcome of foundational skills in education being strengthened.

                The theory of change assumed that the development and distribution of teaching materials and conducting
                assessments as well as recruiting and training teachers were to result in foundational skills being
                strengthened. However, there are several gaps in this theory of change. Other factors are critical for higher
                learning outcomes. For example, the quality of the teaching materials as well as the quality of the teacher
                training and motivation of the teachers to deliver high quality teaching are also critical for this outcome to be
                achieved. The project did not measure these factors. Also, the project did not measure learning outcomes
                which would have been key for assessing the achievement of the desired outcome.

                The project used set of Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs) aligned with the key levers conducive to
                improving the quality of basic education. The DLIs consisted of specific targets agreed with the Government
                and related to key priority areas, which are part of the Education Strategic Plan (2017–21).

                Outputs:

                        While in 2018 only teaching material for grades 1 and 5 were available in the 22 delegations, in 2023
                         teaching materials for grades 1-8 were available in the 22 delegations, achieving the target of teaching
                         materials for grades 1-8 being available in the 22 delegations. Also, learning modules on socio-
                         emotional skills were introduced for grades 7 and 8 (DLI indicator).
                        A student assessment system was established and was operationalized, achieving the target of a
                         student assessment system being established and operationalized.
                        4,854 teachers were recruited or trained, exceeding the target of 3,150 teachers being recruited or
                         being trained (DLI indicator). Of teachers, 3.708 teachers were female, exceeding the target of 1,575
                         teachers being female. Trainings were centered on teaching pedagogies and classroom assessment
                         practices and aligned with the new curriculum to monitor student learning. The project also supported


                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Cabo Verde Education and Skills Dev. (P164294)



       the following outputs: i) development and approval of legislation to support changes to the teacher
       career law and regulations to support teacher training efforts and certification; ii) development of
       teacher training plans and identification of courses for both pre-service and in-service training; iii)
       establishment of a National Scientific Council for Continuous Professional Development; and iv)
       development of detailed plans to establish distance learning teacher training centers in all 22
       municipalities. However, the project did not measure the quality of the trainings and only
       measured the number of teachers trained and less on whether they found employment post-training.
       Also, the ICR did not state the result of teacher recruitment and training.
      Two large-scale learning assessments were completed at the primary level, achieving the target of
       two large-scale learning assessments being completed at the primary or secondary levels (DLI
       indicator). In 2019, a national assessment of student learning in grades 2 and 6 (Aferida) was
       implemented and in 2022 an Early Grade Reading Assessment (EGRA) was conducted.

As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, schools were forced to close in early 2020. Therefore, activities on
decentralizing school management practices were cancelled to allow the government to implement urgent
distance learning activities, which included: i) producing 640 video lessons to be broadcasted over the
national television; ii) purchasing 8,000 televisions for the poorest households (identified through the newly
established social registry); and ii) purchasing 730 tablets to provide teaching and communication support to
all basic and secondary education teachers who were newly hired and had not been provided with a tablet by
the government before. However, due to challenges in verifying data in the registry and political changes
when schools reopened in September 2021, more than 1,039 televisions had not been distributed. As a
result, these televisions were given to early childcare centers and schools instead. Therefore, only 6,961 poor
households had improved access to distance learning programs, not achieving the target of 8,000 poor
households. Also, due to the dropping of decentralization efforts, local-level delegados continued to lack
adequate recurrent budgets to cover maintenance and pedagogical expenditures despite being key players in
the education system. The ICR did not provide more information on the cancellation of related
decentralization efforts.

Outcomes:

      The percentage of students who dropout at grade 7 decreased from 6.70 percent in 2018 to 1.93
       percent in 2023, exceeding the target of 4.80 percent. The percentage of female students who dropout
       at grade 7 decreased from 5.90 percent in 2018 to 1.13 percent in 2023, exceeding the target of 4
       percent. According to the ICR (para. 31) the higher than anticipated reduction in dropout rates was
       impacted by the government’s decision to remove school fees in grades 7 and 8 and cannot be solely
       attributed to project interventions.
      The national Aferida learning assessment showed positive trends in learning outcomes between 2019
       and 2023. Especially in Mathematics in Grade 2 there was an improvement in the different evaluation
       categories: in "numbers and operations", the student performance increased from 19.4 percent to
       30.9 percent; in "organizations/treatment of data" the student performance increased from 29.7
       percent to 38.4 percent; in "geometry and measures" student performance increased from 12.6
       percent to 25.2 percent. In Portuguese, there was an increase from 9.1 percent to 31.1 percent in
       “language knowledge” and a decrease from 61.8 percent to 48.6 percent in “reading”, and a decrease
       from 45.2 percent to 33.8 percent in “writing”. In Grade 6 the assessment showed improvements in
       Mathematics: for “numbers and operations” student performance increased from a baseline of 1.4
       percent to 2.8 percent; in “organization/treatment of data” student performance increased from
       a baseline of 2.0 percent to 27.9 percent; in “Geometry” student performance increased from a


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Cabo Verde Education and Skills Dev. (P164294)



       baseline of 2.4 percent to 23.1 percent; and in “Algebra” student performance increased from a
       baseline of 5.6 percent to 28 percent. While improvements in these areas were made, the baselines
       were extremely low, indicating limited improvements in foundational skills. Furthermore, in
       Portuguese, there was a decrease in “reading comprehension” from a baseline of 61.8 percent to
       48.6 percent, an increase in “language knowledge” from a baseline of 9.1 percent to 31.1 percent, and
       a decrease in “expression and writing” from a baseline of 45.2 percent to 33.8 percent. According to
       the ICR (para. 33) the Ministry of Education believes that learning losses were a result of the format of
       the distance learning program which did not include writing skills and focused mostly on reading and
       listening.

The project was able to provide teaching materials, develop a student assessment system, conduct two large-
scale learning assessments and recruit and train teachers. It is not clear to what extend the decrease in drop-
out rates of students in grade 7 was a result of project activities rather than the government’s removal of
school fees in grade 7 and 8. Also, drop-out rates were not appropriate for measuring the achievement of this
objective since drop-out rates are sensitive to many other factors.

 The overall achievement under this objective was Modest based on the modest improvement in foundational
skills and declining results from the distance learning programs.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the relevance of training programs to the recipient’s strategic development plan

Rationale
Theory of change: The project’s theory of change stated that project activities/inputs such as engaging the
industry in developing the training curriculum, delivering enterprise-based training services, involving trainers
with industry experience, and ensuring the participation of the industry in the trainee evaluation and
graduation process were to result in several outputs. These outputs were to include industry being engaged in
developing the training curriculum, enterprise-based training services being delivered, trainers with industry
experience being involved, as well as the industry participating in the trainee evaluation and graduation
process. These outputs were to result in the outcome of relevance of training programs to the recipient’s
strategic development plan being improved.

The theory of change was sound and logical.

Outputs:

      The project supported capacity building activities such as preparing a Financial Management manual,
       training for the Skills Fund accountant, recruiting a firm to develop a monitoring and evaluation system
       and dashboard, as well as supporting an IT expert based at the Skills Fund.
      The Skills Development Fund (FPED) was strengthened and was operational, achieving the target of
       the FPED being restructured and operational.

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 15
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Cabo Verde Education and Skills Dev. (P164294)




                                  100 percent of complaints were treated, exceeding the target of 90 percent.
                                  1,221 students benefitted from direct interventions to enhance learning, not achieving the original
                                   target of 2,000 students, and achieving the revised target of 1,000 students. Of those students, 837
                                   students were female, exceeding the target of 500 female students. 517 students were from the
                                   poorest quintiles, exceeding the target of 100 students.
                                  1,221 beneficiaries received scholarships, not achieving the original target of 2,000 beneficiaries, and
                                   exceeding the revised target of 1,000 beneficiaries. Of those beneficiaries, 837 were female, not
                                   achieving the original target of 1,000 beneficiaries and exceeding the revised target of 500
                                   beneficiaries. 517 of these beneficiaries were from the poorest quintiles, exceeding the target of 100
                                   beneficiaries being from the poorest quintiles. According to the World Bank team (January 16, 2024)
                                   The government’s original design for the scholarship program was to provide 100 percent
                                   scholarships for all beneficiaries as there was no system in place for targeting the poorest households.
                                   As a result, the US$1 million in World Bank financing was insufficient to cover the planned number of
                                   beneficiaries. However, the World Bank was financing the development of a social registry at the
                                   same time through a different project. The Fund was connected with the registry and able to use this
                                   information to use a sliding scale for beneficiaries depending on their income quintile.

                            Outcomes:

                                  2,140 people benefitted from job-focused interventions exceeding the target of 1,500 beneficiaries. Of
                                   those beneficiaries, 1,356 beneficiaries were female, exceeding the target of 750 beneficiaries being
                                   female. The beneficiaries receiving training had the opportunity to enroll in 40 different training
                                   courses including tourism, installation and maintenance of equipment and commerce and transport.
                                   The ICR (para. 39) stated that the employability of training beneficiaries for the grants program
                                   reached 84 percent. The scholarship program generated an employability rate of 69.6 percent.
                                  75.4 percent of FPEF graduates were employed 12 months after graduation, exceeding the target of
                                   70 percent.

                            The project was substantially able to improve the relevance of training programs as demonstrated through the
                            employability results.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of the first objective was Modest while the achievement of the second objective was
                            Substantial.




                                                                                                                             Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Cabo Verde Education and Skills Dev. (P164294)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency:

The PAD conducted a benefit-cost analysis and stated that in Cabo Verde, average private returns to education
were estimated at 9.3 percent for the employed according to the 2014-15 Education Sector Analysis (ESA)
using Internal Marketing Communication (IMC) 2013 survey data. Furthermore, data showed that the prevalence
of poverty declined significantly with an improvement in level of education: compared to a national average of
35.2 percent in 2015, less than 1 in 50 households (1.8 percent) were likely to experience poverty if the head of
household had a level above secondary school, while this proportion exceeded 48 percent and 42 percent,
respectively, for households whose head was illiterate or had completed primary education.

The PAD (p. 29) conducted a benefit-cost analysis, which calculated an expected total benefit of about CVE 1.9
billion (US$20 million) per year over 2024–2035. The reduction of repetition by extending the duration of basic
education to eight years, was to result in an overall saving of CVE 676 million for all basic and secondary
education. Also, reduction in dropouts was to improve the average qualification and income levels of school
leavers. The economic advantage of the productivity differential was estimated through the differences in the
earnings of school leavers who, through the reduction of dropouts, improved their number of years of schooling.

The overall benefit for the basic and secondary cycles following the reduction in the dropout rate and
subsequent increase in future wages was estimated at an annual average of CVE 538 million. Furthermore, the
2,000 expected beneficiaries of the SDF were to experience both a reduction in their unemployment rate and an
improvement in their potential income. The economic benefit associated with the SDF component was
estimated at CVE 689 million. The analysis calculated an Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of 40 percent between
2019-2035 and a Net Present Value (NPV) of CVE 4.1 billion, indicating that the project was a worthwhile
investment. However, the Bank team was not able to verify which discount rate for the economic analysis was
used.

The ICR did not conduct a benefit-cost analysis due to the lack of adequate data. According to the ICR (p. 20),
the country’s last official household survey was conducted only in 2015 and datasets from annual surveys on
labor market outcomes conducted by the National Institute of Statistics are not public. Instead, the ICR
conducted an analysis to estimate the public cost savings associated with a decrease in the percentage of
students who drop out in grade 7 with an estimated overall public saving of CVE 169 million (about US$1.7
million). While these results are positive, the analysis was not sufficient to adequately assess project efficiency.

Operational efficiency:

The project experienced some implementation delays during the initial phase of project implementation as a
result of procurement challenges due to weak capacity as well as delays in the implementation of skills
development activities related to the initial project design. Despite these delays, the project was implemented
during its original implementation period and did not require any extensions.




                                                                                                        Page 9 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Cabo Verde Education and Skills Dev. (P164294)



Due to insufficient information and the lack of a benefit-cost analysis at completion, the efficiency of this project
is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives was High given its alignment with the World Bank’s latest Country Partnership Strategy
(FY20-25), Efficacy was Substantial and Efficiency was Modest due to the lack of a benefit-cost analysis at
completion. The project’s overall outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

According to the ICR (para. 74) the project outcomes do not face any major risks due to several reasons:
First, the Ministry of Education and the FPEF have adequate resources and systems in place to manage
activities going forwards. Second, the project activities were in line with the long-term education strategy in
Cabo Verde and was endorsed by all major actors in the education sector. And third, a new Bank operation
(Human Capital Project, P175828, financing amount US$26.0 million) is now scaling up several of the
project’s activities.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance



                                                                                                        Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cabo Verde Education and Skills Dev. (P164294)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the PAD (p. 25), the project design benefited from the key policy recommendations of the
  2018 World Development Report including “assess learning, act on evidence, and align actors”. The
  project aimed to support the establishment of a student assessment system, project interventions
  addressing simultaneously key determinants of student learning (content or curriculum, teaching
  practices and school management) as well as focusing on an agenda that supports activities endorsed by
  the government, teacher unions, and civil society.

  According to the ICR (para. 59) the initial design of the skills development activities had shortcomings
  due to: i) lack of organization of the professional training sector at the time of preparation; ii) duplication
  of efforts of other key donors (Luxembourg) leading investments in this sector; and iii) initially an unclear
  focus for both the grants and scholarship programs. As a result, implementation of Component 2 faced
  some initial delays. These delays were resolved with the project restructuring, which brought the project
  back on track.

  The World Bank team identified relevant risks to project implementation. The macroeconomic risk was
  rated Substantial due to high public debt which limits the government’s fiscal space, affecting the
  availability of public resources to support the planned reforms. The project tried to mitigate this risk by
  using RBF mechanisms to ensure the government giving priority to the interventions that were to be key
  for achieving the objectives. The procurement risk was rated Substantial, due to the SDF and DEFPEP
  limited capacity and related possible delays in project implementation. The project sought to mitigate
  these risks by: i) reorganizing the UGPE procurement specialists’ workload; ii) updating the existing PIM
  to include the new provisions of the World Bank procurement regulations; and iii) maintaining an
  acceptable procurement filing system throughout project implementation. These mitigation measures
  were adequate.

  The Results Framework was appropriate and only had minor shortcomings (see section 9a for details).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (para. 72), the World Bank team conducted a total of eight supervision missions. The
 World Bank team also conducted missions focusing on fiduciary performance. During the initial phase of
 project implementation, the project experienced delays due to capacity constraints at FPEF in preparing
 the required grants and scholarship program manuals, approval of the law on sustainable financing for
 skills development, and delays in passing the law to establish a sustainable financing mechanism for skills
 development, which was a condition of disbursement for the scholarship program. To address these
 issues, the project hired a skills expert to provide technical assistance to FPED.

 When it became obvious that the number of students benefitting from scholarship programs was unrealistic
 due to lack of financing, the World Bank team restructured the project.



                                                                                                       Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cabo Verde Education and Skills Dev. (P164294)



 The Task Team Leader remained the same throughout preparation and implementation of the project,
 allowing for continuity.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objective of the project was clearly specified. However, the project's theory of change and how key
 outputs were to result in the intended outcomes was not soundly reflected in the Results Framework. For
 example, the Results Framework included a PDO level indicator measuring drop-out data which was not an
 appropriate indicator to measure improvement in foundational skills as drop-out rates can be influenced by
 other factors, not subject to the project's control. Furthermore, the project would have benefitted from PDO
 indicators more strongly linked to the objective to “strengthen foundational skills in education” by measuring
 learning outcomes, which in the end were provided in the ICR.

 According to the PAD (p. 27), the UGPE was to be in charge of the project’s M&E activities. Government
 information systems were to be used to monitor progress in achievement of outputs and outcomes.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (para. 65) the project tracked and reported indicator data throughout its
  implementation.

  During the 2020 project restructuring, the Results Framework was revised to i) reduce the target of
  students benefitting from scholarship programs by 50 percent due to insufficient financing; ii) add the
  corporate indicator on large-scale learning assessments completed; and iii) replace the indicator on
  results based management practices in education.

  According to the World Bank team (January 16, 2024) the data collected under the project were found to
  be overall reliable and of good quality. Also, the M&E functions that were established under the project
  are sustainable and are a strong foundation to build upon further.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the World Bank team (January 16, 2024) M&E data were used to inform decision making.
  For example, for the skill sector, based on the data on employability of training graduates, it was decided



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cabo Verde Education and Skills Dev. (P164294)



  which training programs to continue, and which ones needed further adaptations to improve the ability of
  graduates to find jobs.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category C and did not trigger any of the Bank’s safeguard policies.

   According to the ICR (para. 68) the project established a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) with four
   main collection points (email, toll free number, focal points, and boxes). The project received two grievances
   throughout its implementation which were addressed in a timely manner.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management:

   UGPE was responsible for the project’s financial management. According to the ICR (para. 69), the project
   submitted timely Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) which were in accordance with the World Bank’s
   procedures and standards. Also, reporting standards and protocols were adequate. The external auditor
   conducted four audits which all had unqualified opinions. While the project experienced some delays at the
   beginning of implementation in areas such as budget planning, including annual work plans as well as
   estimated budgets, they were delivered in a timely manner during the remaining implementation period.

   When the project was restructured in 2020, the flow of funds was improved, enabling FPEF to manage
   funds for the skills grants and scholarship activities more directly. This resulted in strengthened institutional
   arrangements and capacity in FPEF to manage funds.

   When the project closed, the financial management rating was Satisfactory.

   Procurement:

   According to the ICR (para. 70) the project followed the World Bank procurement procedures and did not
   encounter any major issues during project implementation. Also, the post-procurement reviews did not find
   any issues. However, the project experienced some procurement related delays during the initial phase of
   project implementation due to weak Terms of Reference (TORs), unrealistic budget estimates, and need
   for additional market analysis. The World Bank team provided recommendations to address these issues
   such as UGPE improving coordination with beneficiaries (especially with the MOE), as well as improving
   the TORs before launching the Expression of Interest (EOI) to avoid delays in the process. UGPE



                                                                                                      Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cabo Verde Education and Skills Dev. (P164294)



   implemented these recommendations resulting in those improvements. When the project closed the
   procurement rating was Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 27 – 29) included several lessons learned which were adapted by IEG:

      Using Performance Based Conditions (PBCs) can be an effective approach to
       achieving key results. However, selecting adequate indicators to ensure the quality-of-
       service delivery can be challenging. In this project, the PBCs measured the number of
       teachers trained, but did not measure how well they were trained.
      Conducting national learning assessments to improve the quality of learning can
       result in actionable findings for the government to address. While the government was
       initially reluctant to conduct large-scale assessments to measure learning outcomes due to
       lower than expected outcomes during past attempts to measure learning, the project was
       able to provide the government with targeted recommendations that the Ministry could use to
       take actions to improve learning.
      Establishing an alternative entity responsible for the management of donor financing
       may ensure efficient flow of funds and help to build institutional capacity. In Cabo
       Verde, nearly all World Bank financing was managed by the central project implementation
       unit within the Ministry of Finance, resulting in bottlenecks along the approval chain. Allowing
       FPEF to directly receive and manage funds for the grants and scholarship programs resulted
       in improved implementation, higher capacity, and greater sustainability.



                                                                                                   Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Cabo Verde Education and Skills Dev. (P164294)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation. Also, it was sufficiently
outcome driven, internally consistent, and relatively concise. Furthermore, it included useful lessons learned
and provided additional data beyond project indicators. However, the ICR would have benefitted from including
an appropriate benefit-cost analysis at closure and providing more detailed information on key areas such as
M&E and Quality at Entry. Overall, the quality of the ICR was Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 15 of 15
