     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bhutan DPF with Cat DDO (P173008)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0024117

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                             Operation Name
 P173008                                  Bhutan DPF with Cat DDO

 Country                                  Practice Area (Lead)
 Bhutan                                   Urban, Resilience and Land



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-66220,TF-B2602                       30-Jun-2023                                          15,992,855.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 12-May-2020                              30-Jun-2023

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                         15,752,380.95                                       952,380.95

 Revised Commitment                          15,752,380.95                                       952,380.95

 Actual                                      15,992,855.00                                       952,380.95




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan               Chikako Miwa                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD
 Krishnamani



2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Program Development Objective (PDO) of the Development Policy Financing (DPF) operation as stated
in the Program Document (PD, page 15) is:




                                                                                                Page 1 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bhutan DPF with Cat DDO (P173008)



"To support the Royal Government of Bhutan (hereafter Bhutan) in enhancing its technical and
institutional capacity to manage the risk of climate change and natural disasters including disease
outbreaks".

For the purpose of this Implementation Completion Report Review, the PDOs are unpacked as follows:

PDO 1. To support Bhutan in enhancing its technical and institutional capacity to manage the risk of climate
change and natural disasters.

PDO 2. To support Bhutan in enhancing its technical and institutional capacity to manage the risk of disease
outbreaks.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The PDO was to be achieved through reforms in two pillars (PD, page 15):

Pillar A: Integrating climate and disaster resilience into the built environment.

Pillar B: Strengthening Bhutan's institutional and technical capacity for emergency preparedness and
response.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Financing. This DPF operation with a Catastrophe Drawdown Option (CAT- DDO) was financed by an
International IDA Credit of US$14.80 million and a Grant of US$0.95 million from the Pandemic Emergency
Financing Facility (PEF). The total Bank financing for the operation was US$15.75 million. The total amount
disbursed was US$15.99 million (US$15.04 million from the IDA credit and US$0.95 million from PEF). The team
clarified that the difference between the IDA credit at appraisal and amount disbursed was due to the exchange
rate fluctuation at the times of appraisal and disbursement.

Dates. The operation was approved on May 12, 2020, became effective on June 1, 2020 and closed as
scheduled on June 30, 2023.

Drawdown of the Cat-DDO and the PEF.

On May 27, 2020, Bhutan's National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) recommended the Ministry of
Health (MoH) to authorize public funds to defray the expenditure incurred for the COVID-19 pandemic and relief
operations. The MoH submitted to the Bank a full withdrawal request on June 4, 2020. The Bank team secured
the necessary clearances on the same day and Cat-DDO funds were disbursed on June 8, 2020. The Bank team
coordinated with the PEF team to request disbursal of grant funds and resources were transferred to Bhutan on
June 30, 2020.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bhutan DPF with Cat DDO (P173008)




Country context. Bhutan is exposed to multiple natural hazards such as floods, cyclones. cloudbursts and
earthquakes. In 2009 and 2011, two high-magnitude earthquakes struck Bhutan, which resulted in a loss of
US$52.6 million (4.3% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and US$24.5 million (1.4% of GDP), respectively.
Bhutan's urban areas are prone to flooding. There was also the risk that climate change could intensify
hydrometeorological hazards. As Bhutan's urban population is projected to increase from 37.8% in 2017 to
56.8% by 2047, failure to integrate resilience into urban infrastructure could pose a catastrophic impact on the
country's ability to sustain growth.

Sector context. Bhutan enacted the Disaster Management Act in 2013 as the country's primary legal
framework for implementing Disaster Risk Management (DRM) policies. The act established the National
Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) as the entity responsible for integrating DRM into plans and
programs. Although the act mandated relevant line ministries and departments to integrate DRM in plans,
significant capacity building and cross-sectoral coordination were required to identify climate disaster risks.

In 2016, the Government established the National Center for Hydrology and Meteorology (NCHM) as the
autonomous technical body for generating scientific information on weather and climate for emergency
preparedness and response. However, the nascent entity lacked a clear mandate and required institutional
strengthening to generate forecasts and early warning systems for natural disasters and disease outbreaks.

Government strategy. Bhutan's 12th Five Year for 2018-2023 highlighted the urgency of enhancing climate
and disaster resilience. The Government developed the National Disaster Risk Management (DRM) strategy in
2017 and a DRM Roadmap in 2019. The strategy and the roadmap were aligned with the Sendal Framework
for DRM (which Bhutan is committed to).

World Bank (WB) strategy. The operation was well-aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
for 2015-2019 at appraisal. The Results Area 3 of the CPF supported Green Development and articulated the
need for strengthening resilience to climate and disaster risks. The Bank's 2020 Systematic Country
Diagnostic (SCD) identified vulnerability to natural disasters and climate change as a development
challenge. The Bank's CPF for 2000-2024 included "developing disaster management and contingency plans"
under Objective three: " Improving environmental resilience ".

Brank Experience. The Bank has supported Bhutan in strengthening its DRM and climate change aspects
through Development Policy Loan (DPL) (Strengthening Fiscal Management and Private Sector Employment
Opportunities DPL), investment lending operations (COVID-19 Emergency Response and Health Systems and
the Regional Hydromet Services and Disaster Resilience projects), technical assistance (TA) and analytical
work on seismic resilience. While policies and regulations covering aspects of resilience were in place in
Bhutan as a result of these activities, their implementation and monitoring were a challenge.

Appropriateness of the Lending Instrument. This was the first Bank-financed DPF operation with a Cat-
DDO in Bhutan. The Bank deemed the lending instrument as appropriate for the following reasons: First, as a
quick source of funding, the operation would provide immediate liquidity in the aftermath of a natural disaster.
Second, the operation would help in advancing policy reforms that, in the longer term, would aid in enhancing
structured financing for disaster prevention and post-disaster reconstruction. Third, Bhutan's macroeconomic
fundamentals were sound at appraisal. Fourth, Bhutan was eligible for a Cat DDO, given its macroeconomic
outlook and its DRM program; and fifth, the International Monetary Fund (IMF)'s Article IV review approved in
October 2018, noted Bhutan's progress in reducing poverty during the 11th Five Year Plan.



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bhutan DPF with Cat DDO (P173008)




b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Pillar A: Integrating climate and disaster resilience into the built environment. This pillar aimed at the
PDO to enhance Bhutan's technical and institutional capacity to manage the risk of climate change and natural
disasters. Specifically, reforms in this pillar aimed at enhancing the technical and institutional capacity for
integrating climate resilience into the built environment. There were three prior actions (PAs). PA 1 aimed at
providing an overarching framework for the built environment, and PA 2 addressed access to resilient energy-
efficient housing in urban areas. PA 3 aimed at providing scientifically validated early warning of natural
disasters.

PA 1. The Recipient, through its Cabinet, has approved the National Construction Industry Policy on February
4, 2020, which promotes the quality of construction towards a safe, resilient and energy efficient built
environment, as evidenced by letter Ref c -3/49/2020/462 dated February 26, 2020.

Construction is one of Bhutan's key economic activities, with the construction sector accounting for 16% of the
GDP in 2017. A Performance Audit of Disaster Management (DM) conducted in 2016 identified inadequate
application of resilient engineering design standards and lack of proper planning, design and workmanship in
construction works. To address this challenge, Bhutan's 12th FYP aimed to professionalize Bhutan's
construction sector through registration and certification of construction professionals.

The analytical underpinnings of this prior action were sound and based on international best practices and
country-specific work such as: (i) World Bank (2015); Building Regulation for Resilience; Managing Risks for
Safer Cities: (ii) World Bank (2012): Cities and Flooding: A Guide to Integrated Urban Flood Risk Management:
and (iii) World Bank (2019) Bhutan Urban Policy Notes.

Construction activities are expected to increase in Bhutan due to urbanization. Registration and certification of
construction professionals are the foundation for enforcing quality compliance. By adopting this policy, the
Government signaled its intention to improve the quality of construction works. While the prior action was
appropriate, the contribution of the prior action to the PDO was contingent on the enactment of the Construction
and Surface Transportation Bill. The relevance of this prior action is rated as satisfactory.

PA 2. The Recipient, through its Cabinet, has approved the revised National Housing Policy, on February 4,
2020, which promotes the safe and resilient housing for the urban poor, as evidenced by the letter Ref C-
3/49/2020/462 dated February 26, 2020.

The experience with natural disasters in the past underscored the importance of building safe buildings based
on climate smart local area plans (for instance, the 2009 earthquake affected 4,000 households and over 7,000
were rendered without shelter). Bhutan's 12th FYP highlighted the need for retrofitting existing houses to reduce
their structural vulnerability and building safe houses in urban areas.

This prior action was based on robust analytical work such as: (i) Ministry of Works and Human Settlement;
2016. National Report. The Third United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development.
(ii) World Bank, 2019. Bhutan Urban Policy Notes: Affordable Housing Policy. and (iii) Miyamoto International.



                                                                                                  Page 4 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bhutan DPF with Cat DDO (P173008)



2019. Overview of Resilient Housing Best Practices and Lesson Learned: United States + Japanese
Experience. These works underscored the role of risk-informed urban planning for building resilience in cities.

This prior action would likely help in in enhancing Bhutan's capacity for structuring urban plans and managing
better informed urban growth and housing needs. Given that demand for such houses are expected to increase
with urbanization, this prior action was forward-looking and appropriate. However, as with the prior action 1,
enforcing construction quality compliance was contingent on the enactment of the Construction and Surface
transportation bill. This prior action is rated as satisfactory.

PA 3. The Recipient, through its National Disaster Management Agency (NDMA) chaired by the Prime
Minister, has designated the National Center for Hydrology and Meteorology (NCHM) as the 'National Hydromet
Hazard Early Warning Service Provider', pursuant to Section 1-8 of the Disaster Management Act to ensure
clear and systematic early warning and notification to vulnerable populations and government agencies of
threatening hydrometeorological hazards, disaster situations or events in the country, as evidenced by the
Executive Order (C-/2/2019/369) issued by the NDMA dated December 5, 2019.

The absence of official and scientifically-validated early warning services had adversely affected timely
emergency response and evacuation efforts to natural disasters and disease outbreaks. The NCHM did not
have the mandate to enforce the government agencies to act upon NCHM's information. The lack of an
authoritative voice on hydromet information resulted in vulnerable people relying on wide ranging sources of
information, leading to unnecessary panic among the public.

The analytical underpinnings of this prior action were based on: (i) World Bank. 2016. Unbreakable: Building the
resilience of the Poor in the Face of Natural Disasters. This study highlighted the role of early warning services
in reducing the impact of natural disasters. and (ii) World Bank. 2015. Modernizing Weather, Water and Climate
Service: Roadmap for Bhutan. This work highlighted the importance of strengthening NCHM in Bhutan.

Through this prior action, the Government proactively moved towards evidence-based scientific information of
natural disasters. The prior action was appropriate and is rated as satisfactory.

Pillar B: Strengthening Bhutan's institutional and technical capacity for emergency preparedness and
response. This pillar aimed at the PDO of enhancing Bhutan's technical and institutional capacity to manage
the risks of natural disasters and disease outbreaks. Specifically, reforms in this pillar aimed at enhancing
Bhutan's technical and institutional capacity for enhancing emergency preparedness and response
capacity. There were two PAs in this pillar. PA 3 aimed to strengthen emergency preparedness and response
capacity to hydrometeorological hazards and PA 4 directly addressed health emergencies.

PA 3. Discussed above.

PA 4. The Recipient, through its Ministry of Health (MoH) has approved the Bhutan Pandemic Preparedness
and Response Plan (BPPRP) and Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), which enhances the Recipient's
preparedness and response capacities, as evidenced by letter Ref. MoH/DoPH/ZDCP (12)/2019-2020/11502
dated March 11, 2020.

The 2019 Global Health Security Index identified weaknesses in Bhutan's capabilities to detect and respond to
public health emergencies. As a result and in an effort to respond to respond to such weaknesses, the MoH
developed the BPPRP. The BPPRP defined the roles and responsibilities of the different entities of government,
and their coordinating functions and mechanisms during health emergencies.


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bhutan DPF with Cat DDO (P173008)



 The analytical underpinnings of this prior action were: (i) World Health Organization (WHO) 2018. Joint external
 evaluation of Internal Health Regulations (IHR) core capacities of the Kingdom of Bhutan: and (ii) Bhutan.
 Ministry of Health (MoH) 2017. Strategy Plan for Emergency Medical Services 2018-2023.

 This prior action directly supported strengthening of public emergency capabilities and signaled the
 government's intention to move towards a more proactive response to public health emergencies. This prior
 action was however relatively weak, as the prior action directly supported strengthening of emergency
 capabilities, and, while necessary, insufficient for the PDO of strengthening Bhutan's technical and institutional
 capacities for managing the risk of disease outbreaks. Therefore, this prior action is rated as moderately
 satisfactory.

 The causal links between the prior actions under the pillars, the intended program results and the
 outcomes were logical. Most of the prior actions were upstream activities and though necessary, not sufficient
 for realizing the long-term outcomes. The prior actions were directly linked to the Government Program and the
 operation's PDO. There is an explicit, comprehensive and convincing results chain linking PAs to the
 achievement of the PDO and grounded in robust analytical work that drew on national priorities and global best
 practices. The prior actions complemented one another for achieving the intended objective of supporting
 Bhutan in enhancing its technical and institutional capacity to manage the risk of climate change and natural
 disasters including disease outbreaks. This review concludes that the PAs makes a significant contribution to
 achieving the PDO. Overall relevance of design is rated as Satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Pillar A: Integrating climate and disaster resilience into the built environment. There were four
results indicators (RIs) for the three prior actions in this pillar.

RI # 1. The Department of Engineering (DES) established the Interim Engineering Council of Bhutan for
registering and certifying construction professionals based on technical qualification criteria. The indicator
monitored the percentage of construction professionals (including women) registered and certified by the
Interim Engineering Council. The Full Engineering Council was not established due to the delays in the
passing of the planned Construction and Surface Transportation Bill now to be sent to Parliament in 2024.

Global evidence suggests that registration and certification of construction professionals are required to
enforce strict compliance with regulations, quality standards, and standards across all types of
construction works. Although this indicator was appropriate and could be verified, the Interim Engineering
Council could only pre-register construction professionals. Final registration and certification of
construction professionals will be possible only after the permanent Engineering Council is established.
This indicator is rated as moderately satisfactory.



                                                                                                      Page 6 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bhutan DPF with Cat DDO (P173008)



RIs 2, 2a and 2b pertained to establishing construction quality compliance mechanism for
enforcing safe, resilient and green construction.

RI # 2. The Construction Development Board (CDB) established the construction quality compliance
mechanism (CQCM) for enforcing safe, resilient and green construction. RI 2a. This indicator monitored
the percentage of works above 10 million Bhutan Ngultrum (BTN) (US$130,000) monitored by the
CDB. RI 2b. This indicator monitored the percentage of works below 10 million BTN monitored by the
CDB.

At the baseline, there were no arrangements for enforcing the quality of construction works. The indicators
mentioned were valid in indicating that the prior action is likely to be effective in achieving the
PDO. However, the CDB did not have the mandate for enforcing construction quality compliance
mechanism for civil works in the country until the Construction and Surface Transport Bill is enacted.
Given this, it is not clear as to what extent quality enhancement measures were enforced. The indicators
are rated as moderately unsatisfactory.

RI # 3. The Government identified state land for resilient, affordable and energy efficient housing
development in Thimphu and Phentsholing. This indicator monitored the number of state land sites
identified for resilient, affordable and energy efficient housing for the urban poor. This indicator was
directly related to the PDO. This indicator is rated as satisfactory.

RI # 4. The draft of the National Meteorology and Hydrology policy is prepared and submitted to the Gross
National Happiness Commission (GNHC). Although this indicator was necessary, it was insufficient for
strengthening Bhutan's capacity for emergency preparedness and response to natural disasters. The
indicator was not ambitious as it focused on process (submission of the draft) and not an outcome (actual
approval of the draft by GNHC). This indicator is rated as moderately satisfactory.

Pillar B: Strengthening Bhutan's institutional and technical capacity for emergency preparedness
and response. There were two results indicators for the prior actions in this pillar.

RI # 4. Discussed above.

RI # 5. The Ministry of Health (MoH) carries out simulations and mock drill exercises in accordance with
the Bhutan Pandemic Preparedness and Response Plan (BPPRP) and Standard Operating Procedures
(SOP). The indicator monitored the number of simulations and mock drill exercises carried out by BPPRP
and the SOPs.

Although this indicator was a WHO recommendation and valid for strengthening of public health
emergency capabilities, this indicator was relatively weak in measuring the impact of progress towards
achievement of the targeted outcome. Therefore, this indicator is rated as moderately satisfactory.

Although the results indicators were relevant, there were weaknesses in capturing the effectiveness of the
prior actions in realizing the PDO. While RIs 2 were rated as moderately unsatisfactory, RIs 1,3,4, and 5
were rated as moderately satisfactory or above. Overall, the relevance of results indicators is rated as
moderately satisfactory.

Table. Results Framework indicating PAs, results, and the status of achievement of results.



                                                                                                      Page 7 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bhutan DPF with Cat DDO (P173008)



                                                                                  Actual
                                           Baseline     Target                  change in
                                                                                           RI relevance
                Associated Relevance of (including (including Actual Value target
       RIs                                                                                 achievement
                   PAs          RIs       units and units and       of target relative to
                                                                                               rating
                                            dates)      dates)                   targeted
                                                                                  change
PDO 1. To support Bhutan in enhancing its technical and institutional capacity to manage the risk of
climate change and natural disasters.
RI # 1. % of
                                                                   29% of the
construction
                                                                 professionals
personnel
                                                                       pre-
registered and              Moderately     Baseline     Target:                 Target not
                  PA #1                                          registered out               Modest
certified (with             Satisfactory   (2020): 0 (2023): 50%                    met.
                                                                    of which
gender
                                                                  23.7% were
disaggregated
                                                                     women
data).
RI #2. CDB
establishes
and
implements a
construction
quality                     Moderately     Baseline     Target                  Target not
                  PA# 2                                                No                     Modest
compliance                 Unsatisfactory (2020): No (2023): Yes                 realized.
mechanism for
enforcing safe,
resilient, and
green
construction.
RI # 2a. Works
above BTN 10
                            Moderately     Baseline     Target                     Target
million           PA # 2                                             65.8%                    Modest
                           Unsatisfactory (2020): 0 (2023): 60%                 exceeded.
monitored by
the CDB.
RI # 2b. Works
below BTN 10                                            Target:
                            Moderately     Baseline                             Target not
million           PA # 2                                (2023):       8.7%                    Modest
                           Unsatisfactory (2020): 0                                 met.
monitored by                                             10%.
the CDB.
RI # 3. # of
land sites
identified for
resilient,                                 Baseline:    Target                     Target
                  PA #2     Satisfactory                                12                      High
affordable and                             (2020): 0   (2023): 4                exceeded.
energy
efficient
housing.



                                                                                             Page 8 of 16
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Bhutan DPF with Cat DDO (P173008)



               RI # 4. The
               draft of the
               National                                                         Yes and the
               Meteorology     PAs #3                                            draft of the
                                          Moderately   Baseline:     Target:                    Target
               and Hydrology                                                     policy was               High
                                          Satisfactory  (2020): 0   (2023): 1                 exceeded
               Policy is        and #4                                          approved by
               prepared for                                                     the Cabinet.
               submission to
               the GNHC.
               PDO 2. To support Bhutan in enhancing its technical and institutional capacity to manage the risk of
               disease outbreaks.
               RI # 4. See                                                                       See
                              See above. See above. See above. See above. See above.                    See above.
               above.                                                                           above.
               RI # 5. # of
               simulations
               and mock drill             Moderately    Baseline     Target:                    Target
                                PA #4                                                104                Substantial
               exercises                  Satisfactory  (2020):0    (2023): 3                 exceeded.
               carried out by
               MoH.




   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                PDO 1. To support Bhutan in enhancing its technical and institutional capacity to manage the risk of climate
                change and natural disasters.

                PAs 1 -4. RIs 1 -4.

                Rationale
                Theory of Change. Reforms in this area aimed to enhance Bhutan's capacity to manage the risk of climate
                change and natural disasters through integrating climate and disaster resilience into the built environment.
                Reforms such as enactment of the National Construction Policy, registration and certification of construction
                professionals, were likely to help in enhancing Bhutan's technical capacity for improving the quality of
                construction activities. Reforms such as cabinet approval of the National Housing Policy for enforcing
                regulation of construction and identifying state lands for affordable and resilient houses in cities, were likely to
                help in improving the institutional capacity for constructing safe, resilient and energy-efficient

                                                                                                                      Page 9 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Bhutan DPF with Cat DDO (P173008)



housing. Reforms such as designating the autonomous National Center for Hydrology and Meteorology
(NCHM) as the entity for providing systematic early warning to vulnerable populations, government agencies
of threatening hydrometeorological hazards and disaster situations or events were likely to help in Bhutan's
technical capacity for managing natural disasters.

Outcomes.

      The Interim Engineering Council of Bhutan was established under the Department of Engineering
       Services (DES) to register and certify construction professionals in July 2020. The pre-registration of
       construction professions began in November 2020, with 29% of construction professionals registered
       and certified (of which 23.7% were women), short of the target of 50%. However, as the final
       registration and certification will be possible only after the Construction and Surface Transportation Bill
       is approved, the outcome was partially realized.
      The Bhutan Construction and Transportation Authority (BCTA) developed the construction quality
       compliance mechanism (CQCM) for enforcing quality construction standards. The BCTA prioritized
       monitoring of larger works. 68% of the works above BTN 10 million (US$130,000) were monitored as
       of December 2023, exceeding the target of 60%. 8.7% of the works below BTN 10 million were
       monitored, short of the target of 10%. However, the refinement of the CQCM to account for changes
       brought through the Civil Service Reform Act was suspended between October 2023 and February
       2024 when the former government was dissolved. (The team clarified that the Civil Service Reform
       Act which aimed to reduce redundancy and maximize efficiency and effectiveness of public services,
       affected almost all the ministries and government agencies in Bhutan). BCTA has to still obtain the
       approval of the refined CQCM which is expected in 2024. Given that the intended outcomes were not
       realized for reasons outside the control of this operation, this review concludes that the outcomes
       were partially realized.
      The Depart of Human Settlement (DHS) identified twelve state lands (including nine public land sites
       in Thimphu and three public land sites in Phentsholing), for green, resilient and affordable housing as
       per the National Housing Policy, exceeding the target of four state lands by December 2023. The sites
       were selected in these cities considering both the size and vulnerability to flooding and landslides
       during monsoons.
      The draft of the National Meteorology and Hydrology Policy (NMHP) was submitted to the Gross
       National Happiness Commission (GNHC) as targeted. The policy was approved by the Cabinet in
       September 2023. This policy empowered NCHM to provide consistent, quality and comparable data
       across all sectors in Bhutan (DRM, agriculture, public health, urban planning, hydropower and
       tourism). The legislation elevated NMHP's legal status and defined its roles and responsibilities for
       delivering hydromet services beyond providing an early warning system of natural disasters in the
       country.

Efficacy of this PDO is rated as moderately satisfactory, given that two of the four intended outcomes were
fully realized.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                   Page 10 of 16
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Bhutan DPF with Cat DDO (P173008)




                      OBJECTIVE 2
                      Objective
                      PDO 2. To support Bhutan in enhancing its technical and institutional capacity to manage the risk of disease
                      outbreaks.

                      PAs 3 -4. RIs 4 -5.

                      Rationale
                      Theory of Change. Reforms such as designating the autonomous National Center for Hydrology and
                      Meteorology (NCHM) as the entity for 'National Hydromet Hazard Early Warning System Provider' for
                      providing systematic early warning to vulnerable populations, government agencies of threatening
                      hydrometeorological hazards and disaster situations or events were likely to help in Bhutan's technical
                      capacity for managing disease outbreaks. The MoH's approval of the Bhutan Pandemic Preparedness and
                      Response Plan (BPPRP) and Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) were likely to help in enhancing
                      Bhutan's institutional capacity to manage emergency preparedness and response capacities for addressing
                      disease outbreaks.

                      Outcomes.

                            The National Meteorology and Hydrology Policy (NMHP) act was approved by the Cabinet in
                             September 2023. This act empowered NMHP to provide consistent, quality and comparable data
                             across all sectors (DRM, agriculture, public health, urban planning, hydropower and tourism. The
                             legislation elevated NMHP's legal status and defined its roles and responsibilities for delivering
                             hydromet services beyond providing an early warning system to disease outbreaks in the country.
                            The Ministry of Health carried out 104 simulations and mock drills in accordance with the BPPRP and
                             SOPs, far exceeding the target of three. The mock drills were conducted in different tiers of health
                             facilities, including regional referral hospitals, district hospitals and ten-bed hospitals and included the
                             participation of 50% women hospital staff.

                      Drawdown of Cat DDO and PEF instruments.

                            Following the MOH's request to authorize public funds for defraying the expenditure incurred for the
                             COVID-19 pandemic, the Bank team secured the necessary clearances on the same day. Cat-DDO
                             funds were disbursed on June 8, 2020. The Bank team coordinated with the PEF team to request
                             disbursal of grant funds and resources were transferred to Bhutan on June 30, 2020.

                      Efficacy of this objective is rated as Satisfactory.



                      Rating

                      Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

                                                                                                                           Page 11 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bhutan DPF with Cat DDO (P173008)



Rationale

Efficacy of PDO 1 is rated as Moderately Satisfactory as two of the four targets were fully realized. Efficacy of the
second PDO is rated as Satisfactory. Overall achievement of objectives is Moderately Satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory


6. Outcome

Rationale

The PDO was highly relevant to the Government strategy and the Bank strategy. There is an explicit and
convincing results chain linking prior actions to the achievement of the PDO grounded in credible analytical
work. There were some weaknesses in the results indicators in capturing the effectiveness of the prior actions in
realizing the PDO, and moderate shortcomings in achievement of some indicators. Taking these factors into
account, outcome is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Governance and political risk. There is substantial risk to the long-term sustainability of development
outcomes. The bill requiring registration and certification of constructional personnel based on their technical
qualifications is yet to be enacted. It is not clear if the bill would be adopted in its current form or subject to
modification. The ICR (page 16) notes that the results indicator on construction quality compliance
mechanism (CQCM) and construction monitoring had difficulty is sustaining client commitment and
ownership.


 8. Assessment of Bank Performance

 a. Bank Performance – Design

 Rationale


The Bank prepared this Cat-DDO operation, based on the Bank's past and ongoing engagement in Bhutan
(discussed in section 3). The main lesson incorporated at design was the need for strengthening the
government's technical capacity for implementing and sustaining reforms. The prior actions of this

                                                                                                        Page 12 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bhutan DPF with Cat DDO (P173008)



operation, were solid and based on global experience and country-specific work. The Bank designed the
prior actions through extensive consultations with a wide range of stakeholders. The Bank's choice of
lending instrument was appropriate at the time of project design, as Bhutan lacked a contingent line of
credit as a risk retention measure and the government's disaster risk financing instrument was limited to
inadequate government reserves for emergency reliefs and restoration. The selection of indicators was
although somewhat less ambitious in some cases, pragmatic for a small state such as Bhutan with limited
financial and technical capacity.

The Bank prepared the operation in record time. The alignment of health and disaster response
interventions was an integral part of the operation from the outset, before the pandemic. This enabled the
Bank to fast track the delivery of the project and adapt the operation when COVID-19 occurred, to new
circumstances by converting one of the proposed PAs - Bhutan's national influenza and response plan - to
a pandemic preparedness and response plan.

The Bank identified several risks at approval including substantial risk with the weak capacity of the
implementing agencies and moderate risks with political and governance environment and the
macroeconomic outlook. The mitigating measures were: (i) Bank's technical support to enhance the in-
house technical capacity of government agencies; (ii) establishing clear lines of accountability; and (iii)
regular follow-ups and coordination with implementing agencies led by the Ministry of Finance (MoF). With
mitigation measures, operation risk was rated as moderate at appraisal (PD, para 79).

There was one shortcoming. The political and governance risk was underestimated: The reorganization of
the civil services was not expected at the start of the operation and this undermined some prior actions and
the results indicators of this operation.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The Bank team and the Government established a close collaboration during design, especially in the months
leading up to appraisal and project approval as the COVID-19 pandemic started. In the wake of the pandemic,
the Bank did the necessary work for expediting the disbursement of funds, following WHO's declaration of the
pandemic and the Ministry of Health's declaration of emergency. The Bank provided substantial TA and
capacity building during implementation and this contributed to the achievement of the objectives of this
operations. The Bank team conducted all missions virtually, as the government did not allow in-person missions
till the end of 2022.



Rating



                                                                                                  Page 13 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bhutan DPF with Cat DDO (P173008)



Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Overall Bank performance is rated as Satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

Reforms aimed at disaster risk preparedness, indirectly benefitted the marginalized groups, including women,
female headed households, youth, the elderly and individuals with disabilities, who are more vulnerable to
natural disasters.



b. Environmental

The National Construction Industry Policy emphasized environmental risk management in certification criteria for
professionals and mandated the execution of Environmental Management Plans for public works. Similarly, the
National Housing Policy promoted adherence to environmental regulations, focusing on low energy and minimal
environmental implications in the housing sector.



c. Gender

The operation included gender-disaggregated indicators.



d. Other

One results indicator of this operation (RI # 3) had an important follow-on effect on the Asian Development Bank
(ADB) housing project. The state land sites identified as part of this operation were selected by the ADB for
building affordable rent units, three integrated community service centers and recycled waste stations connected
to services.




                                                                                                 Page 14 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bhutan DPF with Cat DDO (P173008)




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR is well-written and clear. The theory of change articulated in the text clearly shows the clear and logical
links between the prior actions, the results indicators and desired outcomes. The analysis and the evidence
provided in the text is adequate for assessing operation outcomes. The ICR draws reasonably good lessons
from the experience of implementing this operation.

One minor shortcoming is the ICR uses several acronyms in the text which do not appear in the list of
abbreviations and acronyms in the front of the text.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreement/Comments
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICRR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this operation, with some
adaptation of language.

1. Combining the "traditional Cat-DDO" design with health emergency preparedness could help in
responding to pandemics. The Bank team provided a new instrument to the government, crucial for
supporting their liquidity needs in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. The operation also addressed the policy
and institutional constraints for disaster risk preparedness. Cross-fertilizing the DRM and health agenda helped
in responding to the COVID-19 pandemic.

2. A careful consideration of the prior actions, results framework and related targets in a Cat-DDO
operation can increase the chance of success, especially in countries with significant fiscal constraints.
The preparation team recognized the challenges of using Cat-DDO, given that it is budget support without any
funding earmarked to achieve the results indicators. Hence, the operation focused on designing incremental
results indicators (that were not in some cases ambitious), but based on international best practices that could

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bhutan DPF with Cat DDO (P173008)



provide a pathway for future reforms aimed at mainstreaming DRM into critical sectors such as infrastructure
and health.

3. Designing reforms and results that are aligned with the core priorities of the government agencies
increases the potential of sustaining impact in the medium to long term. The reforms targeted in this
operation, grounded in robust analytical work, were recognized as a priority by the Government. This combined
with technical assistance by the Bank helped in achieving for the most part, the desired outcomes.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                 Page 16 of 16
