     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China: Gansu TVET Project (P154623)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023918

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P154623                                   China: Gansu TVET Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                     Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-87200                                30-Jun-2023                                        118,580,732.55

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Mar-2017                               30-Jun-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          120,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           120,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                       118,580,732.55                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Salim J. Habayeb           Judyth L. Twigg              Susan Ann Caceres              IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The development objectives of the project were to improve the quality and relevance of Project Schools in
   Gansu and strengthen the school and industry linkage (Loan Agreement dated June 26, 2017, p. 6).

   Explanation of Project Schools: The term "Project Schools" used in the PDO statement meant selected
   schools providing technical and vocational education and training (TVET).



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China: Gansu TVET Project (P154623)



   During implementation, one of the associated outcome targets for graduates obtaining certificates and
   diplomas was reduced in view of nationwide Government of China-mandated cancellation of skill certificates
   in some disciplines, as the government wanted to boost employment by removing the certification requirement
   in related areas (project team clarifications, March 18, 2024). Further details are provided in Section 2d,
   below. The government decision ultimately affected 30 percent of skill certificates offered by the programs of
   project schools. The target reduction was a necessary adjustment to a government policy change rather than
   a reduction in project ambition. Therefore, this ICR Review does not apply a split rating.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Note: Component costs pertain to International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) financing,
   exclusive of front-end and commitment fees.

   I. Strengthen the Demand-driven TVET System (Appraisal: US$1.67 million; Actual: US$1.16
   million). The component was designed to promote school and industry cooperation both at the system and
   school levels and to improve coordination among TVET shareholders.

         Subcomponent 1.1: Promote TVET coordination and management, including the introduction
          and establishment of a Skills Council in the Lanzhou New District (LND) and supporting activities
          such as campus visits, reporting on implementation progress, and sharing recommendations.

         Subcomponent 1.2: Promote provincial policy development to address selected systemic skills
          development issues in Gansu and expand project impact beyond project schools. The
          subcomponent would support evidence-based policy studies on selected key topics and produce
          policy briefs identifying lessons distilled from project implementation to inform province-wide
          reforms.

         Subcomponent 1.3: Strengthen school and industry linkage to strengthen and institutionalize
          the linkage between schools and industry by: (a) establishing or improving School-Industry
          Collaboration Committees at the school level and sector-specific Technical Advisory Committees at
          the departmental level to engage industry; and (b) piloting new models of school-industry
          cooperation based on inputs from the committees and project schools.

   II. Strengthen TVET Delivery through Comprehensive School Reforms (Appraisal: U$105.84 million;
   Actual: US$106.24 million). The component was designed to improve the capacity of project schools to
   deliver high-quality and relevant TVET programs.



                                                                                                  Page 2 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  China: Gansu TVET Project (P154623)



      Subcomponent 2.1: Improve instructor quality to address key challenges related to improving
       management and instruction capacity in delivering quality training programs. The subcomponent
       included: (a) the elaboration of sustainable professional development plans for instructors and
       administrators and setting up or refining the incentive mechanism for performance; and (b)
       organizing domestic and overseas training programs targeted at different cohorts of instructors and
       top- and middle-level school administrators.

      Subcomponent 2.2: Promote modular and competency-based curriculum, pedagogy, and
       assessment reforms to promote competency-based curricula reflecting the needs of the industry,
       transform pedagogy from the traditional teacher-centered approach to a student-centered one, and
       reform teaching and learning assessments reflecting the new curricula and results-oriented
       approaches both for degree programs and short-term training programs. The subcomponent was
       envisaged to: (a) develop or update competency-based standards for core curricula that will be
       based on results from enterprise surveys, graduates surveys, and updates from the School-industry
       Collaboration Committees and Skills Council; (b) develop and adapt modular competency-based
       curricula and other teaching learning materials, and establish a school-level teaching and learning
       resource library; (c) promote student-centered pedagogy to improve teaching effectiveness; (d)
       develop competency-based evaluation instruments to assess students’ learning outcomes and
       teachers’ teaching effectiveness; and (e) develop competency-based short-term training programs
       for rural farmers and migrant workers based on demands from local enterprises and communities.

      Subcomponent 2.3: Improve school management to enhance school management through
       activities that improve the quality and relevance of TVET. The subcomponent was to
       support sustainability mechanisms to institutionalize and sustain good practices produced by
       subcomponents 2.1 and 2.2. Activities would support: (a) setting up or updating school charters
       and/or other regulations in accordance with the priorities highlighted in government policies; (b)
       improving support systems for students outside the classroom, including extracurricular activities,
       student associations, mental health seminars and counseling services, job services, and
       entrepreneurial activities; and (c) improving efficiency of school administration by: (i) conducting
       management diagnoses; (ii) establishing a digitalized management system; and (iii) partnering with
       other non-project schools.

      Subcomponent 2.4: Upgrade facilities and equipment to support new training centers and key
       training equipment in project schools, contributing to extension of access for more students. The
       subcomponent would provide support to (a) expand and upgrade facilities, including construction of
       training centers within existing school campuses of the selected schools; (b) provide key training
       equipment needed for the revised training programs; and (c) develop school guidelines for the
       management of training facilities and equipment.

III. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (Appraisal: US$1.45 million; Actual: US$3.53
million). This component was designed to support capacity building for project management office (PMO)
and project implementation unit (PIU) staff in project management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and
knowledge sharing.

      Subcomponent 3.1: Project management to support the capacity of PMO and PIU staff in project
       activities and management. The subcomponent was also to support knowledge-sharing activities



                                                                                               Page 3 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    China: Gansu TVET Project (P154623)



           such as workshops, seminars, and publication of papers and technical documents produced by the
           project.

        Subcomponent 3.2: Monitoring and evaluation. In addition to routine monitoring, an impact
           evaluation was to be designed and conducted with the objective of comparing outcomes between
           treatment and control groups. Due to the difficulty of random assignment of schools, the impact
           evaluation was not to be rigid, but rather based on a quasi-experimental design (PAD, p. 10).

  Selection of Project Schools

  The selection of participating schools was made by the Government of Gansu based on their contribution to
  priority sectors in the province (ICR, p. 22), and included the following four schools:

      1.   Gansu Energy Chemical Vocational College,
      2.   Gansu Finance and Trade Vocational College,
      3.   Gansu Mechanical Advanced Technical School, and
      4.   Lanzhou College of Arts and Sciences.

  The above selected schools receiving loans under the project were required to provide counterpart funding.
  All four selected schools were in the process of either upgrading to the tertiary level, or shifting to an applied
  university, or expanding their programs (PAD, p. 7). Two of the project schools located within the TVET
  Park specialized in petro-chemistry, energy, trade, and finance. The two project schools located in other
  economic centers would serve Gansu’s electronics, mechanics, engineering, and cultural industries. Two of
  the schools were expected to pilot innovative approaches for school-industry collaboration and to take
  advantage of their proximity to industries.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost and financing: The total project cost at appraisal was estimated at US$144.52 million, consisting of
  an IBRD loan of US$120 million and counterpart funding of US$24.52 million. The actual World Bank cost
  was US$118.6 million. The ICR did not provide specific information on counterpart funding, but it noted that
  the amount was less than originally planned because of cost savings due to competitive bidding on civil
  works.

  Dates: The project was approved on March 31, 2017, and became effective on October 20, 2017. A Mid-
  Term Review was carried out on November 9, 2020. The project closed on June 30, 2023, as planned.

  Restructuring: A restructuring on July 29, 2022, amended the results framework. According to the
  Restructuring Paper (RES50642), pp. 4-6, the Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security started to
  cancel skill tests in 2017 for some certificates with the aim of boosting employment in some disciplines by
  removing the certification requirement. This resulted in the cancellation of about 44 percent of skill
  certificates nationwide. As part of this nationwide cancellation, about 30 percent of skill certificates offered
  by the programs in the four project schools were ultimately cancelled. In particular, about 35 percent of the
  skill certificates offered by some programs with high female student enrollment, such as preschool
  education, e-commerce, and human resource management, were cancelled (project team clarifications,
  March 13, 2024). By 2021-2022, following the COVID-19 pandemic, cancellations reduced the total number
  of graduates, and it became clear that the target for the second PDO indicator (the percentage of graduates

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China: Gansu TVET Project (P154623)



   obtaining both skill certificates and diplomas) could not be achieved. Therefore, the government requested
   the redefinition of this indicator, its baseline, and its end-target. The restructuring adjusted the target value
   for the indicator and added three intermediate results indicators, including for beneficiary satisfaction.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
China’s rapid growth was led by substantial physical capital investments and a large supply of medium- and
high-skilled labor generated by the country’s education system. The country made remarkable progress in
expanding education enrollments, including in the TVET sector. Skills development expanded in Gansu as
a result of virtual universalization of basic education and increased government investment in TVET. Tuition
and fees had been waived at the secondary TVET level, and students from low-income households
received additional financial support (ICR, p. 6). A newly established TVET Park in the LND was expected
to support Gansu’s skills development reform by serving as a major source of labor supply for industrial
zones in LND and the rest of the province. The TVET Park was to host 31 vocational schools, some
merged from among smaller, scattered schools, with about 150,000 students (nearly 60 percent of the
province’s TVET students). It was expected that the proximity of TVET Park to the industries in LND would
promote better school-industry cooperation, and that the consolidation of schools would increase efficiency
in resource allocation, facilitating TVET reform in Gansu.

As the country’s economy was striving to transition from production to innovation, the labor force needed to
reach the right balance between general skills, occupation-specific skills, learning on the job, and high-
quality skills. This was particularly important as the skills mix in China did not compare favorably with that of
industrialized countries. While there was a growing demand for qualified technicians and skilled workers,
only half of China’s 140 million employees in urban enterprises could be classified as skilled (PAD, p. 3). As
Gansu’s vocational education did not reach its full potential, the Gansu government and its Ministry of
Education took a decision to accelerate the development of a modern vocational education system, setting
priorities for the province’s TVET sector with a specific focus on the LND TVET Park as a platform for
experimenting with proposed reforms.

According to the ICR (p. 6), priorities included: (a) the establishment of stronger linkages between schools
and industry; (b) strengthening the teaching force with an emphasis on dual technical and teaching
qualifications and industrial experience; (c) improving school management, providing more autonomy in the
admission process, creating pathways for TVET graduates wishing to pursue higher education, resource
sharing between high- and lower-performing schools, partnering with industries and high-performing
schools in other regions, and providing student support services; (d) enhancing the TVET curricula based
on employer demand, elevating practical vocational skills priorities, stimulating students’ creativity and
entrepreneurial spirit, aligning faculty performance and student employment outcomes, and ensuring that
student learning is in line with vocational standards; and (e) expanding and enhancing space and facilities
for practical training, including within enterprises so that by 2020, 90 percent of Gansu’s TVET schools
would meet national standards, along with a number of shared comprehensive practical training centers,
professional laboratories, and on-site training centers hosted by enterprises.

Hence, project objectives were responsive and relevant to accelerating the development of a modern
vocational education system. At entry, objectives were consistent with Outcome 2.2 of Strategic Theme 2

                                                                                                        Page 5 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      China: Gansu TVET Project (P154623)



               “Promoting More Inclusive Development” of the Country Partnership Strategy for FY13-16. By developing
               model schools serving a primarily rural population, the project was expected to deliver skills training that
               was more closely integrated with the needs of industry, thus enhancing job creation. Project objectives were
               also aligned with China’s 13th Five-Year Plan, the Medium to Long-term Education and Talent
               Development Plans, 2010-2020, and the new Skills Development Policy, all of which aimed at giving priority
               to workforce development in China’s western region, providing more support to poor regions, enhancing
               capacity for the provision of a skilled workforce, encouraging innovations in governance, and meeting the
               needs of industries and students.

               At project closing, objectives remained fully aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the
               period FY20–FY25, specifically with CPF Engagement Area Three (Sharing the Benefits of Growth), under
               Objective 3.2 (Strengthening the Quality of Early Learning and Skills Development Programs), to help
               China develop a workforce with the competencies needed for more complex industries, especially in less
               developed areas. The CPF highlights the fact that the World Bank has several ongoing operations that
               support reforms and investments that aim at improving the quality and relevance of TVET. The CPF notes
               that the experience of World Bank-supported TVET projects provides a solid evidence base for China to
               reform TVET systems through its domestic resources. While the CPF mentions that the World Bank will
               move away from traditional TVET projects, it recognizes the importance of continued support for skills
               development by remaining engaged with the skills development reform agenda.

               Project objectives also remained responsive to the Government of China’s priority of addressing inequalities
               that have emerged during the country’s rapid development. Disparities included those between urban and
               rural areas, which had increased given that export-oriented manufacturing grew mainly in urban areas. The
               Government of China is emphasizing integration between urban and rural areas, and facilitating the mobility
               of people and economic activity through policies that gradually harmonize social entitlements (ICR, p. 11).




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve the quality of project schools in Gansu

                             Rationale
                             Project objectives were interlinked and had variable degrees of overlap. For example, improving quality
                             contributes to enhanced relevance and vice-versa. Strengthening linkages between schools and industry
                             contributes to improving relevance and quality. Since the extent of overlap between relevance and industry
                             linkage is high, and with essentially similar theories of change, activities, and common improved labor market

                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   China: Gansu TVET Project (P154623)



outcomes (ICR, p. 40), both objectives on relevance and industry linkage will be addressed under one
objective (Objective 2).

The theory of change for improving quality under Objective 1 envisaged that activities for the strengthening
TVET delivery associated with school reforms and their respective outputs would plausibly contribute to
improved quality. Main activities included the development of competence-based standards for professional
training programs, training teachers in student-centered teaching methodology, curriculum development
training, strengthening both practical skills and academic qualification of teachers, and enhancing school
management supplemented by policies and regulations. The theory of change was complemented by
activities that further strengthened M&E and project management. As noted above, the theory of change for
quality improvement under Objective 1 was also connected with that of Objective 2 on relevance and industry
linkage, notably for enhancing cooperation between schools and industry, recruiting school instructors from
industry/enterprises, and sending teachers/instructors for training at industrial sites.

Outputs and intermediate results

Key outputs were related to reforms in pedagogy, curricula, teaching standards, school management, and
updated training facilities. The project also recruited an experienced school reform consultant, known as SR
Consultant, to provide continuous training, guidance, and hands-on technical support.

A total of 578 teachers (65 percent female) from the four schools participated in competency-based, active-
methods teacher training courses, which included teacher selection, and progressive, individual competence
assessment and coaching. Initial classroom observations of the pre-training, in-training, and post-training
competence of teachers found that 96 to 100 percent of teachers were rated as needing further development,
and the two subsequent assessments showed significant improvement: over 93 percent of teachers achieved
at least one grade of A or B. The impact-of-training questionnaire found that between 91 and 99 percent of
trained teachers considered that: (a) the course was helpful for increasing knowledge and understanding; (b)
they would continue to use active methods; (c) they would share their experience with other teachers; and (d)
their course was delivered effectively. Over 70 percent of sampled trained teachers and over 80 percent of all
sampled students of trained teachers reported a variable range of improvement in student class-time
engagement (ICR, p. 12).

A total of 179 staff involved in curriculum development (teachers and senior departmental staff) were trained,
29 curricula standards were developed for nine disciplines, 25 relevant textbooks and links to on-line
teaching, and eight learning resources were completed. A competency-based Curriculum Development
Manual was prepared and disseminated to relevant teams, and labor market surveys were conducted.
Curriculum design was based on industry and enterprise requirements to address the demand for talent and
carry out vocational analysis with enterprise experts. A total of 331 professional training programs with
competence-based standards were developed. The project developed 1,140 high-quality modular and
competency-based curricula, and 97.5 percent of practical units implemented the new training programs.

By project completion, 77 percent of students in project schools were enrolled in courses with modular and
competency-based training curricula, more than doubling the target of 34 percent. The impact-of-training
questionnaire found that 20 percent of trained staff had acquired full competence in applying Developing a
Curriculum (DACUM) methodology, and 40 percent made significant progress. The reformed competency-
based curriculum received high student ratings (ranging between 70 to 100 percent), and students felt that
the curricula would help them acquire skills relevant to their future jobs. Similarly, over 95 percent of teachers
reported that students were more deeply engaged with the content of the new materials. Nine student

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   China: Gansu TVET Project (P154623)



assessment manuals were developed, and 9,229 teachers were trained in student-centered teaching
methodology.

Teaching standards and assessment handbooks were revised by inspectors, including teachers engaged in
inspection. The project developed or revised 620 school-level rules or internal school policies to enhance
school management and institutionalize good practices, exceeding the target of 126 rules, and shared them
with non-project schools. A total of 121 non-project schools participated in project events.

The project constructed and equipped new training centers on existing campuses. A total of 22 new buildings
with a construction area of 192,067 square meters were built in the four project schools, exceeding the target
of 155,080 square meters. A set of equipment for classrooms, dormitories, laboratories and training centers,
and management systems was installed and utilized. Maintenance procedures were developed and adopted.
The new facilities and equipment extended the schools’ capacity for about twice the original enrollment (from
29,926 students in 2016 to 57,193 students in 2023), improved the conditions for teaching and learning,
facilitated more hands-on training opportunities for students, and improved overall conditions for students to
increase their practical skills.

Outcome

The percentage of graduates obtaining skill certificate and diplomas increased from a baseline of 38 percent
(34 percent females) in 2016 to 52 percent (50 percent females) in 2023, short of the original target of 64
percent, but exceeding the revised target of 46 percent (44 percent females), as reported by the ICR (p. 33).

The impact evaluation showed improved students' vocational competencies (the effect of improving students'
competences was 0.1076, which was statistically significant at the 1 percent level); improved teachers'
teaching capacities (the score of teachers' teaching method increased by 0.186, which is statistically
significant at the 1 percent level); and improved teachers and students' satisfaction with schooling (the overall
satisfaction of teachers and students increased by 0.445 and 0.110, respectively). The impact evaluation also
showed that teachers' teaching interaction behavior at the end-line was significantly higher than the
baseline, and that project interventions contributed to a higher incremental percentage of graduates obtaining
both skill certificates and diplomas in the four project schools as compared with non-project schools.

In terms of the impact evaluation’s independence and methodologies, and according to the information
provided by the ICR, the SR Consultant, who had a central and continuous role in supporting core project
activities during implementation, carried out the impact study of project activities through a combination of
classroom observation, and questionnaires collecting feedback from administrators, teachers and students
(ICR, p. 27). However, according to a communication dated August 26, 2024 from the Region, and based on
the Client’s inputs, there were two impact evaluations prepared by two different teams, working
independently. First, an independent Impact Evaluation Team, led by the Director of the Sustainable
Development Education Center at Northwest Normal University, produced quantitative evaluations. In terms
of methodology, the study included data collection and assessment at baseline, mid-term, and endline, and
performed prior and post analysis, significant tests for 18 indicators (including project's 3 PDO and 10 key
intermediate indicators), comprehensive comparisons between the four project schools (treatment) and four
non-project schools (control), and attribution analysis. The second one was carried out by SR Consultant and
produced an evaluation report on the school reform activities at the completion stage. The two teams were
publicly recruited in accordance with the World Bank’s procurement regulations and domestic procurement
procedures and independently conducted the impact evaluation and school reforms analysis separately.


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   China: Gansu TVET Project (P154623)




Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve relevance of project schools and industry linkage in Gansu

Rationale
In addition to quality improvement interventions described under Objective 1 above, the theory of change
envisaged the strengthening of a demand-driven TVET system by establishing a Skills Council, establishing
and/or improving school-industry collaboration and sector-specific industrial advisory committees, conducting
policy studies, piloting initiatives on school-industry cooperation, recruiting instructors from
industry/enterprises, and sending teachers for training in industries. The above activities and respective
outputs would plausibly contribute to improved relevance and school-industry linkage.

Outputs and intermediate results

The project established a Skills Council and a Provincial Expert Team to help in promoting TVET coordination
and management, and to shift TVET from a supply-driven model to demand-driven delivery. The Council was
composed of technical personnel from enterprises and key professional teachers from colleges and
universities. The Council carried out research programs and analyses on current needs of enterprises so that
schools could adjust their courses and optimize their training programs to meet those needs. The Council
developed a set of tools and templates providing guidance on how to quickly develop short core courses and
training programs to respond to enterprises’ urgent demand for skills, and it trained 15 teachers from the
project schools on how to use them. A total of 86 briefing notes helped in guiding project schools in applying
operational and policy responses.

A total of 48 school-industry collaboration and sector-specific industrial advisory committees were
established.

The number of school-enterprise cooperation agreements increased from 178 at baseline to 1,023
agreements at completion, against a target of 328 agreements.

By project completion,1,093 instructors from project schools had practices in enterprises compared with only
248 in 2016, against a target of 704 instructors. The proportion of project school instructors who were from
industry/enterprises was 28.3 percent.

A total of 28,361 trainees participated in short-term training programs compared to 3,898 in 2016, against a
target of 12,980 trainees.

Industry attachment training covered 39.5 percent of teachers/instructors.

The project conducted labor market surveys and delivered eight evidence-based policy studies that
addressed systemic TVET issues in Gansu, identifying skills gaps, diagnosing low effectiveness of training
programs, and assessing development and utilization of online resources, benchmarking Gansu’s TVET

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   China: Gansu TVET Project (P154623)



system and schools with the World Bank’s standardized tools. The outputs informed new policymaking on
TVET reforms in Gansu, as well as management of the TVET Park. A total of 88 research briefs were
prepared.

The project held 268 project management training events and organized 102 exchange workshops.

The four project schools enrolled an average of 73 percent of their students from rural areas, of whom 43
percent were from low-income households.

Outcome

The percentage of graduates finding initial employment within 6 months in specialties in which they were
trained increased from a baseline of 37 percent (32 percent females) in 2016 to 67 percent (66 percent
females) in 2023, exceeding the target of 52 percent (50 percent females).

The number of graduates working in enterprises with which schools cooperated significantly increased from a
baseline of 3,173 graduates in 2016 to 35,475 graduates in 2023, exceeding the target of 31,372 employed
graduates.

The impact evaluation found that the incremental graduate employment rates (employed students/graduates)
of the four project schools were higher than the national average and higher than non-project schools (69
percent vs. 59 percent). The employment rate of female graduates from project schools was higher than that
of female graduates from non-project schools (78 percent vs. 62 percent), and the incremental employment
rate from the mid-term to the end-term in project schools (36 percent) was also significantly higher than that
of female graduates from non-project schools (13 percent).

The impact evaluation found that the project had a positive impact on salaries. The mean starting salary of
graduates from project schools increased from US$2,930 at the mid-term to US$3,526 at the end-term, and
the respective rate for female graduates increased from US$2,503 to US$3,087 over the same period. This
was compared to an increase of less than one percent in the mean starting salaries of graduates in non-
project schools, from US$2,973 at the mid-term to US$2,999 at the end-term.

In addition, the impact evaluation reported that cooperation between schools and enterprises increased
significantly in terms of quantity, breadth, and quality. The cooperation changed from merely sending students
for internships to a diversified cooperation model, with talent training agreements that established an in-depth
exchange system of visits between enterprises and schools, and with enterprises providing a large number of
practical training facilities and equipment for teachers and students to improve their skills. It also concluded
that the concept of “participation in enterprise practice” contributed to the observed improvements in teaching
methods.




Rating
High




                                                                                                 Page 10 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                China: Gansu TVET Project (P154623)



OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The two project objectives to improve the quality of project schools in Gansu and to improve their relevance
                            and industry linkage were fully achieved. The aggregation of achievements is indicative of a high rating for
                            overall efficacy.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



    5. Efficiency
   The PAD (pp. 45-54) carried out a detailed economic analysis, including an overview of the provincial economic
   background, TVET sector and market failures, rationale for public sector involvement, and a cost-benefit
   analysis. The latter used benefits measured by wage premiums. It made reasonable assumptions about
   investment allocations throughout the project cycle, three-year duration of training programs, beneficiary
   cohorts, and duration of beneficiary work life. The analysis estimated an Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of 10.2
   percent and concluded that the project benefits would outweigh the costs. Through a series of sensitivity tests,
   the IRR estimates remained robust under different scenarios.

   The ICR carried out an ex-post cost-benefit analysis following the methodology used at appraisal. With updated
   data, monetized benefits were calculated as the incremental value of higher earnings that workers can expect to
   receive in the labor market as a result of improved skills attributable to the project. The economic costs
   pertained to project investments, associated administrative costs, and forgone wages while studying in TVET
   schools as the opportunity cost of schooling. The estimated IRR of 11.1 percent was higher than the 10.2
   percent calculated at appraisal, including because many project results exceeded the original targets (ICR, p.
   17). Under sensitivity analysis, robust alternative IRRs under different assumptions were also maintained.

   Advanced readiness and the adequacy of implementation aspects contributed to project efficiency. No
   shortcomings of significance were reported in the efficiency of implementation. The project benefitted from
   effective management (ICR, p. 24). The management cost accrued at the provincial level accounted for
   only three percent of the total financing, maximizing the funds allocated to beneficiary schools (ICR, p. 17).
   Substantial loan savings were generated from competitive bidding on civil works. The cost of sub-component 2.4
   for upgrading facilities and equipment was US$91.4 million, against an appraisal estimate of USS$105 million,
   and the savings allowed additional construction in project schools. The number of students increased more than
   originally projected, indicating that the unit cost of training was lower than estimated at appraisal. Counterpart
   allocations for consultant services and training—expenditures that guided key school reform activities—tripled.
   Project activities were completed as scheduled, despite the COVID-19 pandemic, as its impact was adequately
   mitigated, including by switching to virtual learning and management follow up during that period.




                                                                                                                            Page 11 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       China: Gansu TVET Project (P154623)



Efficiency Rating
High


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      100.00
 Appraisal                                                 10.20
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      100.00
 ICR Estimate                                              11.10
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives was rated high in view of full alignment with the Country Partnership Framework and
with country and provincial strategies. The two project objectives were fully achieved, indicative of a high rating
for overall efficacy. Efficiency was rated high in view of the value for money combined with favorable aspects of
implementation and cost savings that contributed to project efficiency. These findings are consistent with a
highly satisfactory outcome rating, indicative of essentially no shortcomings in the project’s achievement of its
objectives, in its efficiency, and its relevance.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

No risks of significance were identified or reported. Favorable factors contributing to the expectation that
development outcomes are likely to be maintained include the continued priority provided to TVET by the
Government of China and the Government of Gansu, and increased capacity at the provincial and school
levels to sustain, monitor, and expand reforms, including the sustenance of training by skilled teachers
through cascade training schemes. The project directions remain of high relevance to China’s 14th Five-Year
Plan for Economic and Social Development and other specific plans, including the National Vocational
Education Reform Implementation Plan and the Action Plan for Quality and Excellence in Vocational
Education. The implementation of a newly revised Vocational Education Law of the People’s Republic of
China, adopted in May 2022, cemented the policies and priorities supported by the project (ICR, p. 31).
Gansu province has also introduced multiple policy and strategic documents for TVET, as it considers
vocational education to be an important driver of its provincial economic growth. The TVET improvement
agenda is supported by the Gansu Education Modernization 2035 Outline and by Gansu’s accelerated
education efforts. Substantial institutional and technical capacity was put in place at the provincial level, not
only to support the four project schools and sustain project investments, but also to disseminate its

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China: Gansu TVET Project (P154623)



experience to other schools in the province. Project schools have also developed "Sustainable Development
Strategies" that were prepared by their own teams, supported by technical assistance. According to the ICR,
these strategies aim to ensure that project outcomes, capacity to develop competency-based curricula, the
reform of teaching methods to be student-centered, and performance assessments are sustained and
expanded.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design was shaped by the Joint Decision of the Ministry of Education and Gansu government
  for "Accelerating the Development of a Modern Vocational Education System," including
  by experimenting with reforms aiming at enhancing teaching quality and relevance within a larger agenda
  seeking to improve the TVET sector that can play an important role in Gansu’s urbanization process and
  poverty reduction agenda (PAD, pp. 5-6). The design benefited from lessons learned from TVET projects
  in China, including the experience of Yunnan and Guangdong Provinces, and from other countries.
  Specifically, lessons considered by the project included the following:

        Strong links between schools and industry are an underlying factor for success of school reforms.
        Systematic reform at the provincial level helps a project achieve its objectives and allows project
          results to be sustainable in the long run.
        Importance of developing a customized training plan based on the instructor’s professional
         development plan that accurately reflects instructor training needs, skills demand of the industry,
         and good training practices.
        Importance of promoting learning through modular and competency-based training.
        Importance of capacity building at the institutional level.
        Importance of strong M&E.

  According to the ICR (p. 22), an identification mission in 2015 reached preliminary agreements on
  objectives, selection of project schools that would receive support, and the preparation schedule. Gansu
  province established the Gansu Vocational Development PMO to coordinate preparation. The PMO was
  co-located with the "Lanzhou New District Vocational Education Park Management Committee," an
  agency responsible for coordinating the planning and preparation of the "Lanzhou New District Vocational
  Education Park,"

  The design incorporated a mix of central coordination and standardization of implementation
  arrangements but with sufficient delegation of planning, implementation, and decision making to
  empower schools to adapt to their needs and to innovate. Overall institutional and implementation
  arrangements were clearly specified. The Gansu Department of Education (GDOE) was responsible for
  overall coordination and supervision, supported by the provincial PMO located at the Lanzhou TVET Park
  Management Office of GDOE. Both the PMO and the four selected project schools, through their four
  PIUs, would implement the project and manage loan utilization.

  At the time of preparation, the World Bank’s Country Office-based Task Team Leader (TTL) had been
  involved in the preparation and supervision of four earlier TVET projects in China, of which two were

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China: Gansu TVET Project (P154623)



  under implementation. Hence, preparation benefited from both continuity and prior experience in the
  preparation and implementation of earlier TVET projects. Institutional arrangements were standardized
  among the four project schools, each with a PIU fully staffed with technical experts and administrators
  responsible for school reform, procurement, financial management, M&E, and safeguards. The results
  framework was concise and well defined. The project provided for contracting a school reform consultant
  to provide constant hands-on support, guidance and training.

  The state of readiness for implementation was high before project effectiveness. Project schools had
  already initiated the implementation of their first annual plans. Several planned activities had already
  been initiated, notably for teacher training. Staff of project schools, including their PIUs and the PMO,
  participated in procurement and financial management training in advance of project approval. A
  consolidated procurement plan for the first 18 months of implementation was prepared by the PMO and
  agreed with the World Bank. The PMO and school PIUs were staffed. Terms of Reference for the impact
  evaluation and several research studies were ready.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 A project launch workshop in September 2017 brought together renowned national TVET experts, World
 Bank technical experts and fiduciary and safeguard staff, local experts from the National Industry and
 Sector Association, key staff of the Yunnan TVET project, representatives of GDOE and the Department of
 Finance, and over 500 other participants, including school leaders, administrators, teachers, and PMO and
 school PIU staff. The workshop intended to build capacity of Gansu counterparts in project management
 with a focus on: (i) broadening knowledge about China’s national TVET strategy and development policy;
 (ii) bringing new perspectives, especially on school management and school-industry linkages; and (iii)
 promoting technical aspects of project operations.

 Throughout implementation, the World Bank’s implementation support team, led by the same TTL,
 maintained open and continuous dialogue with the PMO and PIUs in project schools. The team benefited
 from the implementation experience of earlier projects and was results-focused and proactive. World Bank
 support missions routinely visited different project schools; sought views of stakeholders (managers,
 teachers, enterprises, students) on quality improvements and relevance; observed classroom instruction to
 obtain insights on progress in competence-based and student-centered teaching and learning; and
 monitored and advised on reporting, M&E processes, procurement, financial management, and
 safeguards. Together with the PMO, the World Bank’s implementation support team played a catalytic role
 in promoting learning and exchanging experience among various schools in the province and in
 establishing formal learning exchanges with other countries. In response to travel restrictions due to the
 COVID-19 pandemic, the team shifted to virtual supervision and helped implementing agencies to keep
 implementation on track despite the new challenges. The team produced 12 Implementation Status and
 Results Reports and mission Aides Memoire with comprehensive reporting and a focus on attaining
 intended outcomes.


                                                                                                 Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China: Gansu TVET Project (P154623)



 In view of the extent to which World Bank services contributed to quality at entry of the project and
 supported effective implementation through appropriate supervision and implementation support toward the
 achievement of development outcomes, overall Bank Performance is rated Highly Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Objectives were clearly stated and reflected by suitable outcome indicators. The ICR (p. 8) noted that
 indicators used in the assessment of objectives were standard indicators used by the Government of China
 to measure the quality and relevance of TVET schools. Baselines were available for outcome indicators.
 They were also available for intermediate results indicators, except for new activities initiated by the
 project.

 M&E arrangements were well-embedded institutionally and complemented by two impact evaluations.
 Monitoring and assessment of progress were to be undertaken by three main activities (PAD, p. 15): (a)
 routine monitoring; (b) Mid-Term Review; and (c) impact evaluations. Most data measuring outputs and
 intermediate outcomes would be collected at the school level. To strengthen the schools’ capacity for data
 collection, documentation, and utilization, the project provided technical assistance on M&E capacity
 building for project staff during the preparation period and intended to continue such support during project
 implementation, as needed, to ensure that M&E functions were adequate and integrated into the school
 reform process (ICR, p. 27).



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation proceeded as planned, and data collection was regular. However, during
  implementation, and as explained in Section 2, one associated outcome target on graduates obtaining
  certificates and diplomas was reduced from 64 percent to 52 percent in view of the Government of
  China’s policy change and cancellations of skill tests for a number of certificates. The ICR (p. 27)
  reported that the impact evaluation collected data at the pre-and post-stages and provided comparisons
  between project and non-project schools and an attribution analysis. Salient results and further
  information about the impact studies were included in Section 4.




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China: Gansu TVET Project (P154623)



c. M&E Utilization
  Findings were used to assess project progress and achievements and were widely shared with
  stakeholders. The ICR noted that other schools and stakeholders are now benefiting from the
  experience of the project.




  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Environmental Category B, as it triggered Safeguard Policy OP/BP 4.01 in
   view of the construction and operation of new school buildings for additional training space, although
   potential adverse environmental impacts were expected to be limited and site-specific within the existing
   campus of each of the four project schools. The Borrower prepared an Environmental and Social
   Management Plan (ESMP) at entry and a supplementary ESMP in 2020 for new additional civil works
   funded by cost savings. Throughout implementation, an effective environmental, health, and safety
   management system was established. Each implementing agency carried out project tasks in line with the
   ESMP. Implementation was coordinated by the PMO. Project schools provided due attention to
   environmental and safety aspects, and they were compliant with both national and World Bank regulatory
   frameworks. Semi-annual progress reports on ESMP implementation were prepared by an external
   consultant and were discussed with the World Bank. The overall safeguards rating was reported as
   satisfactory.

   The Social Assessment Report dated Nov. 24, 2016, noted in section 7 on Ethnic Minority Population that
   there were 1,013 minority students in the four project schools representing a small proportion of 3.5% of all
   students. Most of them were Hui, Yugu, Dongxiang, and Tibetan, who were from different parts of Gansu
   Province. Also, ethnic minority teachers accounted for only 3 percent of all faculty members. All four
   vocational schools were located in urban areas of Lanzhou and Tianshui Cities, where there are no ethnic
   minority concentrated communities. Since project schools were not located in minority concentrated
   communities, and since the numbers of minority students and teachers were low, the project did not trigger
   the World Bank Safeguard Policy on Indigenous Peoples OP/ BP 4.10.

   Even though project schools were not located in ethnic minority concentrated areas, the ICR (p. 21) stated
   that measures were taken to reach out to students from ethnic and poor families. The Bank Team noted
   that, during implementation, the vulnerable groups especially ethnic minorities, female students and
   teachers had been encouraged to participate all project activities and the progress had been consistently
   monitored by the external monitoring team. Detailed data and analysis informed the implementation like
   status of joining school reform activities, status of ethnic minority students’ language proficiency and dietary
   needs.

   An external agency was contracted to conduct twice-yearly social monitoring, with a strong focus on gender,
   ethnic minorities, and poverty groups to ensure that the project adequately addressed social issues (ICR, p.

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    China: Gansu TVET Project (P154623)



  28). Social monitoring reports were shared and discussed with the World Bank during supervision and
  implementation support missions. The ICR (p. 21) reported that the indicators collected by the external
  monitoring team concluded that disadvantaged groups benefited equally or more from the project.

  The Bank Team confirmed on 6/2/2024 that no issues related to social risks were encountered, and noted
  that all ISRs had satisfactory ratings for safeguards. The Bank Team also noted that, although there were
  no issues related to ethnic minorities and other disadvantaged groups, both the Bank team and the
  PMO/PIUs paid lots of attention to social safeguard aspects and fully utilized the analysis and
  recommendations of social monitoring reports to further improve implementation.

  According to the ICR (p. 28), the project had a well-developed Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM),
  including the assignment of focal persons at the PMO and in the school PIUs to ensure timely reporting,
  recording, and following up on arising grievances. Complaints were of minor nature. The GRM hotlines and
  websites’ information were widely disseminated.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Overall fiduciary compliance was satisfactory.

  The project’s residual financial management risk was considered moderate following the adoption of
  mitigating measures, including: (a) preparation of a financial management manual; (b) training and hands-
  on guidance; (c) explanation of school-based reforms; (d) division of financing for contracts and activities
  among World Bank and counterpart financing; and (e) close monitoring and guidance by the PMO.
  Financial management was satisfactory throughout implementation, with the exception of a short period in
  late 2019 where the rating was moderately satisfactory due to staff turnover and some delays in recording
  expenditures for civil works. Overall, the project’s financial management system was satisfactory and
  provided accurate and timely information, including that loan proceeds were used for their intended
  purposes (ICR, p. 29).

  Procurement was carried out in accordance with World Bank procedures and guidelines. The procurement
  risk was considered moderate after the adoption of mitigating measures, including the hiring of a
  procurement agent and technical consultants to assist the PMO and the four PIUs with document
  preparation, bid evaluation, contract management, and procurement training. Throughout implementation,
  procurement ratings in Implementation Status and Results Reports were consistently rated satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR (p. 21) reported on positive unintended outcomes pertaining to knowledge sharing, cross-
  fertilization, publications, and accolades. However, this ICR Review notes that such impacts were largely
  anticipated, including by design, as both the PAD and the ICR explicitly conveyed that reform benefits were



                                                                                                  Page 17 of 20
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        China: Gansu TVET Project (P154623)



   meant to extend beyond project schools and that the project would leverage its impact by disseminating its
   experience.




d. Other
   --



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                           Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance                  Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    High                  High

Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 31-32) offered several lessons and recommendations, including the following lessons
restated by IEG Review:

The establishment of a Skills Council, including technical experts from industry and key
teachers from universities, can be instrumental in improving the correlation between the
skills demanded by enterprises and those provided by TVET schools, and in advancing the
shift from a supply-driven approach to demand-driven delivery. Under this project, the Skills
Council promoted TVET coordination and management for pursuing the above directions, and it
conducted analytical and research studies on current needs of enterprises to guide schools in
adjusting their courses and in optimizing their training programs. The Council provided guidance to
project schools in responding rapidly to new skills demands from enterprises.

The designation of a focal point to provide continuous technical support, expertise, and
prompt advice facilitates the implementation of school reform activities, as was undertaken by
this project through the contracting of an experienced school reform consultant.

The collective experience of the series of TVET projects in China can provide valuable
guidance to the design and implementation of future TVET projects. The project preparation
team visited locations of similar projects in Yunnan and Guangdong Provinces to observe first-hand,
learn, and internalize lessons, including on close school-industry linkages. The cross-fertilization in



                                                                                                    Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       China: Gansu TVET Project (P154623)



the design and implementation of projects across provinces provided a virtuous cycle of learning
from experience while adapting project design to local conditions and introducing innovations.

This IEG ICR Review also identified the following lesson:

Institutionalizing sustainability planning in TVET schools can contribute to reducing the risk
to development outcome. The project provided technical assistance to support the preparation of
Sustainable Development Strategies by each of the project schools. Four working groups of 15
members each were established to identify opportunities and challenges faced to achieve
sustainable development and to design corresponding responses at the institutional and policy
levels through a consultative process. The project was the first World Bank-assisted TVET project in
China to plan for sustaining the impact of its outcomes. Sustainable Development Strategies
integrated institutional, organizational, and operational arrangements, and aimed to ensure that
capacities to develop competency-based curricula, reforming teaching methods to be student-
centered, performance assessments, and project outcomes are sustained and expanded.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a comprehensive overview of the project experience. It was results-oriented and its narrative
was aligned to the stated objectives. Its theory of change was adequately illustrated and had a well-defined
results framework. The ICR explained the progress made toward the achievement of intended outcomes. Its
analysis of efficacy was meticulous, and the conclusions were based on strong evidence, overall. Lessons were
specific and directly derived from project experience. The ICR was internally consistent and followed
established guidelines. The ICR had moderate lapses in clarity, which were promptly addressed by the Bank
Team, and the ICR lacked pertinent information on the impact evaluations, which was subsequently provided
through a communication from the Region based on the Client's inputs. The ICR was moderately lengthy, and
its narrative could have been less laudatory.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 20
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
China: Gansu TVET Project (P154623)




                                                                   Page 20 of 20
