     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SWIOFish2 Madagascar (P153370)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0024150

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P153370                                  SWIOFish2 Madagascar

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Southern Africa                          Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-59870,IDA-D1720,TF-A4588             29-Sep-2023                                         72,542,687.19

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Mar-2017                              29-Sep-2023

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         74,000,000.00                                     2,730,000.00

 Revised Commitment                          74,047,138.44                                        47,138.44

 Actual                                      67,390,052.04                                        47,138.44




 Prepared by              Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl           Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




 P159562_TBL
 Project ID                               Project Name
 P159562                                  SWIOFish2 Madagascar ( P159562 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A4564                                                                                        5200612.77

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Mar-2017

                                                                                                Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SWIOFish2 Madagascar (P153370)




                                                 IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                            0.00                                    6,422,018.00

 Revised Commitment                                             0.00                                    6,422,018.00

 Actual                                                         0.00                                    5,200,612.77




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. 1) and the Financing Agreement of May 30, 2017 (p.
   6) the objective of the project was “to improve the management of selected fisheries at regional, national, and
   community levels and to increase access by targeted fishers to alternative livelihood activities”.

   The objective will be parsed into four objectives for the purpose of this review:

          i.   To improve the management of selected fisheries at regional level.
         ii.   To improve the management of selected fisheries at national level.
        iii.   To improve the management of selected fisheries at community level.
        iv.    To increase access by targeted fishers to alternative livelihood activities.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included four components:

   Component 1. Enhanced regional collaboration (appraisal estimate US$8.20 million, actual US$7.46
   million): This component included three sub-components:

   Subcomponent 1.1: This sub-component was to promote the implementation of Indian Ocean Tuna
   Commission (IOTC) Resolutions in the South-West Indian Ocean (SWIO) countries enhancing their
   compliance with their international fisheries obligations.




                                                                                                         Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SWIOFish2 Madagascar (P153370)



  Sub-component 1.2: This sub-component was to provide a coordination mechanism between African and
  Indian Ocean Developing Island States (AIODIS) for collaborating and sharing their own experiences to
  address some of their specific challenges.

  Subcomponent 1.3: This sub-component was to strengthen the newly created Indian Ocean Federation of
  Artisanal Fishers (Fédération des Pêcheurs Artisans de l’Océan Indien, FPAOI).

  Component 2. Strengthening capacities for priority fisheries management (appraisal estimate
  US$21.62 million, actual US$22.62 million): This component included three sub-components:

  Sub-component 2.1: This sub-component was to promote fisheries public policy, including the improvement
  of the legal and institutional framework, the statistical system, the applied research, the central
  administration capacity, the inter‐ministerial coordination, and the sanitary certification system.

  Sub-component 2.2: This sub-component was to reinforce sustainable management of fisheries and
  conservation of resources, including the development of fisheries management plans, and their
  enforcement.

  Sub-component 2.3: This sub-component was to strengthen deconcentration and the co‐management
  system and the presence of the administration in the regions.

  Component 3. Strengthening capacities for engaging in alternative fishing practices and livelihoods
  activities (appraisal estimate US$47.53 million, actual US$37.16 million): This component included four
  sub-components:

  Sub-component 3.1: This sub-component was to finance short‐term compensatory measures through cash
  transfer mechanisms.

  Sub-component 3.2: This sub-component was to promote good practices and alternative activities, through
  in particular training and extension services, promotion of safety at sea, and financial education.

  Sub-component 3.3: This sub-component was to strengthen local participatory strategic planning.

  Sub-component 3.4: This sub-component was to finance infrastructure in support of community and sector
  development, including the Policy and Human Resources Development (PHRD) financing for off‐grid energy
  services.

  Component 4. Project management and coordination (appraisal estimate US$6.80 million, actual
  US$5.63 million): This component was to finance regional project coordination, implementation and
  management, country‐level implementation, and management, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) at
  regional and country levels.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$84.15 million. The actual cost was US$72.86 million
  due to delays in the implementation of intended off-grid electrification activities as well as fishing and
  community infrastructure, the alternative livelihoods program, a surveillance mission, and a second


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SWIOFish2 Madagascar (P153370)



   satisfaction survey in Madagascar, which resulted in those activities not being implemented by the time the
   project closed. Furthermore, the actual government’s contribution was lower than originally estimated.

   Financing: The project was financed by an IDA credit in the amount of US$65.0 million (of which US$58.9
   million disbursed), an IDA credit in the amount of US$9.0 million (of which US$8.4 million disbursed), a
   Trust Fund (TF-A4588) in the amount of US$2.7 million (of which US$47,130 disbursed), and a Trust Fund
   (TF-A4564) in the amount of US$6.4 million (of which US$5.2 million disbursed).

   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was estimated to contribute US$1.0 million. The actual contribution
   was US$272,759.

   Dates: The project was approved on March 28, 2017, and became effective on August 31, 2017. The Mid-
   Term Review took place on September 21, 2020. The project closed on its original closing date of
   September 29, 2023.

   On May 8, 2020, the project was restructured to extend the closing date of the PHRD grant from June 30,
   2020, to September 29, 2023, to allow for synchronization of activities of the different grants and closing of
   all credits/TFs September 29, 2023.

   On December 7, 2022, the project was restructured to; i) reduce the target of two intermediate outcome
   indicators and revise the phrasing of one intermediate outcome indicator; ii) reallocate funding between
   categories; iii) expand the project’s geographic scope to two additional regions (Menabe and Atsimo-
   Andrefana) and extend the support to decentralized administration offices to carry out interdiction of illegal,
   unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing and safety at sea-related activities to the whole country; iv) shift
   the funding source of unfinished off-grid electrification activities from the PHRD grant to the IDA credit; and
   v) add construction of central administration buildings and purchase of drones for monitoring, control and
   surveillance to component 2.

   Even though the targets for two intermediate results indicators were reduced, it did not have implications for
   the PDO and the geographic scope was also expanded. Thus, a split evaluation is not required.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. Fisheries was a key sector for the South West Indian Ocean (SWIO) coastal
countries including Comoros, Kenya, Madagascar, Mauritius, Mozambique, Seychelles, Somalia, South
Africa, and Tanzania, according to the PAD (para. 1). Together with Yemen, Maldives, and France, these
countries were members of the South West Indian Ocean Fisheries Commission (SWIOFC), a regional
fisheries body.

Coastal populations in the SWIO region depended heavily on fisheries for their livelihoods and the fisheries
sector was a major contributor to nutritional health and food security. At project appraisal, the fisheries
sector formally accounted for up to 30 percent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in Seychelles, eight



                                                                                                      Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      SWIOFish2 Madagascar (P153370)



               percent in the Comoros, about six percent in Mozambique, five percent in Madagascar, two percent in
               Tanzania, 1.5 percent in Mauritius, and 0.5 percent in Kenya and South Africa.

               However, pressure on fish stock reached a high level. At the time of appraisal, an estimated 28 percent of
               the regional fish stock was overexploited or depleted and a further 40 percent was fully exploited. Tuna
               fisheries were, by far, the most important in the region both in value and total catch, and as tuna resources
               are migratory, they required regional management to ensure stock productivity and optimum harvesting.
               Tuna fishing, processing, and marketing remained dominated by foreign operators, with modest benefits
               retained in the region. There was a strong need for efficient fisheries management required a coordinated
               approach from the regional to the local level and vice versa.

               At the time of appraisal, regional collaboration was being reinforced through SWIOFish1, where a wide
               range of issues were addressed between member countries, particularly with regard to improving the
               conditions for access to tuna fisheries, strengthening the regional fisheries body, SWIOFC, to ensure
               effective and sustainable regional collaboration across stakeholders and improving regional monitoring,
               control, and surveillance (MCS) activities.

               Alignment with the Government Strategy. The project's objective was in line with the government of
               Madagascar's efforts to achieve sustainable fisheries management and resource conservation, as
               demonstrated through the development of the 2012 Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries Sector Program
               and the implementation of the 2015 Fisheries Law.

               Alignment with the World Bank Strategy. The objective of the project was in line with the World Bank’s
               latest Country Partnership Framework (FY17-21) for Madagascar, specifically with objective 2 “enhanced
               resilience of livelihoods of vulnerable households in rural and urban areas” (focus area 1) and objective 7
               “rural productivity” (focus area 2). At the regional level, the objective of the project supported the World
               Bank 2008 Regional Integration Assistance Strategy for Sub-Saharan Africa which stressed the importance
               of management of shared natural resources and provision of regional public goods. Also, the objective was
               in line with the 2015 Africa Climate Business Plan and its objective to foster climate-smart ocean
               economies and boosting social protection.

               The World Bank has significant experience supporting fisheries in the SWIO region through analytical work
               and investment projects.

               Even though the project's objective was at a relatively intermediate outcome level, it was pitched at an
               appropriate level given the past experience, implementation capacity , and resources allocated. The
               relevance of the objective is rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SWIOFish2 Madagascar (P153370)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To improve the management of selected fisheries at regional level.

Rationale
The selected fisheries were fisheries present in priority sites in five regions - Analanjirofo, Androy,
Atsimo‐Atsinanana, Diana, and Melaky – which were considered strategic for fisheries management and/or
were inadequately serviced by the fisheries administration.

Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change stated that project activities/inputs such as conducting
Indian Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC) Compliance Support Missions (CSMs) in participating countries,
holding an annual meeting of African and Indian Ocean Developing Islands States (AIODIS) as well as
holding an annual Indian Ocean Federation of Artisanal Fishers (FPAOI) General Assembly meeting was to
result in several outputs. These outputs were to include IOTC missions, studies and awareness programs
being carried out, compliance guidelines being developed, AIODIs meetings and studies being conducted,
and proposals being developed. These outputs were to result in the compliance rate of SWIO countries with
Indian Ocean Tuna Commission resolutions management of selected fisheries at the regional level being
improved.

However, the theory of change has some logical gaps. It is not clear how holding annual meetings
automatically would improve the compliance rate of SWIO countries or how this improvement would improve
the management of selected fisheries at the regional level.

Outputs:

      16 IOTC Compliance Support Missions (CSMs) were conducted in participating countries, exceeding
       the target of five CSMs. Compliance action plans were adopted by individual countries, whose
       implementation was monitored by the IOTC Compliance Secretariat. However, it is not clear if the
       adoption of action plans can be attributed to the CSMs. For example, no compliance mission was
       conducted for South Africa. However, South Africa exceeded the target for PDO indicator 1
       (“Compliance rate of SWIO countries with IOTC resolution”). Therefore, it is questionable if there was
       a direct correlation between the CMS and countries’ compliance rate.
      The project financed the development and rollout of an e-MARIS application and an Electronic Record
       of Authorized Vessels (e-RAV) to facilitate compliance monitoring and reporting. This output lacked a
       target.
      Five Annual high-level meeting of AIODIS were conducted, almost achieving the target of six meetings
       (due to COVID-19 travel restrictions). As a result of the meetings, action plans for the countries to
       combat marine plastic pollution were developed.
      Six annual FPAOI General Assembly meetings were conducted, achieving the target of six meetings.

Outcomes:

      The overall compliance rate of SWIO countries with IOTC resolutions marginally increased from 72
       percent in 2017 to 72.1 percent in 2023, not achieving the target of 77 percent.
           o For Comoros, the compliance rate with IOTC resolutions decreased from 75 percent in 2017 to
              58 percent in 2023, not achieving the target of 80 percent.

                                                                                               Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SWIOFish2 Madagascar (P153370)



            o For Kenya, the compliance rate with IOTC resolutions increased from 66 percent in 2017 to 76
                percent in 2023, exceeding the target of 71 percent.
            o For Madagascar, the compliance rate with IOTC resolutions increased from 66 percent in 2017
                to 77 percent in 2023, exceeding the target of 71 percent.
            o For the Maldives, the compliance rate with IOTC resolutions increased from 78 percent in 2017
                to 83 percent in 2023, achieving the target of 83 percent.
            o   For Mauritius, the compliance rate with IOTC resolutions increased from 81 percent in 2017 to
                93 percent in 2023, exceeding the target of 86 percent.
            o   For Mozambique, the compliance rate with IOTC resolutions decreased from 80 percent in
                2017 to 70 percent in 2023, not achieving the target of 85 percent.
            o   For the Seychelles, the compliance rate with IOTC resolutions increased from 73 percent in
                2017 to 80 percent in 2023, exceeding the target of 78 percent.
            o   For Somalia, the compliance rate with IOTC resolutions decreased from 71 percent in 2017 to
                23 percent in 2023, not achieving the target of 76 percent.
            o   For South Africa, the compliance rate with IOTC resolutions increased from 76 percent in 2017
                to 88 percent in 2023, exceeding the target of 81 percent.
            o   For Tanzania, the compliance rate with IOTC resolutions increased from 56 percent in 2017
                top 73 percent in 2023, exceeding the target of 61 percent.

Rationale: While the project delivered the outputs as planned, it was not able to achieve the outcome
regarding the compliance rate of SWIO countries with Indian Ocean Tuna Commission resolutions regarding
the management of selected fisheries at the regional level. Also, there were logical gaps in the theory of
change under this objective. Overall, achievement under this objective is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the management of selected fisheries at national level.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change stated that project inputs/activities such as training and
deploying fisheries inspectors, purchasing inspection vehicles, speedboats and drones for the central and
regional FMC offices, developing regulatory texts for the implementation of the 2015 Fisheries Law,
conducting small-scale vessel registration and marking campaigns and implementing a National Fisheries
Information System with a multi-module central database and a data collection system were to result in
several outputs. These outputs were to include fisheries planning, implementing, monitoring, enforcement,
and certification capacities being strengthened. These outputs were to result in the outcome of improved
management of selected fisheries at the national level.

The theory of change was sound and logical.

Outputs:


                                                                                                 Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SWIOFish2 Madagascar (P153370)




      47 legal texts (by-laws) for the implementation of the 2015 Fisheries Law were adopted by the Ministry
       of Aquatic Resources and Fisheries (MRHP), not achieving the original target of 120 legal texts or the
       revised target of 90 legal texts. The legal texts included revisions to the Fisheries law, seven decrees
       and 39 implementing texts on various issues including aquaculture, organization of marine and
       continental fisheries activities, lobster fishing, commercialization and valorization of fisheries and
       aquaculture products etc.
      The number of small-scale fishing vessels being registered and externally marked in priority areas
       increased from 457 vessels in 2017 to 12,275 vessels in 2023, exceeding the target of 2,800 vessels.
      Six regional branches (in Androy, Atsimo-Atsinanana, Melaky, Analanjirofo, Diana, and Atsimo-
       Andrefana) of the Fisheries Monitoring Center were established and are operational, exceeding the
       target of five regional branches.

In addition, the following results at output level were reported in the ICR. They were not included in the RF
and thus did not have any targets:

      Five regions (Analanjirofo, Atsimo-Andrefana, Diana, Melaku, and Menabe) collected and transmitted
         statistical catch and effort data electronically at the national level to the MRHP, achieving the target of
         five regions. The project financed smartphones, data collection kits and materials, recruitment, and
         training of investigative officers on fisheries data collection measures and statistical analysis.
        55 Fisheries inspectors and 20 observers deployed and trained.
        58 inspection vehicles, eight speedboats, 74 motorcycles, two refrigerated trucks and drones for the
         central and regional FMC offices were purchased.
        Small-scale vessel registration and marking campaigns in the 13 coastal regions conducted.
        A National Fisheries Information System with a multi-module central database and a data collection
         system were developed.
        The Madagascar’s 2023 National Frame Survey was conducted. Data were collected on the number
         of fishing vessels and gear for fisheries management planning and implementation purposes.
        23 central and decentralized fisheries administration offices established.
        13. 778 office staff trained on fisheries management subjects.

Outcomes:

      The share of small-scale fishing units in the priority areas using prohibited gear being observed during
         on-shore inspections decreased from 80 percent in 2017 to 46 percent in 2023, not achieving the
         target of 30 percent. Furthermore, this indicator was not appropriate for measuring the achievement of
         the objective.

Rationale: While the project was able to increase the number of small-scale fishing vessels being registered
and externally marked in priority areas, it was unable to improve the use of prohibited gear as defined by the
law. The ICR notes that the reduction in the use of prohibited gear was due to the implementation of the
findings of technical studies on the FMC’s surveillance strategy and function, which informed the
establishment and operationalization of six FMC regional branches, the training and deployment of fisheries
inspectors/observers, maintenance of FMC surveillance vessels, and the acquisition of inspection vehicles,
speedboats, and drones for the central and regional FMC offices. These inputs reportedly increased the
frequency of the surveillance missions and helped to deter the use of prohibited gear by small-scale fishers.



                                                                                                      Page 8 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SWIOFish2 Madagascar (P153370)



However, there is no data available on the increase in the number of patrols or if and how the new gear – for
example, drones – was deployed. Overall, the achievement under this objective is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve the management of selected fisheries at community level.

Rationale
Local-level activities were to initially concentrate in three Ultra Priority Zones (Zones Ultra Prioritaires, ZUPs):
Ambaro ‐ Ampasindava Bay in the Diana region, Antongil Bay in Analanjirofo region, and Melaky Coast in
Melaky region - areas that contained important fishing grounds for which fisheries management plans had
been prepared, gradually extending to the other regions as their fisheries plans were put in place.

Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change stated that project inputs/activities such as implementing
fisheries management plans, fishers receiving professional cards, fisher association members being trained,
restoring mangroves and installing submerged acritical habitats were to result in several outputs. These
outputs were to include fisheries management plans being implemented, official fishing licenses being
granted, locally managed fishing/marine areas (LLMAs) being co-managed by local community structures and
local administration (with the support of non-governmental organizations (NGOs)), and stock enhancement
activities being conducted. These outputs were to result in the outcome of improved management of selected
fisheries at the community level.

The theory of change was logical.

Outputs:

·    Three fisheries management plans were implemented, achieving the target of three plans. While
implementation was not defined in the results framework, the ICR noted that implementation focused on key
actions in the fisheries management plans, such as the creation of locally managed fishing/marine areas
(LMMAs) co-managed by local community structures and the local administration with the support of non-
government organizations (NGOs), local vessel and fisher registrations to feed into the national registration
program, and implementation of stock enhancement activities, as relevant to each ZUP.

·    13,986 fishers in priority areas received a professional card, exceeding the target of 7,200 fishers.

In addition, the following results at output level were reported in the ICR. They were not included in the RF
and hence not have any targets:

·    976.76 hectares of LMMAs across 18 villages in the three ZUPs established and managed.

·    Two vessel and fisher registration campaigns conducted in the three ZUPs.


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SWIOFish2 Madagascar (P153370)



·    2,000 hectares of mangroves were restored.

·    4,000 m2 of coral reef were transplanted.

·    12,000 submerged artificial habitats were installed.

Outcomes:

·    The share of targeted community members with rating “Satisfied” or above on project interventions was
71 percent in 2023, exceeding the target of 25 percent. The ICR notes that this result also reflects satisfaction
from value addition activities

Rationale: The project was able to implement fisheries management plans and distribute professional cards
to fishers. However. there was not sufficient details regarding the implementation of the fisheries
management plans. Also, while 71 percent of community members were satisfied with the project activities, it
is not clear if the objective was achieved since the outcome indicator was not appropriate for measuring the
achievement of the objective. Also, the outcome indicator target of 25 percent of community members being
satisfied with project interventions was not sufficiently ambitious. Therefore, the achievement of this objective
is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
To increase access by targeted fishers to alternative livelihood activities.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change stated that project inputs/activities such as constructing
and installing infrastructure in three ZUPs, adopting local community electrification plans, providing fishing
equipment, training school children in rice-fish integrated farming, and community saving groups being
mobilized were to result in several outputs. These outputs were to include expanded livelihood skills of
fishers, enhanced availability of local financial sources to fishers, and increased access to infrastructure and
services for value addition and alternative livelihoods. These outputs were to result in the outcome of
increased access by targeted fishers to alternative livelihood activities.

The theory of change had few logical gaps. The livelihoods PDO-level Indicator did not measure the outcome,
but rather an intermediate result (access to electricity) contributing to livelihood access.

Outputs:

      The project financed the construction and installation of 171 infrastructure units (62 fish centers, 17 ice
       rooms, 10 cold rooms/units, a landing ramp, 73 wells, and 8 fish smokehouse) in the three ZUPs.
       However, these assets had not been legally transferred to the communities by project closure.


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 19
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               SWIOFish2 Madagascar (P153370)



                                   Therefore, the original target of 320 infrastructures and the revised target of 170 infrastructures being
                                   constructed and installed was not achieved.
                                  20 local community electrification plans were adopted for target communities, achieving the target of
                                   20 plans.

                            In addition, the following results at output level were reported in the ICR but not included in the RF and hence
                            did not have any targets:

                                  Value addition and alternative fishing equipment (e.g. fish product valorization kits and non-destructive
                                   fishing equipment) provided to 769 trained community members, including 555 females. Also, the
                                   fishers participated in alternative (non-destructive) fishing practices and fish value addition training (on
                                   fish valorization techniques, seaweed farming, crab farming etc.).
                                  Secondary school children in 87 rural secondary schools were trained in rice-fish integrated farming.
                                   According to the ICR (para. 34) an alternative livelihoods program for affected fishers was not
                                   launched due to planning delays. According to the Bank team (July 17, 2024) no data on the number
                                   of children trained was available.
                                  352 community savings groups were mobilized in fishing communities within eight ZUP districts with a
                                   total active membership of 13,193 members. US$731,612 was mobilized in financing which helped
                                   community members to purchase fishing equipment, furniture, solar panels, conduct agricultural
                                   activities and other livelihood inputs.

                            Outcomes:

                                  38 additional villages in priority areas were able to access electricity for postharvest and value-
                                   addition activities, exceeding the target of 20 villages.
                                  2,587 fishers participated in alternative fishing practices and livelihoods activities in the priority areas,
                                   lower than the target of 3,500 fishers.

                            Rationale: The project was able increase fishers’ access to participating in alternative fishing practices and
                            livelihoods activities though it was below the target. Also, the project was able to deliver a number of outputs.
                            However, since those outputs lacked targets, it is not clear to what extent the delivery of these outputs was
                            successful. Overall, the achievement under this objective was Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of all the objectives was Modest as discussed above. Therefore, the overall efficacy rating
                            is Modest.



                                                                                                                                  Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SWIOFish2 Madagascar (P153370)




  Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
  Modest                                                     Low achievement


5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency:

The PAD (p. 81) conducted a cost benefit analysis. The costs were the total project costs (US$84.15 million)
and there were two categories of benefits attributed to improved governance: a) benefits from a recovery of
co‐managed coastal fisheries in priority areas through improved regulatory, strategic planning, information and
capacity building systems at local level; and b) increased rate of return and gross value added (GVA) from
distant tuna vessels through the strengthening of statistics and the authority in charge of the quality and safety
of food products. An additional third category of benefits was attributed to private sector activities: i) improved
incomes for traditional and artisanal fishers; ii) increased value added to products along value chains; iii)
benefits of improved or new infrastructure; and iv) benefits from improved ecosystem services. Regional
activities were also to generate increased economic returns for Madagascar and costs savings for the region.

A scenario for the baseline ‘without project’ and for the ‘with project” was developed for all project activities.
Conservative assumptions at all stages led to an estimated Internal Rate of Return (IRR) after five years of 11.0
percent, which was slightly higher than prevailing discount rates (between 6 percent and 7 percent). It is
questionable to what extent the benefits as stated above were sufficiently quantifiable such as benefits from a
recovery of co‐managed coastal fisheries in priority areas through improved regulatory, strategic planning,
information and capacity building systems at local level.

The ICR did not conduct a traditional economic analysis due to the lack of data and quantifiable benefits to
beneficiaries.

Operational efficiency:

According to the ICR (para. 44) the project experienced several delays. For example, as a result of the dismissal
of the PIU in December 2015, delays in the preparation of environmental and social safeguard instruments due
to the long procurement process and low-quality drafts, and extended discussions within the World Bank on the
allocation of regional IDA resources and given the one-country focus of the project, project preparation took 23
months. Also, project implementation experienced several delays due to: i) the PIU missing key staff; ii) frequent
staff changes and insufficient experience in World Bank procurement procedures as well as the MRHP steering
committee’s participation in procurement; iii) lengthy financial procedures; iv) delays in construction activities
due to the country’s complex land transfer procedures and insufficient collaboration between the relevant
government entities; v) lengthy mobilization process of experienced Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs)
to support local activities due to the government’s resistance.

Overall, the project’s efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


                                                                                                       Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SWIOFish2 Madagascar (P153370)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objective was High. The project partially achieved all its objectives, resulting in an overall
Modest Efficacy rating. Efficiency was Modest. The overall outcome rating is, therefore, Moderately
Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment: Government commitment was initially weak due to changes in ministers,
changing priorities of successive ministries and ministers, and the government’s reluctance to invest in local
communities to strengthen their organizing and co-managing capacity. There is a risk that political instability
might continue to result in a lack of political commitment to move the fisheries reform process forward.

Financing: While the project was able to establish government systems that are critical for the long-term
management of fisheries sector in the country, the continued function of these systems will require additional
external financing. According to the ICR (para. 74) while the recent and future fisheries partnership
agreements between the European Union and Madagascar are expected to generate additional financing to
support MCS activities, the availability of funds will depend on successful negotiations and follow-through by
the government to allocate these resources accordingly. Therefore, there is still a risk that the negotiations
will not succeed, and uncertainty remains as to the level of resources that the government will allocate.

Technical: According to the ICR (para. 74) during project implementation, LMMAs were mostly transferred
to the communities and the government assigned LMMA monitoring responsibilities to the local NGOs.
However, the continuous engagement of the NGOs with communities to build capacity will be based on
financing being available. Therefore, there is a risk of a lack of financing for the NGO’s continued
engagement.




                                                                                                      Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SWIOFish2 Madagascar (P153370)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR (para. 49) the project was built on lessons learned from the Southwest Indian
  Ocean Fisheries Governance and Shared Growth Project 1. These lessons included: i) the need for an
  extended time horizon, flexibility, and continuous support to foster social change; ii) the importance of
  livelihood activities to mobilize stakeholders around the sustainability agenda; iii) the importance of
  broad-based consultative processes to build consensus; and iv) the role regional fisheries entities can
  play in addressing concerns. The project addressed these lessons learned by allowing for a six-year
  project timeframe, finance cash transfers for alternative livelihoods, support local and regional activities.

  According to the PAD (para. 73) the World Bank team identified relevant risks to project implementation
  with the political and governance risks as well as stakeholder risk being rated High due to the country’s
  political instability and stakeholders potentially being resistant to change. Several risks were rated
  Substantial including: i) sector strategies and policies as achievement of the PDO was dependent on
  changes needed to fisheries’ policies, strategies, institutions, legal frameworks; ii) technical design due to
  the complexity of a regional project and multiregional interventions and difficulty in developing viable and
  functional production and value‐chain models and alternative livelihoods at different levels; and iii)
  institutional capacity due to the governance and capacities in the regions being inadequate. According to
  the ICR (para. 50) the World Bank implemented several mitigation measures such as promoting
  decentralized sector administration that was less affected by political instability, technical support to the
  government, engagement with local experienced NGOs, providing fiduciary training, and implementing a
  compensation mechanism for resistant communities. However, the mitigation measures were not
  sufficient, resulting in lengthy administrative procedures within the government and complex land
  transfers procedures, and weak procurement capacity resulting in implementation delays. Also, the World
  Bank team did not identify the risk of frequent minister and staff turnover within the PIU, and lengthy
  process to mobilize an experienced NGO due to government resistance.

  The World Bank took 23 months to prepare the project due to the dismissal of the PIU following the
  change of MRHP minister and a six-month suspension of activities until a new PIU was established. Also,
  the project experienced delays in the preparation of environmental and social instruments as a result of a
  long procurement process and capacity issues. Furthermore, the World Bank had lengthy internal
  discussions about the allocation of regional IDA resources given that the project focused on one country.
  The project was not ready for implementation when it became effective due to a lack of budgeted action
  plans for Ultra Priority Zones (ZUP) Fisheries Management Plans, a lack of analysis of actions needed to
  improve fishing methods, reduce postharvest losses, strengthen local capacities, and improve local
  administrative and fishing infrastructure.

  The Results Framework had several shortcomings regarding the selection of PDO indicators and some
  logical gaps in the Theory of Change (see section 9a for more details).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory



                                                                                                      Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SWIOFish2 Madagascar (P153370)




b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (para. 72) the World Bank team consisted of experts with the appropriate capacity to
 support project implementation. Some team members were based in the country, allowing for continuous
 collaboration with the government. The World Bank team conducted a total of 18 supervision missions to
 Madagascar and eight to the IOC. Aide memoires discussed progress, implementation issues, fiduciary
 and safeguards compliance as well as detailed action plans. However, the aide memoires could have
 benefited from more in-depth analysis of project results compared to targets. While Implementation Status
 Reports (ISRs) were candid and identified implementation bottlenecks, they did not always result in follow
 up actions by the World Bank team and the government.

 Due to the lack of readiness when the project implementation started, the project experienced
 implementation delays.

 The World Bank team restructured the project twice. In May 2020, the project was restructured to extend
 the loan closing date. In December 2022, more than two years after the Mid-Term Review and just nine
 months before the project closed, the project was restructured to expand the project’s geographic scope to
 two additional regions to increase disbursement rates and impact despite consistently weak
 implementation capacity. The restructuring took place late in project implementation as a result of lengthy
 discussions between the World Bank and the government due to a change in the ministry. However, the
 two restructurings did not sufficiently revise the project’s Results Framework to allow for an adequate
 measuring of project achievements.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s objective was clearly specified. According to the ICR (para. 62), the M&E design and
 arrangements were well-embedded institutionally. The Regional Integration Unit (RIU) and the PIU were
 responsible for the project’s M&E activities, and data submitted to them by executing entities informed
 semi-annual, mid-term, and completion reports.

 However, the Results Framework had several shortcomings. First, the theory of change and some of the
 links between how key activities and outputs were to lead to the intended outcomes were not logical. For
 example, there was no direct link between PDO indicator 1 (“compliance rate of SWIO countries with Indian
 Ocean Tuna Commission resolutions”) and measuring the improvement in the management of selected
 fisheries at the regional level. Second, PDO indicator 3 (“share of targeted community members with rating
 “Satisfied” or above on project interventions”) lacked objectivity to appropriately measure the achievement
 of the first aspect of the objective. Also, the target of 25 percent was not sufficiently ambitious. Third, PDO

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SWIOFish2 Madagascar (P153370)



 indicator 4 (“additional villages in priority areas accessing electricity for postharvest and value-addition
 activities”) was not appropriate to measure an “increase to alternative livelihood activities” since it
 measured an “increase in accessing electricity.” And fourth, the project included some key outputs that
 were not included in the Results Framework and lacked targets.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (para. 63) M&E data collection faced challenges since some stakeholders were
  reluctant to provide data to the PIU due to inter-personal differences. Also, M&E reporting was input-
  oriented without sufficient analysis. Therefore, when the project closed, there was a lack of data to
  measure the actual achievement of project outcomes. Furthermore, the project conducted a satisfaction
  survey in May 2022. However, the survey was not repeated when the project closed due to a lengthy
  procurement process that was not finished on time to allow for another survey to be conducted.

  In December 2022, the World Bank team only made minor changes to the project’s Results Framework
  by changing the phrasing of one intermediate outcome indicator and reducing the targets of two
  intermediate outcome indicators.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (para. 63) stated that within the IOC, the RIU collected and analyzed data in a
  methodologically sound and timely manner. Also, the RIU and PIU used M&E data to develop progress
  reports and submit them to the World Bank team, which used these reports to identify implementation
  challenges. However, the ICR (para. 64) stated that the government did not use M&E data consistently
  to inform budget planning resulting in continued implementation delays as work plans and budgets did
  not always prioritize delayed activities.

  Given the shortcomings in M&E design, implementation and utilization, the overall M&E quality is rated
  as Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the World Bank’s safeguard policies Environmental
   Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11), and
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The Government developed an Environmental and Social
   Management Framework (ESMF) and a Process Framework (PF). Environmental Social Management
   Plans (ESMPs), Resource Access Restriction Action Plans (RARAPs), and Livelihoods Restoration Plans
   (LRPs) were prepared during project implementation. According to the ICR (para. 66) the project prepared
   ESMPs for infrastructure construction. Safeguard compliance had several shortcomings. When the project

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SWIOFish2 Madagascar (P153370)



  closed, it was not clear if the ESMPs were properly implemented since construction works had not been
  finished, and the closing mission in September 2023 did not include any field visits. Also, three RARAPs
  and LRPs were prepared but were not implemented, as required, by the time the project closed.
  Furthermore, despite several written reminders, the government did not comply with the project's
  Environmental and Social (E&S) Safeguard requirements before starting the distribution of project-financed
  snorkeling kits. As a result, during the closing mission in September 2022, the World Bank and the
  government agreed on measures to manage E&S risks of project-funded investments after closing with the
  PIU submitting E&S performance reports. However, these reports were never submitted to the World Bank.

  When the project closed, the overall safeguard rating was Moderately Satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management:

  According to the ICR (para. 69) the project’s interim unaudited financial reports and audits were mostly
  unqualified, of acceptable quality and submitted in a timely manner. Financial management on the regional
  level was performed appropriately with unqualified audits, and unaudited financial reports which were
  submitted in a timely manner. However, overall, the project did not comply with the World Bank’s financial
  management procedures. The 2023 interim external audit report found that the distribution of some of the
  safety equipment and the snorkeling kits potentially did not comply with the grant agreement. Also, the
  independent consulting engineer who was hired by the World Bank reported that construction activities
  continued in several sites after project closing. Throughout implementation disbursements were delayed
  due to implementation delays and lengthy withdrawal processes. Between May 2021 and March 2022 no
  withdrawals were made due to changes in the implementing agency and the PIU. Furthermore, the project
  experienced a high turnover of financial management staff. The World Bank addressed the lack of financial
  management procedures by providing training. However, lack of understanding of these procedures
  persisted throughout implementation.

  When the project closed, financial management was rated Moderately Satisfactory.

  Procurement:

  According to the ICR (para. 68), while the project complied with the World Bank’s procurement procedures,
  it also encountered procurement-related implementation issues. Procurement was delayed during most of
  implementation. Also, procurement was not sufficiently rigorous in terms of planning, following up and
  documenting due to lack of understanding of World Bank procedures, high staff turnover, and ineffective
  communication between the PIU and technical directorate during bid evaluations. Furthermore, the PIU
  provided work authorizations to infrastructure contractors even though it was clear that works would not be
  completed before project closing. The ICR stated that regional procurement activities were implemented
  by the IOC in a satisfactory manner despite some start-up delays.

  When the project closed, procurement was rated Moderately Satisfactory.




                                                                                                Page 17 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SWIOFish2 Madagascar (P153370)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                               Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                               Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance
                               Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 26) included several lessons learned which were adapted by IEG:

      Partnering with NGOs which are locally engaged and experienced can support local
       government entities especially with limited implementing capacity. In his project, three
       international but locally invested NGOs worked with local communities to improve their
       capacity to organize and co-manage. This allowed the regional branches of the fisheries
       department to focus on other activities that could not be delegated such as enforcement and
       registrations.
      Failure to ensure long-term political commitment may jeaopardize the achievement of
       sustainable outcomes. In this project, changing priorities of successive ministries and
       ministers negatively impacted project implementation since complex fisheries reform
       processes require continued government commitment over time. Performance-based
       financing instruments and sequencing of activities might help to secure long-term
       commitment by the government.
      Fisheries reform processes can be lengthy and require continuous World Bank
       support. A Multiphase Programmatic Approach could help achieve such continuous support.
       Also, requiring critical readiness conditions, such as the effectiveness of Monitoring, Control
       and Surveillance (MCS) or addressing the open access nature of the fisheries, and allowing
       sufficient time for countries to meet these conditions might positively impact the
       implementation and sustainability of the project.




                                                                                                   Page 18 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SWIOFish2 Madagascar (P153370)



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation. It was internally consistent
and candid, sufficiently critical of implementation issues, and included useful lessons learned. However, due to
the lack of data and quantifiable benefits to beneficiaries, the ICR did not include an economic analysis.

Overall, the ICR quality is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 19
