        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        ML-Reconstruction and Economic Recovery (P144442)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0023565

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P144442                                     ML-Reconstruction and Economic Recovery

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Mali                                        Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D3730,IDA-H9010                         01-Dec-2018                                         120,847,244.43

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Dec-2013                                 31-Dec-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            130,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                        121,304,805.94                                                0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero         Avjeet Singh                  Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p 5), the agreement for Additional Financing (AF, p.4), and the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 17), the Project Development Objective (PDO) of this
   Reconstruction and Economic Recovery Project in Mali was "to rehabilitate basic infrastructure and restore
   productive activities of communities impacted by the crisis in Mali."

   This review will assess the project performance against the following objectives:


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ML-Reconstruction and Economic Recovery (P144442)



         To rehabilitate basic infrastructure in communities impacted by the crisis in Mali.
         To restore productive activities of communities impacted by the crisis in Mali.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1: Rehabilitation of local public infrastructure (US$50.0 million at appraisal, 2017 restructuring reduced
   to US$44.2 million, AF added US$15.9 million for a revised total of US$60.1 million, US$60.1 million
   actual) This component was to finance the rehabilitation of local public infrastructure, equipment for
   schools, health centers, water and sanitation systems, transport and trade facilities, energy and other local
   public infrastructure along two tracks. Track 1 was to finance a priority investment program for rehabilitation
   of infrastructure and other related needs. Track 2 was to finance other infrastructure needs the target
   communities identified from a review of the existing Social, Economic, and Cultural Development Plans
   (PDESC). The target 149 participating local governments (PLGs) were in the North and in selected areas in
   the South. The 2017 restructuring reduced the allocation for this component, but the 2018 AF scaled up
   activities to rehabilitate 50 km of rural roads between Konna and Koana that would link the Port of Konna to
   the national road network and targeted villages of the Konna commune, and other local infrastructures to
   increase rapid recovery of the Central Mali economic zone. The scaling up of the other local infrastructure
   included the rehabilitation and equipping of schools, health centers, water and sanitation systems, transport
   and trade facilities, energy, and other infrastructure under the local governments. The added rehabilitation
   of the infrastructure in the Konna area was to fill investment gaps of originally planned works; upgrade
   the technical platforms of completed infrastructures; finance investments in the newly created region of
   Taoudeni in the far North of the country; and consolidate the socio-economic impacts expected from the
   rehabilitation of the Konna port. All works were to include labor-intensive methods.

   2: Support to productive investments (US$35.0 million at appraisal, 2017 restructuring increased this to
   US$40.2 million, AF added US$8.5 million for a revised total of US$48.7 million, US$48.7 million
   actual) This component was to finance investments in the Center and the North of Mali by
   restoring productive assets of targeted rural households, and re-launching productive activities of rural
   community-based organizations (CBOs). US$3 million was to be used to restore productive assets
   of targeted vulnerable households to access improved seed and animal feed, and to recapitalize livestock.
   US$32 million was to finance collective productive activities proposed by selected women-led community-
   based organizations (CBOs) whose members included women, youth, and vulnerable minorities. The 2018
   AF was to scale up productive investments in the Center and the North of Mali, increase fish production and
   commercialization of agricultural land, and infrastructure activities in Taoudeni and in the Konna area.

   3: Community engagement and local governance (US$10.0 million at appraisal, AF added US$4.0
   million for a revised total of US$14.0 million, US$14.0 million actual) This component was to finance
   activities to strengthen the engagement of participating local governments (PLGs) in the planning,
   prioritization, and oversight of development activities. Activities included: (i) communication and outreach;
   (ii) consultation process at the village level; (iii) a facilitated process to finalize priority infrastructure for
   rehabilitation; (iv) a transparent validation process to review PDSECs by the PLGs, civilian administration,

                                                                                                          Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ML-Reconstruction and Economic Recovery (P144442)



  civil society, and community groups especially of women and youth; (v) monitor the implementation
  of infrastructure rehabilitation and productive investments by PLGs and the target communities; (vi)
  dissemination of project progress to stakeholders; and (vii) a functional feedback and grievance redress
  mechanism. AF was to finance activities for the continued engagement of communities and the PLGs such
  as in community youth mobilization, ownership through sports and cultural activities, and digital literacy. AF
  was also to finance the newly created Office of Fisheries and Aquaculture Development in the Inner Delta
  (Office de Développement de la Pêche et de l’Aquaculture dans le Delta Intérieur du Niger - ODPADIN) and
  launch the operation of the fishing port of Konna after its rehabilitation.

  4: Project management, monitoring and evaluation (US$5.0 million at appraisal, 2017 restructuring
  increased this to US$5.6 million, AF added US$3.7 million for a revised total of US$9.3 million,
  US$9.3 million actual) This component was to finance project management, coordination of activities,
  communication, procurement, financial management, safeguards, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E).
  This component was to finance the recruitment of Delegated Contract Management (Maîtrise d’Ouvrage
  Déléguée or MODs) and the preparation of work plans and budgets. Three regional implementation units
  (regional antennas, RAs) were to coordinate project activities, working closely with government entities at
  regional, and local government (commune) levels. This component was to finance a Third-Party Monitoring
  (TPM) agency to monitor project implementation. AF was to scale up this component by enhancing M&E by
  using Geographic Positioning System (GPS), field tagging, satellite imagery, interactive beneficiary
  feedback, and surveys.

  5: Contingent emergency response (US$0.0 million at appraisal, US$0 million actual) This component
  was to finance emergency response activities in case of a crisis or emergency. Restructuring was to redirect
  unutilized funds to finance this component, and revise the PDO, accompanying indicators,
  and implementation arrangements, as needed. An Immediate Response Mechanism Operational Manual
  (IRM/OM) was to be prepared and approved by the World Bank, in compliance with OP 10.00, paragraph
  11. The manual was to name an Immediate Response Mechanism Coordinating Agency and expenditure
  management procedures. This component was not triggered.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total original project cost was US$100.0 million. Additional Financing (AF) provided
  US$30.0 million more. The revised total project cost was US$130.0 million. The grant disbursed US$121.3
  million. The balance was cancelled.

  Financing: The International Development Association (IDA) provided both the original and additional
  financing as a grant. As a fragile state, Mali met the requirements for retroactive financing of approximately
  US$4.5 million to allow for the financing of urgent needs. The African Development Bank (AFD) under the
  Sahel Alliance (AS) initiative co-financed the project with a grant of €2 million to operationalize the AS in the
  Konna economic area in Center Mali under component 1 (see above) as one of 12 AS flagship
  projects. The AS was a regional program jointly founded in July 2017 by the World Bank Group, the United
  Nations Development Program (UNDP), and the African Development Bank (ADB). France, Germany, and
  the European Union supported this alliance later joined by Italy, Spain, the United Kingdom (UK), and
  Luxembourg. The AS was to strengthen the peace, security, and development in the region by facilitating
  the speedy delivery of development projects, raising resources, including from the private sector;
  and measuring results.


                                                                                                      Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ML-Reconstruction and Economic Recovery (P144442)



   Borrower Contribution: None.

   Dates: The World Bank approved this project on December 6, 2013. The project became effective on March
   19, 2014. The Mid Term Review (MTR) was conducted on May 8, 2017. The project was to close originally
   on December 1, 2018. The project closing date was extended by almost four years and closed on
   December 31, 2022. The project went through five level 2 restructurings and one additional financing (AF).

         On October 3, 2017 to introduce changes to the results framework, revise target values of indicators
          based on actual achievements and integrate priorities agreed at MTR for the remainder of the
          project period. The restructuring clarified indicators and data collection methods. The restructuring
          acknowledged the protracted insecurity in targeted project areas. Activities were adjusted
          accordingly.
         On October 30, 2018, to provide US$30 million in AF to scale up activities, add the corresponding
          indicators in the results framework, and adjust target values of indicators, as needed. In
          addition, data collection methods were clarified. The closing date was extended by two years to
          close on December 1, 2020.
         On November 24, 2020, June 28, 2021, and March 21, 2022 to further adjust target values of
          indicators and extend the project closing date to June 30, 2021, to March 31, 2022, and June 30,
          2022, respectively.
         On June 24, 2022 to extend the closing date to December 31, 2022 due to Covid-19 and the
          ongoing sociopolitical crisis. This extension was retroactively processed in September 2022 after the
          government cleared arrears and IDA disbursements had resumed.

   Split Rating: No split rating of the outcome will be undertaken. The PDOs remained unchanged throughout
   implementation. AF provided additional resources to scale up the activities with commensurate adjustments
   in target values of indicators.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context: Mali is a low-income country recovering from a rebellion in the north, a violent extremist
insurgency, and a military coup in the capital, Bamako. The conflict was due to: (i) growing competition over
resources, (ii) weak institutions, (iii) underlying social tensions, including lack of citizens' trust in the ability of
the government to provide basic services and security, and (iv) slow decentralization process. Official
Development Assistance (ODA) was reduced. Economic activities in the North contracted. The
displacement of its residents increased. In mid-2013, a presidential election was held. The United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) arrived for peacekeeping. Malian
security forces were redeployed to Northern towns. Significant social and economic infrastructure,
and livelihoods were destroyed. Violence continued because violent extremist groups (VEG)
remained. Inter communal tensions persisted. This project was to target 149 participating local
governments (PLGs). A local government or commune was the third administrative level in Mali.
This project was to rehabilitate public infrastructure and restore productive activities in crisis affected areas.




                                                                                                             Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      ML-Reconstruction and Economic Recovery (P144442)



               Country Plans: The election in August 2013 of a new president and the arrival of MINUSMA
               peacekeeping forces with Malian security forces helped stabilize the region. The government began to
               redeploy civilian administration and restore services in the North, announced a national dialogue to address
               the causes of the Tuareg rebellion in the North, and created a new Ministry of National Reconciliation and
               Development of the Northern Regions. The PDOs were relevant to two key areas of the government’s
               Strategic Framework for Economic Recovery and Sustainable Development in the Center and North of Mali
               (2016-2018). First, in infrastructure development, and second, in rural development and food security. The
               government also supported the development of a multi-sector, multi-donor approach for rapid results in the
               vulnerable area of Konna (Center Mali) as one of three priorities of the Sahel Alliance's operation in the
               country.

               World Bank Country Partnership Framework: The objectives were aligned with the World Bank’s
               Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY16 to FY19, and extended to FY20. The objectives also
               supported the World Bank’s Africa Strategy for 2019-2023 to build a resilient and sustainable Africa. The
               PDOs directly contributed to three of the six priorities of this strategy: (i) creating jobs and transforming
               economies; (ii) making institutions efficient and accountable; and (iii) addressing the drivers of fragility,
               conflict, and violence. The PDOs remained relevant to the focus areas of the extended CPF: (i) improved
               governance; (ii) creating sustainable economic opportunities for agriculture; and improving basic services
               through sustainable infrastructure and connectivity. The project was to contribute to the following objectives:
               1.1 Improve public resource management at the national and local levels; 1.2 Foster citizen’s engagement;
               2.1 Improve productive capacity and market integration of farmers and pastoralists; and 2.3 Improve
               infrastructure and connectivity to all.

               World Bank Experience in the Sector and in the Country: This project complemented two other World
               Bank operations: (i) Emergency Education project (P123503), approved on May 22, 2013 and (ii)
               Emergency Safety Nets project (P127328), approved on April 30, 2013. The project was to build on the
               experience gained from the Rural Communities Support Project (Projet d’appui aux communautés rurales,
               or PACR) and was to utilize a similar implementation approach of relying on NGOs (or MODs).

               Overall, the relevance of the project's objectives is rated High. This was an emergency operation designed
               to address the destroyed social and economic infrastructure, and livelihoods amid the growing insecurity in
               the country.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To rehabilitate basic infrastructure in communities impacted by the crisis in Mali.


                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ML-Reconstruction and Economic Recovery (P144442)




Rationale
Theory of Change: No TOC was prepared at appraisal, but the results framework provided the causal link
between the inputs, outputs, and expected outcomes of the project. A TOC was prepared at closing.

Inputs were to consist of financing priority investments to rehabilitate basic infrastructure such as
roads, water supply, local energy facilities, drainage and solid waste management, schools, and health
centers. Inputs were to include procuring equipment for schools, health centers, water and sanitation
systems, transport, and trade facilities, AF was to scale up the project, rehabilitate rural roads between Konna
and Koana to link the Port of Konna to the national road network and target villages of the Konna
commune. All works were to include labor-intensive methods.

Outputs were to include the roads, water supply system, schools, health centers, and provision of
equipment. Outputs were also to include temporary jobs created after using labor-intensive works. Target
values of outputs were reduced in the 2017 restructuring to acknowledge implementation delays (see Section
5, Administrative and Operational Efficiency below). The 2018 AF increased targets of outputs to include
the rehabilitation of an additional 50 km of rural roads between Konna and Koana that would link the Port of
Konna to the national road network and targeted villages of the Konna commune, and other
local infrastructures (schools as the local preschool – rehabilitation and/or construction and equipment of a
sport complex – youth center – market, etc.) to increase rapid recovery of this key economic zone of
Central Mali. The added investments were to be in the newly created administrative region of Taoudeni in the
far North of the country and assist in the rehabilitation of the Konna Port.

Outcomes were to be the functional use of the completed infrastructure measured by the number of direct
beneficiaries, the share of local rehabilitated infrastructure that remained functional one year after completion
and the direct beneficiaries of this local infrastructure. AF was to link the Port of Konna to the national road
network and targeted villages of the Konna commune and consolidate the expected socio-economic impacts
from the rehabilitation of the Konna port. These were to contribute to the expected long- term outcomes of
increased resilience to shocks, protection of human capital, and contribute to economic recovery (see Section
9, M&E Design below).

The TOC did not include critical assumptions, which, if realized were to have increased the likelihood of
achieving the objective. All achievements noted below were assessed against revised targets, where
applicable.

OUTPUTS:

The following outputs were delivered:

      28 transport infrastructures were rehabilitated, exceeding the target of 17.
      75 percent of grievance redress mechanisms were addressed, exceeding the target of 70 percent.
      124 local governments benefited from rehabilitated infrastructure. The original target was 100 and the
       revised target was 123.
      771 street lighting globes were in place and in use. The original target was 413 and the revised target
       was 671.
      280 health facilities were rehabilitated and functional. The original target was 215. The revised target
       was 280.



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ML-Reconstruction and Economic Recovery (P144442)




      100 percent of participating local governments revised their PDESC. The original target was 80
       percent. The revised target was 100.
      640 water supply systems were rehabilitated and functional, exceeding the original target of 350 but
       falling short of the revised target of 718.
      106 km of roads were rehabilitated. This did not meet the original target of 137 km. but exceeded the
       revised target of 78 km.
      1,575 classrooms were rehabilitated and functional. This did not meet the original target of 2,500
       classrooms but almost achieved the revised target of 1,641 classrooms.

OUTCOMES:

      32,907 days of temporary jobs were created. This exceeded the original target of 30,896 days but
       not the revised target of 44,035 days.
      82 percent of the rehabilitated local public infrastructure remained functional after one year.
       The original target of 80 percent was exceeded The AF increased this target to 90 percent and this
       was almost achieved. Schools and health centers in the Mopti and Timbuktu regions were closed
       because of the violent extremist insurgency that targeted the educational system. Line ministries
       contributed to ensuring that the completed facilities remained staffed, equipped, and maintained.
      1,389,981 people benefitted from the rehabilitated local infrastructure. This exceeded the original
       target of 350,000 persons. This almost achieved the revised target of 1,420,291 persons at the 2017
       restructuring or the revised target of 1,429,347 persons at AF.
      1,445,468 direct beneficiaries exceeded the original target of 380,000 persons. The revised
       target of 1,516,535 persons was almost achieved. 51 percent of the actual beneficiaries were
       female. There was no original target at appraisal, but the 51 percent female target was added at
       restructuring. The project benefited from community outreach, capacity building for municipalities, and
       support to community development committees. Some subprojects were cancelled because
       of increasing insecurity. The Konna-Koana road activity was transferred to the Mali Rural Mobility and
       Connectivity Project (P160505).

Given that most of the targets were almost achieved or exceeded, the efficacy of the project to achieve this
objective is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To restore productive activities of communities impacted by the crisis in Mali.

Rationale
Theory of Change: No TOC was prepared at appraisal. The results framework provided a reasonable causal
link between the inputs, outputs, and expected outcomes of the project. A TOC was prepared at closing. The
objective of the component is to jump-start economic activities to increase incomes and reduce food
insecurity at the household and collective levels by helping adversely affected (i) rural households to restore

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ML-Reconstruction and Economic Recovery (P144442)



their productive assets, and (ii) rural community-based organizations (CBOs) to re-launch productive
activities.

Inputs: Financing was to be provided to target vulnerable households in the zones affected by the crisis to
restore their productive assets and enhance domestic food production capacity. The inputs were to be
provided under two categories. First, financing of activities that would immediately restore household
productive assets of targeted households by complementing the activities financed in the North under the
West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program (WAAPP). Inputs were to finance the purchase of seeds and
animal feed for distribution to farmers/herders Kits were to be distributed to recapitalize livestock.
Second, financing productive investments proposed by two community-based organizations (CBOs - CARE
Mali and SOS Sahel and/or any other entity to be selected by the PCU). These CBOs may propose the
financing of infrastructure, livestock and fishery activities, or income generating artisanal activities. Inputs
were also to include the financing of capacity building activities to improve the productivity and profitability of
those investments to be delivered by public agencies, private service providers, or other non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). The 2018 AF scaled up productive investments in the Center and the North of
Mali and targeted agriculture development activities in Taoudeni. The AF also targeted agricultural land and
infrastructure activities for fish production and commercialization in the Konna area.

Outputs were to be categorized also into two: first, increased access to improved seed and animal feed
to restore productive assets at the household level, and the value/number of recapitalized livestock in the
target area. The second category was the rehabilitated or constructed infrastructure for agricultural
production, such as small irrigation perimeters, storage facilities, and small processing units; the restocking,
provision of animal feed, vaccination, marketing facilities; and the construction of small shops and facilities
for handicrafts.

Outcomes were to be measured by the number of direct project beneficiaries and the share of restored
productive assets of the target communities that remain in use one year after project closing. The
AF scaled up activities and was to increase productive investments in the Center and the North of Mali to
redress the impacts of the crisis on local communities and households. These beneficiaries were to represent
reduction of food insecurity of the beneficiary rural households, and the number CBOs who re-launched
their productive activities.

As in the first objective, the TOC did not include critical assumptions.

OUTPUTS:

      Enhanced domestic food production capacity.
           o 721 tons/year of seeds procured and distributed. This output exceeded both the original target
               of 350 tons/year and the revised target of 625 tons/year.
             o 4,603 tons/year of animal feed procured and distributed. This output also exceeded both the
               original target of 4230 tons/year and the revised target of 4,231 tons/year.
      Relaunched agriculture, livestock, and fisheries activities
           o 624 micro-projects in productive assets were financed (household level). This output almost
               achieved both the original target of 680 micro projects and the revised target of 636 micro
               projects.
             o 372 micro projects for women's organizations were financed (collective level). This
               output exceeded the original target of 250 and almost met the revised target of 393.


                                                                                                      Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ML-Reconstruction and Economic Recovery (P144442)



            o 2,058 hectares farmland were rehabilitated. This output almost achieved both the original
              target of 2,150 hectares and the revised target of 2,564 hectares.
      Restored income generating activities.
           o 50,539 beneficiaries received emergency assistance. This output almost achieved the original
              target of 55,000 but met the revised target of 50,539.
            o 2.82 spatial multi-sectoral approach was in place. This exceeded the original target of 2.

OUTCOMES:

      86 percent of productive assets for economic activities were rehabilitated. These remained in use one
       year after completion and exceeded the original target of 70 percent, but not the increased target of 95
       percent at AF. The lower rate achieved was due to the rising insecurity in the target areas. Frequent
       cattle thefts negatively affected husbandry activities.
      55,487 people benefitted from the use of rehabilitated productive assets. This exceeded the original
       target of 30,000 persons and the revised target of 40,856 persons introduced at the 2017
       restructuring. The AF target of 87,187 persons was not achieved. The emergency distribution of the
       means of production (seeds, fertilizers, and animal feed) was completed. The longer-term investments
       in productive activities in agriculture and livestock, trade, and small industries were reported to have
       followed but with no economic values reported.
      1,445,468 direct beneficiaries exceeded the original target of 380,000 persons. The target was revised
       to 1,516,535 people and was almost achieved. 51 percent of the actual beneficiaries were
       female. There was no original target at appraisal for the share of female beneficiaries, but a target was
       added at restructuring and was achieved. The revised target was only almost achieved
       because increasing insecurity in the target region dropped planned AF-financed activities (irrigation
       schemes in the Gao and Timbuktu regions). In addition, beneficiaries were double counted in some
       areas where AF-funded activities were implemented following the integrated,
       multisector implementation approach. The partial achievement of this outcome indicator resulted from
       two factors: (i) overestimation of the target for the Konna economic zone, where 46,129 beneficiaries
       were forecast given the regional nature of the fishing port, against 11,525 direct beneficiaries
       estimated after implementation of this subproject; and (ii) reduced beneficiaries in the Gao and
       Timbuktu regions because activities were scaled down or cancelled (irrigation schemes in Goundam,
       Timbuktu, Tobon and Ouattagouna were cancelled; the Sindiwara village irrigation scheme was
       suspended) due to insecurity and the decision to focus on the Ansongo economic area.
      The following achievements were reported for the rehabilitation of the Konna fishing port but without
       supporting data. Fishing and related activities in the Konna fishing port were reported (no data) with
       women noted to have played an essential role (no data) in the trade, smoking, and drying of the fish
       traded (no data). Women’s committees supervised these activities. Other management committees
       managed the sports complex, the youth center, and early childhood center. The market garden has
       led to the availability of vegetables year-round in the target area (no data). 486 young people were
       offered temporary jobs using labor-intensive work (no target).

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this second objective is rated Substantial with moderate
shortcomings. Productive activities were claimed to have been restored in some target communities. Some
outputs exceeded or almost achieved targets. However, outcome targets were not achieved because of the
overestimation of target levels and the rising insecurity in the target regions that prevented the
implementation of some planned activities.


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                ML-Reconstruction and Economic Recovery (P144442)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy of the project is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings. Most of the target
                            indicators under the first objective were exceeded or achieved. Revised indicators and targets with the AF led
                            to some indicators being almost achieved. In the case of the second objective, there were moderate
                            shortcomings in the achievement of the targets of some outcome indicators. This was mainly due to the
                            overestimation of some target levels and the rising insecurity in the target regions that prevented the
                            implementation of some planned activities.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency. Mali was a fragile state that met the requirement for urgent assistance under OP10.00,
   paragraph 11 – Project in Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints – with Condensed
   Procedures. The emergency nature of the project did not require an economic analysis since investments
   were not specified at that time. Benefits from similar projects in the region served as a proxy for expected project
   benefits. An economic analysis was to be conducted in the first year of implementation. However, priority
   investments were reported to have been selected without the benefit of the planned economic analysis.
   One stand-alone income generating activity conducted a cash flow analysis. (ICR, Annex 4). At restructuring
   and at AF, no economic analysis of the project investments was conducted. At closing, some economic analysis
   was conducted using qualitative benefits but not all were counted because of lack of data. The ICR Annex 4
   provided a list of tangible and intangible benefits and used a meta-analysis of benefits. This method is a form of
   observational study where no variables are manipulated but use data from past research. Economic benefits for
   investment categories were estimated. For example, classrooms with an investment of US$3.15 million in
   construction costs resulted in benefits that ranged from US$10.1 million to US$21.1 million. No economic rate of
   return or internal rate of return was calculated.

   Administrative and Operational Efficiency: The project faced start-up delays due to capacity and an insecure
   environment. Significant delays in establishing the implementation arrangements were noted. The Project
   Coordination Unit (PCU) took nine months to recruit staff and was established by October 2014. The five project
   management contractors (Maîtrise d’Ouvrage Déléguée or MOD) were hired in April 2015. The 2017 MTR
   acknowledged the slow procurement, contracting delays, delayed launch of activities, lack of operational
   capacities, and rising insecurity in the project areas. Restructuring re-allocated resources among
   components. AF increased the scope of the project, extended the project closing date, and updated the results

                                                                                                                            Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ML-Reconstruction and Economic Recovery (P144442)



framework to reflect increased outcomes from the additional activities without changing the PDOs. Successive
political changes, sociopolitical crisis, deteriorating security and arrears triggered Operational Policy 7.30. This
suspended disbursements in the country, further delaying implementation. Project closing date was extended by
almost four years.

Overall, project efficiency is rated Modest. Even though the ICR team assessed that the project delivered a mix
of least-cost investments and activities, in the absence of an EIRR, as well as implementation delays due to the
deterioration of security, procurement, and contracting delays, COVID-19 pandemic that further restricted
implementation, the overall efficiency is rated as Modest. The fragile, conflict, and violent condition in the
country hampered data collection.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objective is rated High. The emergency nature of the project was relevant to the country's
plans and contributed to the World Bank's objectives under its extended partnership framework for the country.
The efficacy of the project is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings because of partial achievement of
some outcome targets. Efficiency is rated Modest. As a result, the overall outcome of the project is rated
Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose high risks to the development outcomes:



                                                                                                      Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ML-Reconstruction and Economic Recovery (P144442)



     Political risk. There is continuing threat of increase in the violence in the country’s political
        environment. Development outcomes from the completed investments in basic services and restored
        productive activities are at risk.
       Continuing insecurity. In last year of implementation, incidents of violence increased from 1,913
        fatalities in 2021 to 4,476 in 2022. 92 percent of these occurred in Northern and Central Mali. Fighting
        between armed groups and conventional forces, against civilians, and infighting in armed groups
        increased. Massive displacement resulted. Government staff retreated to regional capitals or
        Southern Mali. Agricultural production and trade were disrupted.
       Financial. Political instability affects the functioning, operation, and maintenance of the completed
        public infrastructure. The continuing conflict remains a threat to the commitment made by PLGs to
        maintain the infrastructure services and support the restored productive activities of households and
        community organizations. The continuing availability of any budgetary provisions would be in
        question.
       Ownership of government or other stakeholders. The project introduced participatory consultative
        processes for constituents and supportive policies to rely on the PDSECs as an effective means to
        own investment prioritization. These processes may not have been sufficiently institutionalized to
        continue after the project closed.
       Governance. Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI) and the Ibrahim Index of African Governance
        were used to measure trust in the government. Mali’s overall score for “voice and accountability” (not
        just those of the target areas because the project was unable to conduct beneficiary surveys due to
        insecurity) fell from 42.4 in 2014 to 27.5 in 2021. The country’s overall Ibrahim Index of African
        Governance score for “rights and inclusion” also fell from 54.7 in 2014 to 49.2 in 2019. These scores
        reflected the volatility in the country during periods of political, security, and pandemic shocks.
        However, these indicators reflect the perception of the entire population of Mali and not necessarily
        the areas targeted by the project per se.
       Economic. War in Ukraine and its impact on trade and availability of agricultural products threaten
        the world, not just Mali. This risk remains until the war is over.
       Exposure to natural hazards. Climate change has wreaked havoc around the planet and threatens
        all corners with various climate variable events and risks from natural hazards. This risk is anticipated
        to increase over time. Preparation and risk reduction measures could mitigate this risk but attention to
        these measures would compete with the other risks noted above.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank team processed the project under OP10.00, paragraph 11 – Projects in Situations of Urgent
  Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints – with Condensed Procedures. The design met the country’s
  national development priorities for the recovery of targeted regions and the World Bank’s partnership
  strategy for the country. The Bank team designed the project with a simple and flexible design in
  response to the urgent assistance needed by an FCV country. The Bank team took advantage of the
  relative stability provided by the presence of international security evident in the peaceful presidential
  election in 2013. The Bank team adopted a flexible design in case of resurgent insecurity by
  including third-party implementation, such as MODs or national and international NGOs. This design also


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ML-Reconstruction and Economic Recovery (P144442)



  included decentralized implementation offices in central and northern Mali. The objectives were simply
  stated and realistic. Interventions were focused on achieving the objectives. The Bank team adopted
  lessons from similar undertakings to inform design. These included (i) aiming for rapid results in the
  short-term while laying the foundations for improved governance in the medium-term; (ii) conducting
  participatory needs assessments to map priorities of vulnerable groups in project areas (returnees,
  female-headed households, youth); (iii) undertaking transparent infrastructure prioritization and
  beneficiary participation in identifying project investments to foster ownership and attention to operations
  and maintenance (O&M) needs to facilitate sustainability; and (iv) promoting dialogue to
  sensitize stakeholders in polarized communities.

  Overall, the quality of Bank team performance at entry is rated as Substantial. The Bank team designed
  the project as an emergency and met the requirements of OP 10.00.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team was based in the field. This allowed for timely support between the 18 supervision missions
 conducted over the almost eight-year implementation period. Deteriorating conflict, health, political, and
 economic conditions adversely affected project implementation. The substantial implementation delays
 brought about by procurement and contracting and staffing issues were addressed during the MTR. The
 Bank team provided training to improve environmental, social, and fiduciary compliance of the
 implementing agency. COVID-19 slowed the implementation. The 2021-2022 political crisis occurred. The
 Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) adopted sanctions that affected Mali's ability to
 repay its loans. This led to six months of arrears. Withdrawals under all IDA financing were subsequently
 suspended using the OP 7.30. The Bank team addressed these implementation hurdles by using MODs,
 CBOs, and third-party monitors, by restructuring to realign resources to suitable activities in the face of
 rising insecurity and providing AF to take advantage of a multi-donor integrated project in the Konna area
 as part of the Sahel Alliance's integrated territorial approach in Mali.

 Overall, Bank supervision is rated Satisfactory. The Bank team was working in an FCV context and
 proactively addressed implementation delays with the flexible implementation design, responsive
 restructurings, and AF to take advantage of other donor partners programs in the same areas. The team
 also addressed shortcomings in indicators of the results framework. Increasing insecurity in the target
 region limited the ability to collect data.

 Overall Bank performance is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ML-Reconstruction and Economic Recovery (P144442)



  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design was adequately reflected in causal relations between the input, outputs, and expected
 outcome indicators in the results framework since there was no theory of change offered at appraisal. The
 PDOs were simply stated and considered what was achievable within the FCV context. The indicators were
 specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and time bound. Targets were available for some but not all
 indicators. The results framework did not include intermediate results indicators to capture some key
 achievements (no indicators for transport infrastructure and street lighting). There was also double counting
 of beneficiaries and absence of consensus on the methods of calculation of some indicators, including
 rehabilitated infrastructure and productive assets functioning one year post rehabilitation. The ICR
 acknowledged that the M&E design did not include women beneficiaries. This was addressed at
 implementation. MODs were to collect baseline data.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E was implemented by the Project Coordination Unit of the Ministry of Economy and Finance. The
  PCU consolidated data provided by the Regional Antennas (RA) and the different implementing agencies
  (MODs and CBOs). The continued insecurity in North and Central Mali affected access to target areas by
  state officials and project staff. The 2017 restructuring addressed shortcomings in indicators such as
  validating the outcome values and achievements, revising some indicators, adding new indicators, and
  adjusting end target values for most indicators. In 2017, after the MTR, a third-party monitor (TPM) in the
  Gao region was piloted, using an engineering firm and an NGO. The engineering firm conducted a
  physical inspection to confirm the effective use of completed investments. The NGO monitored the
  effectiveness of implementation on future investments. In addition, phone surveys were conducted
  using the Iterative Beneficiary Monitoring (IBM) approach to collect reactive feedback from beneficiaries.
  The M&E system also leveraged Information and Communications Technology (ICT) to overcome the
  rising insecurity. From 2018, data was collected and reported through GEMS, complemented by satellite
  imagery. The TPM monitored project processes and described impacts and results based on inputs from
  communities and other stakeholders. More than 2,100 activities were geo-referenced. The 2018
  AF, scaled up M&E arrangements (TPM, IBM and GEMS) with two TPM agents contracted to monitor
  execution throughout the project area, covering the regions of Mopti, Segou, Gao, Timbuktu, Kidal, and
  Menaka.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data informed the MTR and project progress. Adjustments made to indicators of the results
  framework in the subsequent restructurings used M&E data. Even the most insecure areas reported
  M&E data. Monthly meetings were held at regional and national levels to review the data collected and
  to take any corrective measures. Communities and PLGs monitored the use of project resources at the
  grassroots level, monitoring the timeliness and quality of infrastructure rehabilitation, and the use of



                                                                                                   Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ML-Reconstruction and Economic Recovery (P144442)



  project inputs by associations and individual beneficiaries to conduct productive activities. Periodic local
  meetings, notice boards, and vernacular radio were used at the community level.

  Overall, the quality of M&E is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings. The M&E system assessed
  progress and the achievement of the objectives, although handicapped by the lack of some indicators.
  The M&E system initially had shortcomings, noted at MTR but was corrected subsequently. The ICR
  notes that the M&E data was widely disseminated, and accessible to stakeholders.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards: The project was processed under OP10.00 Project in Situations of Urgent
   Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints – with Condensed Procedures following Mali's call for urgent
   assistance. The project had an environmental safeguards category of "B." Direct project impacts were not
   expected to be significant or irreversible. The project triggered a partial Environmental Assessment (OP/BP
   4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36), and Pest Management (OP 4.09). The
   Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF) and a Pest Management Plan
   (PMP) were prepared prior to appraisal. The safeguards category was unchanged with the AF and the
   Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), PMP, and RPF remained valid under the AF.
   Safeguard documents were approved and published at the country level and on the Bank's website. The
   central and regional offices of the implementing agency, with the MODs, the TPM agents, and local state
   administration used qualified specialists to supervise safeguard compliance based on the Bank's framework
   and national regulations. The report noted overall compliance with safeguards (ICR, paragraph 45).

   Social Safeguards: The project complied with all safeguard policies per the ICR. The project triggered
   Physical/Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). A Resettlement
   Planning Framework (RPF) was prepared and disclosed. The Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was
   prepared for the 50 km of rural roads between Konna and Koana in Center Mali implemented under the AF.
   Training project staff and stakeholders from the community on gender-based violence (GBV) mitigated
   risks. An NGO was contracted to prevent and respond to GBV cases. Shortcomings were noted in the
   management of social and environmental safeguards. Firms managing the construction sites and inspection
   offices lacked experts. MOD agencies recruited safeguards specialists only after the AF, with limited
   skills. The poor quality of safeguards reporting was noted. A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was
   developed. Complaints management committees were established in each target locality supported
   by NGOs. An information and awareness-raising campaign was conducted among target communities. 122
   complaints were lodged of which 119 were resolved. Unresolved complaints involved the collapse of the
   Kaneye bridge and the Sindiwara Village Irrigation Perimeter. The MOD agency in charge of the Kaneye
   bridge subproject contracted a firm to rebuild the infrastructure at its own expense. The works could not be
   completed by the time the project closed because contractors had to wait for the February/March 2023 flood
   waters to recede. The Sindiwara works was 88 percent complete by August 2021, but continuing insecurity
   and poor performance led to its cancellation. Farmers lost up to two production seasons. The affected
   beneficiaries were compensated in cash and in kind (cereal). Compensation was completed in early 2023.

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ML-Reconstruction and Economic Recovery (P144442)



   In their October 10, 2023 email. the Bank task team confirmed that the project fully complied with all
   safeguards. The team added that official hand of the reconstructed Kaneye bridge was waiting for minor
   works to be completed. However, the contractor had to leave when an Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb
   (AQIM) installed a blockade in the Timbuktu region that led to the deterioration of security and an upsurge in
   conflict fatalities. The client was monitoring the security situation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: Bank specialists based in Mali monitored fiduciary compliance. Some
   weaknesses were identified and addressed during implementation related to the financial reconciliation of
   the MOD. Overall, based on supervision missions, review of the financial statements, and annual audit
   reports, financial management was reported to have been satisfactory despite some irregularities (ICR,
   paragraph 46). The project complied with reporting and audit covenants.

   Procurement: Assessments determined that procurement performance was moderately satisfactory. The
   implementing agency used the Bank’s online procurement planning and tracking tools (STEP) for
   procurement transactions. Delays were noted in contract execution, incomplete archiving of
   documentation, and in the Kaneye bridge subproject management. As part of AF preparation, the
   implementing agency prepared its Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD) which
   described how fit-for-purpose procurement activities supported project operations to achieve the PDOs and
   deliver Value for Money (VfM). Procurement of works, goods, and services were noted to have contributed
   to boost job opportunities in the project areas.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   High


12. Lessons

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ML-Reconstruction and Economic Recovery (P144442)




The ICR offered four lessons from the operations (ICR, paragraphs 51-54) slightly modified below:

        In multi-sector local development projects, an integrated intervention may generate
         larger impacts. This project used an area development approach to generate a broad
         impact for beneficiaries. Communities prepared local development plans to identify priority
         infrastructure investments and productive activities to be restored. This mix of investments in
         public (infrastructure) and private goods (income-generating activities) in a post-conflict
         context facilitated an integrated response to the different development needs of the
         beneficiaries. Engaging local governments in subproject implementation contributed to
         building capacity and restoring local institutions.
        Increasing insecurity in fragile countries may benefit from using third-party agents to
         monitor implementation. In this project, flexibility meant quickly adapting to challenging
         circumstances. This adaptive project management style facilitated just-in-time decisions to
         seize opportunities. This was the case in adding Konna and Taoudeni target areas.
         Contracting MOD agencies as third parties to implement selected activities contributed to the
         flexible design. The MODs were experienced with infrastructure works in fragile areas.
         However, using MODs also led to operational constraints as procuring their services was
         delayed, and they were not present in some of the targeted areas. A candid assessment of
         the operational capacity of third parties and adding needed staff may mitigate these
         challenges.
        Hiring local NGOs and construction firms as third-party monitoring agents may
         address rising insecurity. In this project, NGOs and local enterprises were hired as third-
         party monitoring agents even as risks and longer completion times were noted. Closer
         supervision, active monitoring of the security situation, sound community engagement, and
         enhanced M&E mechanisms were added. Well-established local NGOs and firms facilitated
         the implementation of sub-projects. The NGOs had knowledge of the local context. They
         systematically mapped vulnerable groups as part of the participatory prioritization exercise.
         This effort increased inclusive targeting. In addition, procurement was adapted to local
         conditions. Contract sizes were adjusted. Firms were encouraged to join larger, national
         firms.
        Prioritizing investments from local development plans raises public awareness of
         processes and acceptance of projects in target areas. The PIU used PDESC as an entry
         point into project areas in this project. Each of the 149 municipalities prepared or revised
         these plans over 4 to 6 months. Inclusive consultations involved elected officials, state
         technical services, local development committees, and civil society, including vulnerable
         groups (Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs), migrants, and pastoralists). They considered
         the priority needs of all groups in the target communities, particularly those of women and
         youth. This consultative process informed the public about the project – especially through
         organized public debates – and legitimized the project to beneficiaries.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No


                                                                                                    Page 17 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ML-Reconstruction and Economic Recovery (P144442)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The report followed the guidelines and provided a clear and candid picture of the project, providing the
consequences of the interventions and the limitations brought by increasing insecurity. The evidence supporting
the consequence of the interventions was obtained from the M&E system in place. Evidence was adequately
analyzed. Salient points were summarized and linked to findings. The report was internally consistent and
linked various parts of the report. The results reported were mutually reinforcing. Annexes provided supporting
evidence to support the achievements reported. For example, the efficiency analysis in Annex 4 noted the
various proxy indicators that could have been monitored to reinforce project outcomes. The Annex provided a
qualitative assessment of benefits using a meta-analysis method. A box highlighting the rationale and results of
the additional funds for the Konna fishing port was helpful. Lessons were based on project experience. Overall,
the quality of the report is rated High.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                                  Page 18 of 18
