     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK Sindh Irrigated Agri Productivity (P145813)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0024144

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P145813                                      PK Sindh Irrigated Agri Productivity

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Pakistan                                     Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-56040                                    31-Dec-2021                                        184,400,510.10

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Mar-2015                                  30-Sep-2023

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             187,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              186,989,713.11                                              0.00

 Actual                                          184,400,510.10                                              0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Maher Amin            Avjeet Singh                  Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Waly




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Sindh Irrigated Agriculture Productivity Enhancement
   Project (SIAPEP) as articulated in the Financing Agreement (FA, page 5) was identical to the one stated in
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 11) and aimed to:

   "Improve irrigation water management at tertiary and field levels in Sindh."



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK Sindh Irrigated Agri Productivity (P145813)



   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on two objectives:

   1. To improve irrigation water management at the tertiary level in Sindh.

   2. To improve irrigation water management at the field level in Sindh.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following four components:

   1. Community Water Infrastructure Improvement (appraisal cost: US$120.20 million, actual cost:
   US$174.83 million). This component included three sub-components:

   1.1. This aimed to assist the Government of Sindh efforts to improve and rehabilitate tertiary
   distribution level water courses. Activities under this sub-component included farmer mobilization,
   establishment of Water Course Associations (WCAs) and their registration, survey and design, and
   construction. About 5,500 water courses were to be improved through the provision of lining (corresponding
   to 30% of water course length). The farmers would co-finance 24% of the costs through provision of skilled
   and unskilled labor.

   1.2. This aimed to increase the resilience of the rural poor to floods through the strengthening of
   flood mitigation measures, including the establishment of shelters. It financed the provision of
   approximately 380 permanent flood shelters of three types in the seven most vulnerable districts in the
   irrigated areas of Sindh to increase their resilience to water related disasters such as flooding and heavy
   rains. Land for construction would be largely public or community owned land located in non-cultivable
   areas, preferably on higher ground. Once constructed, these shelters would be transferred to the Provincial
   Disaster Management Authority (PDMA) and their affiliates at the district level for operations and
   maintenance; some would be used for community activities.

   1.3. This sub-component financed the provision of supervision and implementation assistance
   consultants (PSIAC) for project design and construction supervision for activities under component
   1. PSIAC would assist the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in construction supervision, engineering and
   designs, procurement, financial management, quality control, and the timely completion of strategic studies
   and pilot projects.

   2. Promotion and Installation of High Efficiency Irrigation Systems (appraisal cost: US$65.90 million,
   actual cost: US$21.72 million). This component included two sub-components:

   2.1. This aimed to support the installation of HEIS. This included drippers and bubblers for growing high
   value crops on irrigated and irrigable land; provide technical assistance packages to farmers on operations



                                                                                                  Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PK Sindh Irrigated Agri Productivity (P145813)



  and maintenance of HEIS; and provide additional training and assistance to farmers in the use of HEIS by
  specialists and consultants.

  2.2. This aimed to support the establishment of HEIS demonstration sites and distribution of kitchen
  garden HEIS kits. This consisted of drip irrigation equipment for female-headed households and landless
  farmers. It would include 48 demonstration sites of 2 ha (5 acres), two in each district, and the distribution of
  approximately 10,000 kitchen garden HEIS kits consisting of drip irrigation equipment for a plot of 10m x
  10m, including a small water storage of 160 liter with a conveyance pipe for the daily provision of water. The
  100 kitchen garden HEIS kits for demonstration purposes would be provided free of charge; individual
  households requesting a HEIS kit would need to contribute 10% of the investment cost of US$100.

  3. Improved Agriculture Practices (appraisal cost: US$24.40 million, actual cost: US$14.42
  million). This component included three sub-components:

  3.1. This would provide laser guided land leveling equipment and associated deep ripping equipment, and
  will facilitate training in the use of deep ripping equipment.

  3.2. This would facilitate training to farmers to improve crop production and irrigation agronomy practices.

  3.3. This would provide Technical Assistance and Training (TAT) Consultants to provide training to field
  teams, public sector staff and farmers in HEIS installation, operation and repair, crop diversification, crop
  production under HEIS, soil measurement and fertilizer application, and to support piloting of activities
  under sub-component 2.2 and training of trainers for operators in laser land leveling and deep ripping under
  sub-component 3.1.

  4. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Strategic Studies (appraisal cost: US$31.70
  million, actual cost: US$24.83 million). This component included two sub-components:

  4.1. This would provide support for project monitoring and evaluation and carrying out impact assessments.

  4.2. This would provide support for the Project Implementation Unit and Project district offices and field
  offices, and for carrying out strategic and feasibility studies for pilot activities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost was estimated at US$242.20 million. The actual cost according to the
  ICR Data Sheet (page 2) was US$184.40 million. The difference was due to the lack of any borrower
  counterpart funding.

  Financing. The project was financed through an IDA Credit worth US$187.00 million. The actual amount
  disbursed was US$184.40 million (ICR Data Sheet, page 2).

  Borrower Contribution. The Borrower was expected to contribute US$55.20 million. None of this amount
  materialized according to the ICR Data Sheet. In a further communication, the project team explained that
  the ICR Data sheet was system-generated with no option to edit/amend the numbers. The team explained
  that the borrower contributed PKR million 6,264.40 (equivalent to US$38.17 million) as reported by GoS,
  and farmer’s contribution was estimated at PKR million 7,764.88 (equivalent to US$51.40 million).


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK Sindh Irrigated Agri Productivity (P145813)



   Dates. The project was approved on March 20, 2015 and became effective five months later on August 21,
   2015. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on April 29, 2019 which was five months later than the
   MTR date specified in the PAD on November 30, 2018. The project closed on September 30, 2023 which
   was 21 months beyond the original closing date on December 31, 2021.

   The project was restructured twice, both Level 2 restructuring, as follows:

   1. On November 11, 2021, when the amount disbursed was US$129.29 million, in order to extend the loan
   closing date by twelve months from December 31, 2021 to December 31, 2022. This extension was needed
   to accommodate delays in project implementation resulting from the impacts of COVID-19 and associated
   restrictions and lockdowns, the locust plague of 2020 which forced implementing agencies to divert
   resources towards pest control, and severe floods in August-September 2022 that required the client to
   focus on emergency response and relief activities (ICR, paragraph 20).

   2. On November 10, 2022, when the amount disbursed was US$175.22 million, in order to extend the loan
   closing date by nine months from December 31, 2022 to September 30, 2023. This extension was needed
   to ensure the full utilization of IDA credit and completion of slower-moving project activities, including
   support to HEIS and repair of irrigation infrastructure damaged by the 2022 floods (ICR, paragraph 20).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. Sindh is Pakistan’s second most populous province with a population of 43 million
people. Agriculture is the primary livelihood source for over 60% of the population, which resides in rural
areas. While Sindh includes over 5.8 million hectares of irrigated land and more than 800,000 farms, the
average farm size is small, productivity low, and yields lag other countries with similar agro-climatic
conditions. Irrigated agriculture in Sindh suffers from poor management of water resources and inefficient
water use. Key concerns include climate change, low surface water delivery efficiency, water distribution
inequities, insufficient storage capacity and control structures, wasteful on-farm water use, inadequate
drainage infrastructure resulting in water shortages, waterlogging, salinity, and environmental degradation,
poor operation and maintenance (O&M), low-cost recovery, and a restrictive investment climate. Further,
water theft and water scarcity affect tail-end farmers and lining watercourses is one way of assuring
equitable water availability. This project aimed to improve irrigation water management at tertiary and field
levels in Sindh which was expected to improve the management of water resources and increase the
efficiency of water use.

Previous Bank experience. The World Bank has extensive experience in irrigation projects and strong
knowledge of irrigation issues. This project benefited from the Bank experience in irrigation and drainage
sector operations in countries such as Mexico, Turkey and Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, and the Kyrgyz
Republic. Also, the experience and lessons from Pakistan's Sindh On-Farm Water Management Project
were relevant to this project. Overall, the Bank was in a strong position to design and oversee the
implementation of this project-given the rich experience and in-house irrigation expertise.

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with World Bank Group’s Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS, FY2015-FY2019) for Pakistan. Specifically, the project would contribute to the

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 21
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       PK Sindh Irrigated Agri Productivity (P145813)



result areas of private sector development and inclusion. The project would directly contribute to the CPS
Outcome 2.2: Increased productivity in farms and selected irrigation schemes, by supporting water use
efficiency and encouraging technology that was expected to promote crop diversification and increased
productivity. The project would also contribute to Outcome 3.3: Increased resilience to disasters in targeted
areas, through supporting efficient management of the country’s water resources and contributing to
adaptation to future climate change scenarios. The project was expected to contribute to the Bank’s twin
goals of reducing poverty and promoting shared prosperity by directly benefiting around two million people
(out of which 37% were below the poverty line).

At completion, the CPS mentioned above was still used as a new CPS was not yet approved. The
2020 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) acknowledged that promoting equity and inclusion, through
increased productivity and environmental sustainability in agriculture, was a crucial pathway to sustained
growth. Finally, the PDO was in line with the Pakistan Country Climate and Development Report
(November 2022) which underscored the significance of resilience to floods and droughts, and agricultural
recovery from the 2022 floods.

Consistency with Country Strategies and priorities. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with Pakistan’s
Vision 2025 and the Sindh Development Plan, where the important role of water in various sectors of the
economy and its effective management in the future economic growth of the country and the province was
emphasized.

At project completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the Sindh Agriculture Policy (2018-2023) which
reaffirmed the commitment to raise agricultural growth; reduce poverty, address food and nutritional
insecurity, sustainably manage natural resources; and promote climate smart and resilient agriculture. The
policy also recognized the pivotal role of irrigation and agriculture in achieving these objectives. The PDO
was also in line with the National Water Policy (2018) which aimed to achieve by 2023: increased water use
efficiency, reduce conveyance loss, increase surface water storage, replace, and refurbish water storage
and irrigation infrastructure, as well as improve water accounting and mechanisms for data
collection. Finally, the PDO was in line with the goals of the National
Climate Change Policy (2021), which sought to enhance institutional capacity, coordination, resilient
infrastructure, and early warning and response systems for effective disaster risk management, to achieve
sustainable and equitable growth.

Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. The statement of objectives was clear, focused, and
pitched at an adequate level of ambition relative to the targets set and the Bank's experience. However, the
objective was narrow and did not reflect the overall activities covered by the project, most notable was
increased agriculture productivity. At completion, the PDO continued to be relevant and in line with the
Government strategies and priorities. While a new CPS was not yet approved at the time of completion, the
PDO was in line with the Pakistan Country Climate and Development Report (November 2022) which
underscored the significance of resilience to floods and droughts, and agricultural recovery from the 2022
floods.

Therefore, the Relevance of Objectives is rated Substantial.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial

                                                                                                      Page 5 of 21
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  PK Sindh Irrigated Agri Productivity (P145813)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To improve irrigation water management at tertiary level in Sindh.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective the project, the project supported the following
               activities:

               Support community water infrastructure improvement which included community water course
               improvement through the provision of lining for tertiary level water distribution system and establishing water
               course associations to manage tertiary lines. Lining was expected to cover an average of 30% of tertiary
               canal length. The lining of water courses decreases conveyance losses and prevents seepage to
               groundwater aquifers; helps to deliver water faster to the farmers’ fields, so they can take advantage of the
               full duration of an irrigation cycle; and ensures equity in water distribution. In addition, the project would
               support flood mitigation to the poor through financing the construction of 380 flood shelters of three types in
               the most vulnerable seven districts of the Sindh. The project would also fund flood shelters which were critical
               infra-structure for the protection of the landless and the very poor, particularly women, children, elderly and
               disabled along with their belongings. The project would also support the establishment of water course
               associations to improve water course management.

               The expected outputs of the above-mentioned activities included: flood shelters established, improved water
               course infrastructure in place, and water course associations established.

               The expected intermediate outcome was: improved water course management.

               All of the above would contribute to achieving three PDO outcomes: increased WC conveyance efficiency,
               improved irrigation water management at tertiary level, and increased crop intensity.

               Anticipated long-term outcomes included: increased community resilience, increased crop productivity and
               diversification, and improved farmers' incomes and livelihoods.

               Overall, the activities reflected in the ToC were directly connected to the outputs, intermediate outcomes and
               outcomes in plausible causal chains. Even though, the ToC in the ICR lacked the critical assumptions that
               underpinned the achievement of the PDO, the project team reported the following potential critical
               assumptions in follow-up by IEG: Farmers support WC lining and infrastructure improvements and
               participation in WCAs; Farmers are willing and able to invest in HEIS and other agricultural technologies;
               WCAs continue to be operational beyond the end of the project period, undertaking necessary operations and
               maintenance as needed; and Farmers adopt and sustain improved agricultural practices promoted during
               trainings and as part of farmer field schools (FFSs). Also, the connection between the construction of flood
               shelters and the stated objective was not clear. Finally, the project design could have benefited from the



                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PK Sindh Irrigated Agri Productivity (P145813)



inclusion of an agribusiness/marketing activities, which would have improved the financial sustainability of
project investments.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      6,060 improved watercourses were fully functional (including a functioning Watercourse Association)
         exceeding the target of 5,500.
      6,060 operational Water Course Associations (WCAs) were created and/or strengthened exceeding
         the target of 5,500. WCAs were expected to focus on operating, maintaining, and improving water
         canals and ancillary structures; improving water supply from surface and sub-soil water sources;
         managing water allocation within the command area and establishing schedules of water delivery;
         locating, constructing, maintaining, and improving field drains; and organizing labor for general or
         emergency repairs. In a further communication, the project team explained that while there was no
         written documentation for the operational status of the WCAs, the project management unit reported
         to the team that all 6,060 units were carrying out the basic functions of regular meetings, watercourse
         maintenance and repair, and water distribution decisions.
        218,160 farmers (of which 10.6% were females which was below the target of 25%) were benefitting
         from improved watercourses exceeding the target of 198,000 farmers.
        842,340 hectares (ha) were improved in the total command area exceeding the target of 550,000 ha.
        847,186 ha were provided with irrigation and drainage services exceeding the target of 564,000 ha.
        Number of people with access to shelters (none) compared to target of 106,650.
        The construction of 380 flood shelters did not materialize. According to the ICR (paragraph 50): "the
         (project) design did not account for the community buy-in required to secure public or community-
         owned non-cultivable land to construct these shelters, nor for the interdepartmental coordination
         required to construct and maintain them." In a further communication, the project team explained that
         "the funds that were earmarked for the construction of the 380 flood shelters were repurposed to
         provide flood emergency assistance goods in response to the 2022 floods. SIAPEP provided 27,100
         tents and 2,200,000 mosquito nets to be distributed during the flood relief operations."

Outcomes

      By project completion, 5,993 water courses had an increase in water course conveyance efficiency of
       at least 15% exceeding the target of 5,500 water courses (PDO outcome indicator #1). The ICR
       (Annex 1) noted that this indicator was estimated on the basis of a 10% sample of water courses
       supported under the project. Of the 6,060 water courses that were lined, 5,993 demonstrated an
       increase in water course conveyance efficiency of 18% on average, while 67 water courses showed
       an increase in water course conveyance efficiency of less than 15%. Direct project beneficiaries
       reached 2,176,822 exceeding the target of 2,000,000 (PDO outcome indicator #2), which represented
       the reach of the project’s direct benefits to the local population through activities across all
       components (irrigation and drainage services, laser leveling, deep ripping and farmer field schools).
      Cropping intensity in command areas covered by water courses (lined under the project) increased by
       27% from a baseline of 121.7% to 148.7% exceeding the target of a 20% increase (PDO outcome
       indicator #4).

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project contributed to improving water management at the tertiary
level through funding lining of water canals and supporting the establishment of water canal associations.
Lining water canals improved conveyance efficiency through preventing seepage to groundwater aquifers. It

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PK Sindh Irrigated Agri Productivity (P145813)



is also plausible to assume, given the improved conveyance, that water was delivered faster to the farmers’
fields and better equity in water distribution was achieved. As noted above, the project exceeded its targets
for the three PDO outcome indicators pertaining to this objective. Also, most targets for intermediate results
indicators were exceeded. However, construction of flood shelters did not materialize. Also, there was no
evidence in the ICR to demonstrate that establishing water course associations helped management of
tertiary level in Sindh. In a further communication, the project team explained that WCAs contributed to
improved management "by coordinating water distribution to its members, organizing cleaning and
maintenance labors, and ensuring minimization of any water loss in the management of this resource."

Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial with moderate
shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve irrigation water management at the field level in Sindh.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective the project, the project supported the following
activities:

1. Support the promotion and installation of High Efficiency Irrigation Systems (HEISs). The project would
support small and medium-sized HEISs for 2 to 10 ha (5 acres to 25 acres) farms. HEIS systems were
expected to improve irrigation efficiency and use less water. To better demonstrate the technology the project
would support 48 HEIS demonstration sites, and finance the associated training of department staff and
farmers including women in the installation, operation and maintenance of the HEIS. The project would also
support 100 kitchen garden HEIS kits for demonstration purposes for poor families to produce vegetables.

2. Support improved agriculture practices in order to increase the benefits of enhanced water availability from
water course lining and high efficiency irrigation systems. The project would support farmers’ training in
improved crop production techniques and in acquiring relevant technologies for use on their farms. The
project would also finance laser land leveling and deep ripping. Laser land leveling was expected to
contribute to about 30% savings of irrigation water, uniform seed germination, uniform uptake of fertilizers,
and thereby increased yields. Deep ripping breaks soil hard pans and when followed by laser land leveling it
helps water conservation and increase in crop yields. The project would also support improved agriculture
production technology including establishing 1,500 farmers field schools (FFS) for about 10 crops on about
30% of the project renovated water courses with the members of the water course associations.

The expected outputs of the above-mentioned activities included: HEIS established in target areas for high
value crops, kitchen gardens with HEIS established for female farmers, farmer plots received laser land
levelling and deep ripping, and farmers trained on improved irrigated agricultural practices.



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PK Sindh Irrigated Agri Productivity (P145813)



The expected intermediate outcomes included: improved field conditions for more efficient irrigation, and
improved irrigated agriculture production practices adopted in WC areas.

All of the above would contribute to achieving two PDO outcomes: improved irrigation water management at
the field level, and increased crop intensity.

Anticipated long-term outcomes included: increased community resilience, increased crop productivity and
diversification, and improved farmers' incomes and livelihoods.

Overall, the activities reflected in the ToC were directly connected to the outputs, intermediate outcomes and
outcomes in plausible causal chains. The critical assumptions were the same as provided by the team under
Objective 1.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      772 females were provided with HEIS which was below the target of 2,600.
      4,934 ha were established under HEIS which was significantly below the target of 14,000 ha. This
         shortcoming was attributed to three main factors: (i) the level of investment required from the
         beneficiary (40%) for the relatively costly installation of the equipment, and (ii) power issues related to
         operating a HEIS, whereby the cost of electricity and/or fuel and the prevalence of power shortages
         dissuaded many potential users, and (iii) the need for specialized technical knowledge and inputs to
         run a HEIS irrigated farm (ICR, paragraph 31).
        15,100 households were provided with HEIS in kitchen gardens exceeding the target of 10,000 ha.
        452,143 ha received laser levelling, benefitting 55,361 farmers, significantly exceeding the target of
         160,256 ha. The project provided 1,807 laser leveling units.
        49,920 ha received deep ripping which was below the target of 106,837 ha. The ICR (paragraph 33)
         explained that farmers' demand for deep ripping units was limited as farmers could not attribute the
         benefits with the high initial cost given the availability of cheaper traditional alternatives.
        51,484 farmers (of which 18.7% were females) were trained on improved agronomic practices and
         technologies exceeding the target of 37,500 farmers. This included 2,000 farmer field schools (FFSs)
         focused on irrigation water management, 772 HEIS trainings trained growers and operators on
         cleaning, fertigation, water meter readings, valve control and record keeping.
        70,858 ha were under improved agronomic practices exceeding the target of 52,500 ha.

Outcomes

      By project completion, cropping intensity in command areas covered by water courses (lined under
       the project) increased by 27% from a baseline of 121.7% to 148.7% exceeding the target of a 20%
       increase (PDO outcome indicator #4). However, in areas covered by HEIS the project achieved an
       11% increase in cropping intensity compared to the end target of 50% (PDO outcome indicator #5).
       Nonetheless, this shortfall did not impact the project overall efficacy significantly since HEIS activities
       covered only 0.6% of the overall command area covered under the project.
      The project also provided 230,626 water users (of which 15% were females) with new/improved
       irrigation and drainage services exceeding the target of 210,000, but female water users fell short of
       the 25% target (PDO outcome indicator #3).



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                PK Sindh Irrigated Agri Productivity (P145813)



                            Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project aimed to improve irrigation water management at the field
                            levels in Sindh through installing High Efficiency Irrigation Systems (HEISs) the provision of kitchen gardens,
                            the expansion of laser land levelling, and the extension of deep ripping. The project exceeded its outcome
                            targets with regards to water users provided with new/improved irrigation and drainage services, but fell short
                            of its target for the increase in crop intensity for areas under HEIS. The project met or exceeded several
                            intermediate outcome targets. Most notable was the number of farmers trained on improved agronomic
                            practices and the area under laser land levelling. However, the project fell significantly short of achieving its
                            target for areas under HEIS, and areas that received deep ripping.

                            Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings. The project contributed to improving water
                            management at the tertiary as lining water canals improved conveyance efficiency through preventing
                            seepage to groundwater aquifers. It also helped to deliver water faster to the farmers’ fields and ensured
                            equity in water distribution. The project exceeded its targets for the three PDO outcome indicators pertaining
                            to this objective. However, construction of flood shelters did not materialize. Also, there was no evidence in
                            the ICR to demonstrate that establishing water course associations helped management of tertiary level in
                            Sindh. The project also contributed to improving water management at the field level through installing High
                            Efficiency Irrigation Systems (HEISs), the provision of kitchen gardens, the expansion of laser land levelling,
                            and the extension of deep ripping. The project exceeded one outcome target pertaining to this objectives and
                            fell short of the other (cropping intensity under HEIS areas). The project also fell significantly short of
                            achieving its target for the area under HEIS and the areas that received deep ripping.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

   Ex-ante

                               The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of the project for the base case was estimated at 37.7% with
                                a net present value (NPV) of US$268.10 million, under an opportunity cost of capital of 12%. The

                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 21
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         PK Sindh Irrigated Agri Productivity (P145813)



         economic benefits of project interventions included in the analysis were: (i) increased area under
         irrigation and cropping intensity; and (ii) increased crop yields.
        Financial analysis was carried out on the basis of crop budgets for 14 crops. The results showed that net
         farm incomes (i.e., after full O&M
         costs were deducted) increased considerably in all cases. However, the calculated farm incomes were
         not sufficient to recover investment costs for 2 ha and 4 ha HEIS farms with row crops in unimproved
         water courses.
        A financial cost-benefit analysis was carried out for the various HEIS models. The results showed that
         on-farm HEIS for orchards was financially viable with Financial Internal Rates of Return [FIRR] of above
         12%, except for the 2 ha and 4 ha farms in unimproved water courses.
        Sensitivity Analysis. The results of sensitivity analysis showed that the project’s economic viability was
         robust to adverse changes in project costs and benefits. The project was also robust to changes in
         incremental benefits and only becomes uneconomic if incremental benefits were
         reduced by 67%. Under the extreme situation of a 20% reduction in incremental benefits and a 20%
         increase in project costs, with a three-year
         delay in benefits, the project remained economically viable with an EIRR of 15.5%.
        The total estimated project cost per beneficiary household was US$1,284 and the average cost per water
         user provided with new/improved irrigation and drainage services was estimated at US$836.
        Overall, the PAD (Annex 6) included detailed EFA that provided a sound justification of the project
         investment at appraisal.

Ex-post

      The overall project economic rate of return (ERR) was estimated at 47.7% exceeding the EIRR of
         37.7% estimated at appraisal. This was based on the conservative assumption that 50% of farmers
         reached by the project realize on average 50% of the incremental benefits as estimated in the Impact
         Assessment Reports (ICR, paragraph 40).The analysis at completion largely followed the same
         methodology applied at appraisal to ensure consistency and comparability.
        Total project cost per beneficiary household was US$1,069 as compared to US$1,284 estimated at
         appraisal (83%), and the average
         cost per water user provided with new/improved irrigation and drainage services was US$576 as
         compared to US$836 estimated at appraisal (69%).
        The average cost per water course improved by the project was US$27,552, which was 38% above the
         average cost estimated at appraisal US$19,937. The ICR (paragraph 39) attributed this to the impact of
         inflation and the fact that more than half of the water courses were lined 50% compared to the appraisal
         target of 30%.
        Implementation efficiency. The project closed 21 months beyond its original closing date. The project
         experienced delays due to the impact of the COVID-19 and associated supply chain disruptions
         combined with a locust plague in 2020. Also, the massive floods in Sindh in 2022 caused extensive
         damage to project interventions, and required the Government to focus on emergency response and
         relief activities. The ICR (paragraph 20) noted that the irrigation infrastructure required repairs following
         the 2022 floods.
        Overall, the ICR (Annex 4) included a detailed EFA that justified the project investments.

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. The overall project economic rate of return (ERR) at completion was
estimated at 47.7% exceeding the EIRR of 37.7% estimated at appraisal. Also, the total project cost per
beneficiary household and the average cost per water user provided with new/improved irrigation were 83% and

                                                                                                         Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PK Sindh Irrigated Agri Productivity (P145813)



69% of their respective appraisal estimates. While the project experienced a significant delay of 21 months, this
was largely due to external factors beyond the project control as noted above. Therefore, Efficiency is rated
Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                 37.70
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              47.70
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial with moderate
shortcomings. The project contributed to improving water management at the tertiary water course as lining
water canals improved conveyance efficiency. The project also contributed to improving water management at
the field level by installing High Efficiency Irrigation Systems (HEISs), the provision of kitchen gardens, the
expansion of laser land levelling, and the extension of deep ripping. The project exceeded its targets for four out
of five PDO outcome indicators, but fell short of one. Also, the envisioned construction of flood shelters did not
materialize, and the targets for the area under HEIS and the area that received deep ripping were not
achieved. In addition, there was no evidence in the ICR to demonstrate that establishing water course
associations helped management of tertiary level courses. Efficiency was rated Substantial. The project
economic rate of return at completion was estimated at 47.7% exceeding the 37.7% estimated at appraisal.

Based on the assigned ratings for the three Outcome criteria, Outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory due to
moderate shortcomings pertaining to the operation's Efficacy.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following risks could potentially impact the Development Outcome:


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PK Sindh Irrigated Agri Productivity (P145813)



1. Institutional risk. The sustainability of Water course Associations (WCAs) and their ability to manage
O&M of Water courses (WCs) continues to be one of the main risks related to the WC improvement
outcomes. The WCAs remain the focal point for coordination between on-Farm Water Management field
teams and farmers, so the likelihood that they will cease to exist is low. The benefits of improved WCs are
highly valued by all farmers, therefore, their willingness to support WCA's O&M activities is likely to remain
high. However, for this to happen, WCA members need to remain actively engaged and water management
field teams keep these platforms active and relevant to farmers. That said, past experience in other regions
with similar interventions show mixed results with regard to the ability of WCAs to maintain WCs without
support from the government or external agencies.

2. Financial risk. The lack of financial support could result in farmers abandoning new practices or
technologies beyond the project period. Currently, a significant proportion the of the HEIS, laser land
leveling, and deep ripping is subsidized by the project, which could limit scale-up or further take-up of these
technologies beyond the project. Further, the implementation team comprising individual consultants
was dissolved at the time of project closure. While farmer investment in some interventions does provide
some reassurance on farmer responsibility to maintain technologies, loss of continuity and handholding
support could jeopardize the sustainability of the afore mentioned project activities.

The following risk is emphasized by IEG:

3. Environmental risk. The project areas continue to be prone to severe floods and potential negative
effects due to climate change. During implementation the project experienced severe floods in 2022 which
caused damage to some project funded infrastructure. The project design needs to reflect mitigation
measures to accommodate the impacts of climate change, specifically, irrigation infrastructure need to be
designed to withstand floods that could potentially impact the Sindh province in the future.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic Relevance and Approach. The project was strategically relevant and in line with the
          Government priorities. The PDO was also in line with the Bank strategy at appraisal (see Section
          3 for details). Increasing irrigation efficiency was vital to maximize the use of available water
          resources and increase agricultural production in Sindh province of Pakistan. The project
          reflected the importance of effective management in the future economic growth of the country
          and the province.
         Technical, Financial and Economic Aspects. While the project design reflected a focused and
          realistic objective, the targets and the scope of interventions were conservative and did not
          explicitly incorporate agriculture productivity enhancement. Design focused on irrigation water
          management, but lacked a broader focus on sustainable irrigated agriculture systems for a more
          holistic response to current and future sectoral challenges including groundwater management
          and soil salinity (ICR, paragraphs 49 & 68). Design reflected well structured components with
          activities that supported improving irrigation management combined with improved field-level
          agricultural practices for increased productivity. However, constructing flood shelters lacked
          deeper analysis of the requirements of their successful implementation. This included

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PK Sindh Irrigated Agri Productivity (P145813)



         the interdepartmental coordination required to construct and maintain shelters and securing
         community-owned non-cultivable land to construct these shelters. Also, the promotion of HEIS
         required deeper analysis of its suitability for implementation under the local environment. The
         economic and financial analysis in the PAD was detailed enough and provided adequate
         justification of the project investments.
        Poverty, Gender, and Social Development Aspects. The project was designed to target small
         farmers and poor communities, and project activities aimed to improve agricultural practices at the
         farm level. The project also promoted kitchen gardens KG which contributed to poverty reduction.
         The project was also expected to increase agricultural output and increase disposable income
         among beneficiaries. The deign featured activities that specifically targeted women including
         kitchen gardens and ensuring that women benefited from project promoted services such as
         HEIS, laser land leveling and deep ripping. However, the project overestimated the participation of
         women in project activities. Women participation in project activities was lower than expected,
         which according to the ICR (paragraph 55) was attributed to the conservative socio-cultural norms
         and a mismatch of household configurations used to estimate indicator targets.
        Environmental and Fiduciary aspects. The project design reflected adequate environmental
         and fiduciary aspects.
        Implementation Arrangements. While implementation arrangements were complicated
         involving several layers of government and spanning across 24 districts in the province, early
         mobilization of the PIU and adequate leadership and government commitment ensured effective
         implementation.
        Risk Assessment. The project’s overall risk rating at appraisal was Substantial. Identified risks
         related to: implementation capacity, governance, stakeholders, and design. Risk identification in
         the PAD was adequate and reflected mitigation measures. However, implementation of HEIS
         proved more challenging than anticipated and the risk related to the implementation of flood
         shelters was not anticipated at appraisal.
        M&E Arrangements. M&E arrangements featured systems, such as Geographic Information
         System (GIS), Management Information System (MIS), Information Communication and
         Technology (ICT) to monitor activities and verify data. Also a Grievance Redressal Mechanism
         (GRM) was developed to establish a social accountability system under the project. The results
         framework (RF) included adequate indicators to monitor project activities and assess achievement
         of outcomes. However, some indicators could have been better formulated, for example, the
         choice of cropping intensity as a measurement for improved irrigation management was not the
         best choice given that irrigation management could be improved without a change in cropping
         intensity in the case of orchards. Also, the mix of beneficiary types households, household
         members (total), farmers and females headed households, made beneficiary calculation
         inconsistent (ICR, paragraph 68).

Summary of Quality at Entry (QAE) Assessment. The project was strategically relevant and in line
with the Government priorities. While the project design reflected a focused and realistic objective, the
objective was narrow and did not reflect the wide set of activities supported by the project. Also, the
project design lacked a broader focus on sustainable irrigated agriculture systems for a more holistic
response to current and future sectoral challenges including groundwater management and soil salinity.
Women participation in project activities was overestimated against a conservative socio-cultural
environment. Implementation arrangements and fiduciary and environmental aspects were adequate.
However, the risk related to the challenges associated with flood shelters implementation was
overlooked, and the risk associated with the implementation of HEIS was underestimated. M&E


                                                                                                 Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK Sindh Irrigated Agri Productivity (P145813)



  arrangements were adequate, but there were some concerns with regards to the suitability of outcome
  indicators as noted above. Overall, QAE is rated Moderately Satisfactory due to moderate shortcomings
  pertaining to design, risk assessment and to a lesser extent M&E.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The project was implemented under challenging conditions due to the COVID-19 outbreak in early
          2020 followed by a locust plague in the same year and severe floods in 2022. The Bank conducted
          17 implementation support missions. Implementation benefited from the locally based task team as
          this allowed regular missions for technical and implementation support. Locally based fiduciary and
          safeguards specialists enabled close collaboration with the PIU.
         The project experienced four changes in Task Team Leadership during implementation.
          Despite effective handover and ensuring transfer of project knowledge during transitions, the four
          changes in TTL leadership was "less than ideal scenario, in the Pakistan portfolio (ICR, paragraph
          71)."
         The project benefited from the close collaboration between the Social GP and Pakistan Gender
          team on women’s interventions and ways to overcome limited female participation. However, the
          ICR (paragraph 72) noted that "collaboration or cross-support in project design between the
          Agriculture and Water GPs was limited."
         Although a detailed restructuring of the project was prepared with the counterpart in 2021, including
          changes in the RF, components, and costs, it was not formalized because the revision process took
          too long. Eventually two restructurings were approved and both reflected only the extension of the
          closing date (see Section 2e).
         The project team attempted to address the limited uptake of HEIS by farmers, however, all
          suggested solutions failed to overcome the farmers’ reluctance to HEIS. The project achieved
          limited results against its envisioned HEIS target (4,934 ha were established under HEIS which was
          significantly below the target of 14,000 ha).

 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. The Bank supervision faced challenging
 implementation events including the outbreak of COVID-19, a locust plague, and the 2022 floods. The
 Bank team provided support to address implementation challenges, but the two planned restructurings only
 reflected an extension of the Loan closing dates. Despite the Bank's attempts to address HEIS uptake
 issues, low farmer uptake of this technology persisted. Overall, the Quality of Bank Supervision is rated
 Moderately Satisfactory due to moderate shortcomings related to the implementation of some project
 activities.

 Based on the assigned ratings to QAE and Bank Supervision, the Overall Bank Performance rating is
 Moderately Satisfactory due to moderate shortcomings pertaining to QAE and Quality of Bank Supervision.




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK Sindh Irrigated Agri Productivity (P145813)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PDO was composed of two objectives (see Section 2), which were assessed based on five
        PDO outcome indicators.The PDO outcome indicators were measurable, relevant, included
        reasonable targets, and had baseline measurements where applicable. However, measuring the
        improvement in crop intensity as a proxy for improved water management did not reflect an
        accurate assessment. Since water management could be improved without changing crop intensity
        as in the case of orchard crops. The results framework (RF) could have benefited from integrating
        more specific outcome indicators related to water use efficiency such as crop per drop. Also, the RF
        lacked indicators to measure productivity and diversification, despite that the project supported
        several activities that would impact productivity and diversification.
       The design reflected a mix of beneficiary types, including households, household members,
        farmers, and female-headed households. This, in turn , made beneficiary calculations inconsistent,
        which led to a mismatch of household configurations used to estimate indicator targets.
       The RF included 15 intermediate results indicators (IRIs) to track the progress of the different
        project activities. The IRIs were measurable, reflected reasonable targets, and were connected to
        the project activities. However, the RF lacked an indicator to qualitatively measure the functionality
        of water course associations.
       Overall, M&E design had some notable shortcomings as reflected above. There were concerns on
        using the crop intensity as a proxy measure for improved water management and the RF lacked an
        indicator to quantitatively measure the functionality of water course associations. Finally, the mix of
        beneficiary types led to a mismatch of household configurations used to estimate indicator targets.



b. M&E Implementation
       According to the ICR (paragraph 58) the implementation of M&E activities was through individual
         consultants at the PIU and district level, and an
         agency was engaged to support the various assessments. The project's M&E consultants
         monitored field implementation and compliance through regular visits, including spot checks and
         participation in key activities, such as the trainings conducted for farmers and other stakeholders.
        M&E implementation benefited from using several platforms including a Geographic Information
         System (GIS), Management Information System (MIS), Information Communication and
         Technology (ICT) to ensure robust periodic monitoring of implementation. Also, the
         project maintained and hosted a public domain that reflected regular reports and a performance
         dashboard to serve as a social accountability mechanism. While a geospatial monitoring
         dashboard was established, and updated with data from the field, remote sensing was not used
         on the ground (ICR, paragraph 57).

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK Sindh Irrigated Agri Productivity (P145813)



        In addition to regular monitoring activities of improved cropping techniques, a mid-term review,
         and an impact assessment at completion, were also carried out. Also, the project conducted an
         impact assessment of water courses improvements using a pre-post approach on a 10% sample
         basis, that reflected head, middle, and tail farmers of the water course.
        Overall, M&E implementation was successful and generated enough data to assess the project
         outcomes. The system provided necessary data and information to monitor project performance.
         Also, the digital MIS and geospatial monitoring dashboard allowed auditing and verification of the
         construction of civil works. However, M&E design shortcomings were not addressed in the two
         project restructurings.



c. M&E Utilization
       According to the ICR (paragraph 59) "the project team relied on monthly, quarterly, and annual
         reports produced by the M&E consultants to track implementation against planned activities."
        The M&E system reflected systematic data collection which helped assess the project
         performance during the Implementation Support Missions, as well as audit civil works to ensure
         transparency and accountability (ICR, paragraph 59).

  Summary of M&E Quality. M&E design had moderate shortcomings as noted above. While
  implementation was successful, M&E shortcomings were not rectified during implementation. Utilization
  was evident in some management decisions including the extension of water course lining to 50% rather
  than 30% and using Precast Concrete Parabolic Segments (PCPS) for lining rather than bricks.

  Overall, M&E Quality is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings pertaining to M&E design.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
        Environmental Category and Safeguards. This project was classified as a “Category B” under
          OP/BP 4.01 with a partial assessment as the environmental impacts of the project interventions
          were expected to have positive environmental impacts including: increased water use efficiency,
          reduction in loss of arable land due to use of water high in salinity and reduction in pesticide
          usage. Three environmental and one social safeguard policies were triggered: Environmental
          Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09), Projects on International Water Ways
          (OP/BP 7.50), and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). In compliance with the Bank's safeguard
          policies, the borrower prepared an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), an Integrated Pest
          Management Plan (IPMP) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The approved safeguards
          documents were disclosed on March 4, 2014.




                                                                                                 Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK Sindh Irrigated Agri Productivity (P145813)



         Compliance with Environmental and Social Safeguards. According to the ICR (paragraphs 62 &
           63) "the project successfully complied with all the environmental safeguard requirements" and
           "successfully complied with social safeguard requirements."




b. Fiduciary Compliance
        Financial Management (FM). FM performance was satisfactory for most of the project
          implementation and FM risk rating remained Moderate. The books of accounts for project
          transactions were appropriately maintained and fund flow remained smooth throughout the project's
          life. An external firm conducted regular internal audits of the project during its implementation.
          However, FM performance rating experienced a downgrade to Moderately Satisfactory (MS) due to
          delays in recovering advances from non-performing Water User Associations. This situation was
          rectified through close and regular follow-ups and all advances were successfully recovered by the
          first quarter of FY 2023. At completion, FM performance was rated Satisfactory.
         Procurement. The project used Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP), and
          most of the project funds were disbursed through community-driven procurement approaches and
          matching grants. To enhance transparency, the project introduced digital wallets for beneficiaries,
          but the uptake limited (ICR, paragraph 65). Two major consultancies (M&E and PSIAC)
          experienced challenging contract management because firms provided less qualified staff than
          contractually mandated. The ICR (paragraph 65) noted that "timely action ensured services were
          delivered as per contract terms." At completion, procurement performance was rated Moderately
          Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   The ICR (paragraph 48) stated that: "the significant impact of WCs was evident in the Government of
   Sindh’s commitment to sustaining project developments in response to the 2022 floods. The Government
   provided PKR2,151.34 million (US$) from its own funds to repair 1,593 WCs (26% of WCs rehabilitated by
   the project) and 56 water storage tanks (10% of the storage tanks established by the project), which were
   damaged by this natural disaster. The civil works related to the repair continued during the last months of
   the project, and beyond its close on 30 September 2023, until 30 November 2023. SIAPEP was also able to
   finance – for total of US$7.86 million – the provision of flood emergency response goods, including 27,100
   tents and 2,200,000 mosquito nets."



11. Ratings


                                                                                                 Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK Sindh Irrigated Agri Productivity (P145813)



                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included four lessons. the following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. To effectively address issues related to the water-agriculture nexus, a more holistic
approach that incorporates cross-cutting interventions combining technical, institutional,
and capacity-building activities, is required. SIAPEP focused on infrastructure improvement and
supply, and capacity-building for beneficiaries. A stronger emphasis on institutional aspects and
interventions targeting agricultural productivity (which naturally complements improved irrigation
water availability and is its intended outcome) could have enhanced project outcomes. This requires
the Bank to emphasize more collaboration and/or cross-support in project design between the
Agriculture and Water GPs.

2. To ensure comprehensive assessment of outcomes, projects need a clear ToC combined
with a strong M&E design that informs adjustments to strategy and strengthens outcomes,
and provides rich evidence for future operations. Key data on project activities that extends
beyond indicator results or activity lists, based on a thorough understanding of causal relationships
within the project, can be used to analyze and adjust project processes. While the project collected
data on numerous parameters, a number of indicators (which would have benefitted project
assessment) were not measured or monitored including: the operation and capacity of WCAs, HEIS
operational costs, the effect of HEIS on input savings (water, fertilizer and labor), crop diversification,
use and upkeep of laser land leveling (LL) and deep ripping (DR) equipment, the effects of LL and
DR on water savings, the delivery of tents and nets, and the activity of the Project Supervision &
Implementation Assistance Consultants (PSIACs). Also, data on adoption of practices and
technologies promoted by the project beyond its direct beneficiaries would have been useful to verify
and assess spill-over effect.

3. To maximize benefits and strengthen the sustainability of production, irrigation project
need to incorporate elements of agribusiness and agricultural marketing. Field interactions
indicated that there is room to encourage entrepreneurship among project beneficiaries/farmers and
foster a culture of calculated risk-taking for productive investments, rather than relying on subsidies.
Capacity building, collective marketing schemes and improved market linkages could bolster
irrigation and agriculture projects. Within the project cycle, timeliness of interventions beyond
improving irrigation water management is also crucial. For instance, activities such as the farmer
field schools implemented in this project should be conducted early in the implementation
cycle rather than towards its end, since they require time and encouragement for adoption. Similarly,

                                                                                                       Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PK Sindh Irrigated Agri Productivity (P145813)



activities related to marketing through producer organizations need to be implemented shortly after
project implementation begins to allow enough time to establish the relevant marketing links.

The following lesson is emphasized by IEG:

4. To ensure successful implementation of activities targeting women in a society that
exhibits a conservative socio-cultural behavior, women activities need to be tailored to fit the
cultural norms, and targets need to be realistically set at appraisal. The project experience
demonstrated that featuring activities geared towards women did not automatically mean that
women would participate as envisioned. Project design needs to include a comprehensive social
analysis to clearly understand the role of women within the society and design relevant activities that
would ensure women participation.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

      Quality of Evidence. The ICR reflected an evidence base that was adequate to assess the project
         outcomes. The ICR could have benefited from reporting survey results to reflect the beneficiaries'
         opinion on the project achievements. In a further communication the project team shared with IEG the
         final impact assessment.
        Results Orientation. The ICR included an adequate discussion on the achievement of the PDO.
        Quality of Analysis. The ICR included an adequate assessment of outcomes even though there were
         some shortcomings in the M&E design.
        Internal Consistency. Various parts of the ICR were internally consistent and logically linked and
         integrated.
        Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.
        Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the standard structure defined in the Guidelines and used
         available evidence to justify the assigned ratings.
        Conciseness. Overall, the ICR provided a clear and concise coverage of project activities to the extent
         possible, and candidly reported on most shortcomings. However, the ToC lacked the critical
         assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the PDO.

Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. The ICR included an adequate assessment of outcomes. The
lessons drawn by the ICR were relevant. Most sections were concise and reflected relevant evidence. Overall,
the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating

                                                                                                    Page 20 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
PK Sindh Irrigated Agri Productivity (P145813)



Substantial




                                                                              Page 21 of 21
