     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Youth Employment and Opportunities (P151831)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0024085

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P151831                                     Kenya Youth Employment and Opportunities

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Kenya                                       Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-58120                                   31-Dec-2021                                          142,012,211.90

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 20-May-2016                                 31-Aug-2023

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           150,000,000.00                                                  0.00

 Revised Commitment                            150,000,000.00                                                  0.00

 Actual                                        143,700,861.44                                                  0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz         Judyth L. Twigg               Susan Ann Caceres                IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 8) and the Financing Agreement (page 5), the
   project objectives were as follows:

           To increase employment and earnings opportunities for targeted youth.

   One of the key project indicators was slightly revised at the time of project restructuring such that
   its operational definition was better aligned with other indicators, and thus the target figure was adjusted

                                                                                                      Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Youth Employment and Opportunities (P151831)



   accordingly. However, as this change did not affect the project ratings, a split rating methodology was not
   applied.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Improving youth employability (Appraisal: US$ 75.0 million; Actual: US$ 76.9 million): This component
   aimed to address the problem identified by employers that youth who come out of school and training
   centers frequently lack the relevant work experience and competencies, including behavioral skills, for
   employment. The component directly built upon a pilot program from a predecessor Bank operation
   that provided targeted youth with training and work experience in the private sector with the goal of
   improving youth employment outcomes. Activities included: provision of three-month training in life skills,
   core business skills, and technical skills; three-month internships in the formal sector (in partnership
   between training providers and employers who demand certain skills); three-month apprenticeships in the
   informal sector led by master craftsmen; upgrading of master craftsmen skills; and development of
   certification standards for apprenticeships. Results-based financing mechanisms were used for the
   provision of training by service providers and master craftsmen to incentivize internship placements and
   completion.

   2. Support for job creation (Appraisal: US$ 41.5 million; Actual: US$ 45.6 million): This component aimed to
   expand opportunities for youth through job creation and increased earnings through self-
   employment. Activities included: financing of business start-up grants (US$400 seed funding) disbursed in
   two tranches for simple entrepreneurship plans; provision of business development services (BDS) to
   support the start-ups, such as mentoring, consulting, and advisory services for marketing or technical
   issues; business plan competitions for high-potential youth entrepreneurs in expanding or starting up
   ventures; and innovative catalytic interventions to reach hard-to-serve youth.

   3. Improving labor market information (Appraisal: US$ 13.5 million; Actual: US$ 5.5 million): This
   component aimed to provide timely information about labor demand and supply, as well as career prospects
   and labor market policies. Activities included: development of a one-stop-shop for access to labor market
   information; identification of labor market information users; and data gathering; and dissemination of
   content.

   4. Strengthening youth policy development and project management (Appraisal: US$ 20.0 million; Actual:
   US$ 15.8 million): This component aimed to build capacity in the Ministry of Public Service, Youth, and
   Gender Affairs. Activities included: review and development of youth employment policy; monitoring and
   evaluation of youth employment policies and programs; and project management.



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Kenya Youth Employment and Opportunities (P151831)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost

        The project cost at appraisal was US$ 150 million. The actual cost at completion was US$ 143.7
         million. The difference was due to exchange rate fluctuations and lower-than-expected unit costs.
        At the time of the August 2021 restructuring, US$ 15.68 million of unutilized funds under
         Components 1, 3, and 4 were reallocated to business grants and BDSs under Component 2, which
         had exhibited faster disbursements and better employment and earnings outcomes than the other
         interventions. In particular, for Component 3, the planned activity for the Department of Labor to
         collect labor market data proved costly, and therefore the relevant questions were inserted into other
         existing data collection instruments instead, thereby lowering project costs.

  Financing

        The project was financed by an International Development Association Credit of US$ 150 million, of
           which US$ 143.7 million was disbursed.

  Borrower contribution

        There was no planned Borrower contribution.

  Dates

        May 20, 2016: Project approval.
        December 15, 2016: Project effectiveness.
        November 11, 2019: Mid-term review.
        April 30, 2020: Project restructuring. The project design and implementation arrangements were
         modified to include private sector organizations in internship placement, adjust payment
         mechanisms, and include a microenterprise/small enterprise policy activity. In addition, the
         operational definition for one key project indicator (number of youth employed, including self-
         employed, at least six months after receiving a startup grant and/or BDS) was modified, changing it
         from an absolute number to percentage, in order to match the operational definition of other key
         project indicators. This change resulted in a slight reduction in the corresponding target from 73.5
         percent to 70 percent.
        August 6, 2021: Project restructuring. The project closing date was extended from December 31,
         2021, to December 31, 2022, due to the initial slow start and six-month halt in activities due to
         COVID-19. The extension enabled the following: completion of all anticipated rounds of training as
         well as an additional round benefiting 7,000 youths, to offset higher than anticipated levels of attrition
         among trainees; and completion of the impact evaluation and tracer studies. Targets for several
         intermediate indicators were also modified.
        July 28, 2022: Project restructuring. The project closing date was extended from December 31,
         2022, to August 31, 2023, for similar reasons as above and to allow for the completion of a
         beneficiary assessment for at least one of the government-funded programs for youth.
        August 31, 2023: Project closing.



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Kenya Youth Employment and Opportunities (P151831)




   3. Relevance of Objectives

               Rationale
               Kenya is considered a lower middle-income country yet still ranks among the poorest 25
               percent of countries in the world, with 40 percent of its population having incomes below the poverty line.
               The rising number of young people in the working population (ages 15-25 years old) represents
               an opportunity for faster economic growth, but this depends on whether the economy can create sufficient
               jobs to absorb the rising number of new entrants and whether these entrants are adequately prepared and
               qualified to step into these jobs. Between 2009 and 2013, three million youths came of working age, but the
               economy was able to add only 2.6 million jobs, with most employment growth taking place in the informal
               trade sector, a low-productivity sector (self-employed, unpaid family workers, and those working for wages
               in small household enterprises). The rate of unemployment in 2009 for all Kenyans between 15 and
               64 years of age was 8.6 percent. For those aged 15 to 19 years, it was 15.8 percent, and for those aged 20
               to 24 years, it was 13.1 percent (as reported in the PAD, page 2). In summary, employment rates and
               productivity levels among young people in the working population were low, largely due to lack of relevant
               training and readiness and mismatch with market demand. Moreover, these employment challenges were
               considered as key to political stability in the country.

               The government developed the National Youth Empowerment Strategy (NYES) for 2013–2017 to reflect the
               emphasis placed on youth empowerment in its second Medium-term Plan (2013–2017). The NYES
               guided implementation of youth-targeted empowerment interventions, with an overarching goal to provide a
               unified and coherent
               framework for the development and empowerment of youth at both national and local levels. The project
               objectives were highly consistent with these priorities as well as with the more recent Kenya Vision 2030
               strategy, which aims to create sustainable employment and guarantee improved livelihoods for youth.

               The project objectives were also well aligned with the Bank's Country Partnership Framework for FY2023-
               28, which identifies faster and more equitable labor productivity and income growth as a high-level
               outcome, with a specific objective on job creation that addresses labor market demand and supply
               (including the number of jobs created for vulnerable youth as a supplemental indicator). The prior Country
               Partnership Strategy for FY2014-18, which was in place at the time of project appraisal, referenced the
               issue of youth employment and the need to explore interventions to help ensure that youth are prepared for
               wok, under the second domain area of protection and potential, delivering shared prosperity, though no
               specific objectives or outcomes in youth employment were included.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                         Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kenya Youth Employment and Opportunities (P151831)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
Increase employment opportunities for targeted youth

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective was clear. Given the market failures in aligning the supply of youth
labor with demand from employers, the project interventions focused on more relevant and effective training
for youth employment, identified according to actual needs in the labor market. Activities included financing to
start and expand businesses, managerial and entrepreneurial training, networking opportunities, and access
to information for government programs. There were also specific elements to further catalyze job creation,
targeting high-potential job creators and hard-to-reach youth (i.e. marginalized communities, persons with
disabilities, or those affected by conflict). The job training activities were directly based on experience with a
pilot project from a predecessor Bank operation and represented a scaling-up.

The target population was youth between 18 and 29 years of age who were without jobs and
were experiencing extended periods of unemployment or who were working in vulnerable jobs, defined as
those who were self-employed, a contributing family worker, or working for wages in a household enterprise
with
fewer than ten workers. The ICR (p. 22) confirms that this planned targeting was effectively implemented, with
chiefs and assistant chiefs engaged in the verification process to help eliminate inclusion errors, and special
efforts made to reach women, persons with disabilities, and other hard-to-serve youth (single mothers, "street
children," and youth living in conflict areas). The project's tracer studies confirmed that targeting was
successful.

As noted in the ICR (page 15), the reported data drew from comprehensive tracer studies carried out across
six beneficiary cohorts, coupled with impact assessments of certain interventions. Although the complete
dataset was only fully accessible post-project completion, it informed the findings of the ICR, thereby resulting
in some minor discrepancies compared to the data presented in earlier Implementation Status and
Results Reports, which were based on information available at the time.

Outputs

358,432 beneficiaries directly benefited from project activities (target: 280,500). Of these, 50 percent were
female. The ICR (page 21) reported that this gender balance was a result of several measures in the project
design, including stratifying the pool of applicants by gender prior to the random selection of beneficiaries,
targeting outreach to women especially for the business plan competition, providing childcare so that women
could attend training, and disbursing grants to individual account holders, not spouses or guardians, which
ensured that women were not denied access.

      Provision of three months of job training and three months of internship experience in the formal
       sector. The ICR does not report on how many beneficiaries completed the training and/or internships.
       The training covered life skills, core business skills, and technical skills. Private sector providers
       were contracted to deliver the life skills and core business skills training according to a standardized
       curriculum. Following the training, internships were provided through public and private formal training
       institutions, who partnered with employers to provide the specific skills training identified by the
       employers.


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kenya Youth Employment and Opportunities (P151831)




      Provision of three months of job training and three months of apprenticeship experience in the
         informal sector. The ICR does not report on how many beneficiaries completed the training and/or
         apprenticeships. The targeted beneficiaries were vulnerable youth with limited education, as well as
         youth in rural areas. The job training was identical to the above, but the technical skills were provided
         by master craftsmen in the form of traditional apprenticeships.
        Upgrading of skills for 1,061 master craftsmen (target: 1,000) and development of certification
         standards for traditional apprenticeship trades.
        Provision of seed funding (up to US$ 400 per grant) for youth-led start-ups to invest in tools and inputs
         (target: 30,000 beneficiaries). Eligibility criteria included attaining a minimum score on an
         entrepreneurship aptitude test. A total of 85,951 beneficiaries received either seed funding and/or
         business development services.
        Provision of BDS for young self-employed and entrepreneurs (target: 8,000 beneficiaries). The
         services included a basic package of business and entrepreneurship training as well as mentoring,
         consulting, and advisory services for marketing or technical issues. A total of 85,951 beneficiaries
         received either seed funding and/or business development services.
        Business plan competition for high-potential young entrepreneurs to expand businesses or start up
         new ventures with the potential to create jobs for targeted youth. Support to entrants was also
         provided, in the form of access to networks, mentoring, and business support services.
        Grants to non-governmental organizations, private sector providers, or community-based
         organizations to provide services for hard-to-reach youth. This Innovation Challenge competition—the
         “Future Bora Initiative”—among social enterprises aimed at benefiting particularly vulnerable youth,
         such as single mothers, “street children," children with disabilities, and youth living in conflict areas. A
         total of 1,931 vulnerable youths benefited from programs implemented by four social enterprises with
         a focus on: (i) waste collection and recycling involving homeless youth; (ii) hydroponic farming; (iii)
         single mothers to engage in community work and business creation; and (iv) farming involving children
         with disabilities.

In addition,

      Strengthening of the Labor Market Information System (LMIS), including identifying priority users and
       LMIS needs (i.e. types of indicators, analyses, and reports), information gaps, and awareness creation
       among potential users. The website has had 2.2 million visits since its launch (target: 10,000).
       Published reported included the 2020 Informal Sectors Skills and Occupations Survey and the 2022
       Employer Skills and Occupations Survey. The ICR noted that these LMIS products, however, were
       difficult to maintain and update given cost and time requirements. Therefore, the project instead relied
       on existing data being collected by different government agencies, including Kenya’s Continuous
       Household Surveys, which provide frequent up-to-date data.
      Preparation of updated National Youth Policy, which was formally endorsed by the Cabinet in
       November 2019 and disseminated in 2020-21. An implementation plan was also prepared to enact
       the policy statutes into law.



Outcomes

      The percentage of youth who received training and an internship and who found a job or were self-
         employed after at least six months increased from 62.8 percent in 2016 to 81.7 percent at project

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kenya Youth Employment and Opportunities (P151831)



         closing, surpassing the target of 77.8 percent. This represented an 18.9 percentage point increase,
         which surpassed the target of a 15 percentage point increase.
        The percentage of youth who received grants and BDS and who found a job or were self-employed
         after at least six months increased from 71.6 percent in 2016 to 89.6 percent at project closing. This
         nearly achieved the original target of 90.1 percent and surpassed the revised target of 86.6
         percent. This represented an 18 percentage point increase, which achieved the original target of
         18 percentage points and surpassed the revised target of 15 percentage points.
        2,700 new jobs were created through enterprises from the business plan competition.
        33,418 youth obtained skills certification, surpassing the target of 27,500 youth.
        80 percent of participating youth reported high levels of satisfaction with training and internship
         program.
        The business survival rate was 12 - 14 percentage points higher among project beneficiaries
         compared to non-project beneficiaries.
        The business creation rate was 27 percentage points higher among project beneficiaries compared to
         non-project beneficiaries.

Of note, the employment gains among beneficiaries contrasted with the youth employment trends exhibited at
the national level during the project period. Youth unemployment at the national level increased by roughly 50
percent, from 9 percent in 2017 to 13.4 percent in 2022 (as reported in the ICR, page 17).



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Increase earnings opportunities for targeted youth

Rationale
See above for outputs, which overlapped with and were directly relevant for the theory of change for this
objective.

Outcomes

      Average earnings among workers at least six months after receiving training and an internship
       were 40.3 percent higher following project participation. (Note: No target was provided, as this was not
       an original project indicator.)
      Average earnings among workers at least six months after receiving a start-up grant, BDS, or
       business competition award were 50.4 percent higher following project participation. This surpassed
       the target of a 10 percent increase.

The ICR reported the additional findings:

      Beneficiaries that received the start-up grant and BDS had the following results, compared to non-
         project beneficiaries: higher sales (91 percent and 27 percent larger for new and existing businesses,

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Kenya Youth Employment and Opportunities (P151831)



                                    respectively); higher profits (90 percent larger for new businesses); greater likelihood to be the
                                    household's main income provider (4 percentage points higher); and greater likelihood of reporting
                                    their business as the main source of income (13-14 percentage points higher).




                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The first objective to increase employment opportunities for targeted youth is rated Substantial due to
                            evidence of training and internship/apprenticeship participation leading to jobs. The second objective to
                            increase earning opportunities for targeted youth is rated High due to evidence of higher earnings following
                            participation in project activities, including significantly exceeding targets. These ratings combine to an
                            aggregate overall Efficacy rating of Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   An economic analysis was conducted during project appraisal (PAD, pages 27-28) to compare expected costs
   and benefits of the main interventions supported by the project, using available evidence of the impact of similar
   programs in Kenya and other countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. The benefits were defined as the average
   expected increase in annual earnings as a result of program participation, though these activities were expected
   to result in other monetary benefits (for example, increases in business assets), benefits to human capital (for
   example, improved business, vocational, and life skills), and other socioeconomic benefits (for example,
   women’s empowerment). The expected baseline earnings of participants were estimated using the 2013 Skills
   Toward Employment and Productivity (STEP) survey in Kenya. The results for Component 1 (Improving Youth
   Employability) indicated that the costs of the training and internship program would be recouped through the
   increased earnings of program participants within 3 to 7 years, yielding an internal rate of return (IRR) of at least
   10 percent. For Component 2 (Support for Job Creation), the estimated IRR was 17 percent for the grants, 15
   percent for the BDS, and between 5 percent and 13 percent for the business plan competition.

   The economic analysis was updated at project completion (ICR, Annex 4). An overall IRR for the entire project
   was calculated at 40.6 percent. The IRRs for individual interventions ranged from 14.6 percent for the training
   component to 100.2 percent for grants and BDSs. Again, this analysis did not include other benefits such as
   monetary benefits, benefits to human capital, and other socioeconomic benefits. With regards to implementation

                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Kenya Youth Employment and Opportunities (P151831)



efficiency, the project nearly fully disbursed, with a total of US$ 143.7 million, or 97.2 percent. The undisbursed
balance was the result of fluctuations in the exchange rate between SDRs and the U.S. dollar, as well as lower
than anticipated unitary costs. In particular, actual unitary costs under Component 2 (grants and BDSs) were
roughly 40 percent less than anticipated. Management costs were at 11 percent by project closing (appraised at
13 percent), with the 2 percent savings re-allocated to grants and BDSs for beneficiaries with the second
restructuring.

However, there were significant implementation shortcomings. There were initial implementation delays due to
insufficient budgetary allocations and cuts (leading to unpredictable flow of funds), delays in the transfers of the
loan proceeds to the project accounts, delays in payments for services rendered by training providers and other
contractors (leading to some reputational losses for the project), delays in the payment stipends to beneficiaries
(leading to higher attrition rates), delays in procuring a firm to develop the project's management information
system (MIS), lengthy procurement processes for business plan competition, and lengthy government
processes for developing new occupational testing standards and revision of old ones. Financial management
was rated Moderately Unsatisfactory in Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) over a large part of
the the project's lifetime (in the last 8 out of a total of 14 ISRs), indicating that there were inefficiencies in that
area over an extended period (see also Section 10b). With these shortcomings, project efficiency is rated
Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         0
 Appraisal                                                     0
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         84.00
 ICR Estimate                                                 40.60
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance is rated High due to strong alignment with country conditions, government strategy, and Bank
strategy. Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial due to Substantial achievement of the first objective to increase
employment opportunities for targeted youth (due to evidence of training and internship/apprenticeship
participation leading to jobs) and High achievement of the second objective to increase earning opportunities for
targeted youth (due to evidence of higher earnings following participation in project activities,
including significantly exceeding targets). Efficiency is rated Modest, with favorable benefit-cost analyses and
reasonable project management costs, but significant inefficiencies in implementation. Taken together, these



                                                                                                          Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Youth Employment and Opportunities (P151831)



ratings indicate that there were moderate shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and results,
leading to an Outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project's achievements at the beneficiary level are likely to be sustained due to the training and
experience imparted, although the seed funding activities are not likely to be continued. The project also
contributed at a higher policy level through the development of the LMIS and the national youth
empowerment policy. Lastly, Bank support to this sub-sector will be continued under a follow-on project—
the National Youth Opportunities Towards Advancement Project—approved on June 15, 2023, for a total of
US$ 229 million, which expands coverage to all 47 counties in the country.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank has been actively engaged in the youth employment sub-sector beginning with the
  predecessor Youth Empowerment Project (P111546, US$ 16.9 million, 2010-2016), which piloted a
  training and internship program in coordination with private employers. The Bank had also built an
  evidence-based knowledge program in the sector through assessing various interventions targeted at
  youth, a study on Kenyan labor demand (focusing on the key growth sectors of manufacturing and
  services), and an analysis of the 2013 STEP survey (which helped identify employment challenges facing
  urban youth ages 15 to 24). These prior works by the Bank contributed significantly to the technical
  soundness of the project design.

  The results chain and monitoring framework were clear. The project approach incorporated both direct
  beneficiary interventions and higher-level policy support. Risk assessment was rated Substantial due to
  high complexity, with multiple implementing agencies and multi-pronged interventions, implementation
  mechanisms, and monitoring systems. Use of existing implementation capacity was identified as a
  mitigation measure, along with formal coordination mechanisms and inclusion of key actions as
  conditions for effectiveness. One shortcoming in the project design was the limited engagement of the
  private sector, owing to the Public Finance Management Act; although the underlying results-based
  financing mechanisms were designed to provide strong incentives for internship placement and
  completion of on-the-job training, the provision of internship opportunities ultimately proved to be a
  challenge due to lack of contacts between training providers and private employers.




                                                                                                  Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Youth Employment and Opportunities (P151831)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Regular supervision missions were carried out, including field visits to participating counties to monitor
 implementation of the various project activities. To ensure adequate supervision in remote counties, local
 consultants were hired to carry out announced spot checks of service providers, master trainers, and
 employers. The Bank team provided ongoing technical support and training, particularly in the areas of
 randomized beneficiary selection, monitoring and evaluation, and procurement (for example, results-based
 procurement mechanisms for formal and informal training). The Bank team responded effectively to some
 implementation challenges throughout the project period, including insufficient government budget
 allocations and delayed release of funds, and changes in ministry leadership and project counterpart
 staff. Multiple project restructurings were effectively utilized to resolve some implementation problems,
 particularly in light of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, fiduciary challenges were significant, and many
 remained unresolved, with the last 8 ISRs rating Financial Management as Moderately Unsatisfactory. The
 final ISR cites lengthy delays in carrying out internal audits, outstanding unresolved audit issues dating
 back to 2018, questions about whether internal reviews were being conducted by key implementing
 entities, "rampant bounced payments" for payees, and lack of a key control for verification of payee bank
 accounts. The ICR noted that “Observations in past external audits remained unresolved for extended time
 periods” (page 29). The Region has more recently indicated the following. The long outstanding issues of
 2018 had been closed by the year 2022. The last Financial Management supervision mission flagged an
 amount of Kshs 26,030,088 (USD 221,099) as potentially ineligible but this was subsequently resolved.
 According to the Region, the financial management issue “has been demonstrated as having been
 resolved.” There is, however, one more audit report expected for the period ending 30 June 2024 to be
 submitted by 31 December 2024 -- according to the Region, this audit should cover all expenditure in the
 application period of 29 February 2024. It is currently unavailable for this ICR Review. Overall, the lack of
 sufficient timeliness and extended time periods over which Financial Management issues remained
 unresolved are flagged.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design and arrangements were clear. The results framework identified measurable and relevant
 indicators, including baseline and target figures. M&E arrangements included the key activity of
 the development of an LMIS. Evaluative activities were also included, such as impact evaluations and
 tracer studies. As noted in the ICR (page 27), the choice of which interventions to evaluate with rigorous


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Youth Employment and Opportunities (P151831)



 methods (which included randomization) stemmed from the existing gaps in evidence regarding their
 efficacy.



b. M&E Implementation
  As reported in the ICR (page 27), initial M&E implementation had some weaknesses under Component 1,
  including problems tracking beneficiary progress from intake to completion and administrative support (for
  example, payments to training providers and master craftsmen and payment of beneficiary
  stipends). These delays resulted in information gaps and payment delays to both providers and
  beneficiaries, and 42 percent of beneficiaries indicated that delays in stipend payments had been the
  most negative aspect in their experience. However, several measures were taken to address these
  weaknesses, including hiring an external firm to conduct an overall diagnosis of the MIS and identify
  needed improvements, which were subsequently put in place. The project also utilized a Geo-Enabling
  initiative for Monitoring and Supervision, including capacity building, to conduct spot checks for remote
  supervision and real-time risk monitoring. Despite initial minor shortcomings, the project monitoring
  system was a key element of tracking project progress and making adjustments to ensure project
  achievements.

  The evaluative studies were completed as planned, including four tracer studies, which assessed the
  project’s beneficial effects in terms of increased employment and earnings at various points during
  implementation. The project also supported a process evaluation of the government’s Catalytic Funds
  (Youth Enterprise Development Fund, Women Enterprise Fund, and Uwezo Fund), completed in the last
  year of the project, which gave recommendations on how to consolidate and improve functioning of the
  funds. The ICR (Annex 6) describes the methodology and quality of these evaluative studies.



c. M&E Utilization
  Examples of the use of M&E to inform project decisions (ICR, page 25):

         a. Reallocation of unutilized funds to business grants, which had shown faster disbursement rates
            and more promising employment and earnings results based on evidence from tracer studies
            and beneficiary surveys.
         b. Adding two training rounds to offset higher than expected attrition rates, focusing the intake of
            participants to counties showing lower attrition rates and higher employment rates.

  In addition, the project contributed to knowledge through conducting impact evaluations and tracer
  studies, which helped develop in-house institutional M&E capacity.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues



                                                                                                       Page 12 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Kenya Youth Employment and Opportunities (P151831)



a. Safeguards
  The project was classified as an Environmental Category "C" project, and therefore no Environmental
  Assessment was required.

  The safeguard policy OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples was triggered due to challenges in access to
  project activities from vulnerable and marginalized areas and also concerns that the anticipated project
  benefits would not be culturally appropriate and/or gender and inter-generationally inclusive. A Vulnerable
  and Marginalized Group Plan was prepared to mitigate impacts on indigenous peoples, with measures
  requiring female and disabled persons participation, utilization of Free Prior and Informed Consent
  processes, and establishment of a grievance redress mechanism. According to the ICR (page 28),
  safeguard implementation was rated satisfactory throughout the project period, with sustained outreach to
  indigenous communities and an accessible and functional redress mechanism.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management: Financial management performance was weak, with the ICR (page 29) noting the
  following shortcomings: delays in the internal flow of funds (for example, delays of up to 30 days between
  the time funds were drawn from Designated Accounts to their deposit in the project’s bank accounts); gaps
  between the budget allocations and the project’s planned use of funds as a result the lack of participation
  of project teams in the budgeting process; lack of continuity among accounting staff; weaknesses in the
  project’s MIS, including a lack of functioning finance and accounting modules that required manual
  interface between the MIS and other payroll systems; large numbers of bounced stipend payments; delays
  in the implementation and submission of internal audit reports; recurring delays in submission of Interim
  Financial Reports; and observations in past external audits remaining unresolved for extended time
  periods. Financial management performance was rated as moderately unsatisfactory in the last 8 ISRs.
  Please see section 8b above for further details.

  Procurement: Procurement risk was rated High during project appraisal due to limited capacity and
  experience with Bank projects and insufficient office infrastructure of the implementing agencies
  responsible for procurement. Mitigation measures included hiring an experienced procurement consultant
  early on in the project period, in parallel with the Bank's ongoing procurement training. Given the many
  procurements under the project, establishment of Framework Agreements (FA) for a large number of
  formal and informal sector training providers proved a critical procurement approach, although this required
  close monitoring and verification. Despite some delays in payments and in providing Systematic Tracking
  of Expenditures in Procurement documentation, the FA contracts were executed reasonably well. Overall
  procurement performance was rated moderately satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None reported.



                                                                                                 Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Youth Employment and Opportunities (P151831)




d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 Shortcomings in implementation
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory    efficiency led to an Efficiency
                                                                                 rating of Modest.
                                                                                 Lack of sufficient timeliness and
                                                                                 extended time periods over
Bank Performance                Highly Satisfactory   Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                 which financial management
                                                                                 issues remained unresolved.
Quality of M&E                  High                  High

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (pages 32-33):

      Self-employment and entrepreneurship can provide critical employment growth opportunities
       in a dominantly informal economy. In the case of this project, given the context of limited
       formal jobs growth, the clear focus on supporting self-employment with skill building and
       work experience through apprenticeships, combined with a comprehensive package of
       support for young entrepreneurs, played a key role in achieving short-term employment
       outcomes.
      Participation of private sector employers, not just training providers, can be a critical element
       of employment accessibility for vulnerable youth. In the case of this project, job placement
       was a key bottleneck under Component 1 on employability. Although the project's original
       model for engaging private sector employers was not followed, the project's
       arrangements addressed the job placement challenge through including apprenticeships in
       the informal sector, using results-based financing models with private employers in the
       formal sector, and hiring specialized service providers for training and linkage/placement with
       employers.
      Evidence-based decision making and knowledge building can inform and strengthen
       operational implementation. In the case of this project, a strong monitoring and
       evaluation system supported implementation effectively and transparently. Results of impact
       evaluations helped to direct overall funds allocation based on the relative effectiveness of
       individual interventions and to adopt corrective measures.




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Kenya Youth Employment and Opportunities (P151831)



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was concise and consistent with guidelines. It had a strong results orientation, using impact
assessment data to focus on outcomes in employment and income, not just participation in training. The quality
of the evidence was satisfactory, although the analysis could have included more details on project outputs (for
example, number of beneficiaries who completed the training and/or internship) in order to clearly trace the
results chain (Efficacy section). Also, results-based financing mechanisms were an important aspect of the
provision of training, but this aspect was not clearly explained upfront in the ICR. Lessons were extensive and
useful for informing future operations in youth employment.

In a significant shortcoming, the ICR (page 28) incorrectly characterized the project's Financial Management
performance, stating that it improved to Moderately Satisfactory toward the end of the project's lifetime, when in
fact Financial Management was rated Moderately Unsatisfactory in the last several ISRs. The ICR erroneously
stated on page 28 "FM performance gradually improved from “Moderately Unsatisfactory” to “Moderately
Satisfactory” toward the end of the Project’s lifetime.”



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 15
