     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Forest Sector Modernization & Coastal Re (P157127)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024181

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P157127                                     Forest Sector Modernization & Coastal Re

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Viet Nam                                    Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-60790                                   31-Dec-2023                                         52,588,485.07

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Jun-2017                                 31-Dec-2023

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           150,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             69,639,258.61                                               0.00

 Actual                                         52,589,518.62                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Shashidhara Laxman          Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Kolavalli




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective stated identically in the Legal Agreement (page 4) and the Project Appraisal Document (para
   22) was) “to improve coastal forest management in the Project Provinces.”



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Forest Sector Modernization & Coastal Re (P157127)



  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Enabling Effective Coastal Forest Management (Appraised: GoV US$3 million; Actual:
   GoV US$0.73 million)

   1.1 Improving coastal forest planning and its coordination across sectors, through, inter alia: (a) upgrades in
   technologies for spatial planning, (b) development of integrated spatial plans in selected sites; (c)
   development of technical guidelines for improved spatial planning; and (d) public awareness, dissemination
   and learning activities in connection with the pilot integrated spatial plans.

   1.2 Supporting modernization of quality forest seedling production through, inter alia: (a) upgrades of
   structures and technology for quality seedling in selected regional units; (b) transfer of skills for seedling
   production and nursery management to seedling producers; and (c) fostering linkages between small holder
   seedling producers and buyers and support for seedling quality certification.

   1.3 Providing technical and analytical support for market-based financing for management of coastal
   protection forests, through, inter alia: (a) implementation of techniques for valuation of the provisioning and
   regulatory services from coastal forests; and (b) implementation and promotion of a scheme for payments
   for forest ecosystem services.

   Component 2: Coastal Forest Development and Rehabilitation (Appraised: IDA US$104.86 million,
   GoV US$7.22 million; Actual: IDA US$22.80 million, GoV US$2.30 million)

   2.1 Supporting the protection, planting and tending of existing and new stands of coastal forests, through,
   inter alia: (a) carrying out detailed site assessments; (b) design and implementation of coastal protection
   forest plantations and rehabilitation/enrichment activities; (c) provision of seedlings, monitoring thereof and
   carrying out planting and management activities; and (d) community engagement in forest protection.

   2.2 (a) Carrying out physical investments to support the survival and effectiveness of coastal protection
   forests, including, inter alia: (i) augmenting the natural recovery of degraded mangroves; and (ii) improving
   the survival rates of newly planted and enriched coastal forests; and (b) monitoring and management of
   planting and protection activities.

   Component 3: Generating Sustainable Benefits from Coastal Forests (Appraised: IDA US$40.42
   million, GoV US$2.95 million; Actual: IDA US$26.08 million, GoV US$3.77 million)

   3.1 Strengthening communities to partner with private enterprises for the generation of benefits from
   improved coastal forest management, through the provision of Competitive Grants to Eligible Communities.




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Forest Sector Modernization & Coastal Re (P157127)



  3.2 Upgrading infrastructure for production, processing and marketing of goods and services from coastal
  forests, including rural roads and other productive infrastructure, through the provision of Competitive
  Grants to Eligible Districts.

  Component 4: Project Management and M&E (Appraised: IDA US$4.72 million, GoV US$16.84
  million; Actual: IDA US$2.04 million, GoV US$5.34 million)

  4.1 Provision of technical assistance at the central and provincial level on, inter alia, co-management, and
  integrated spatial planning, and establishment of a monitoring and evaluation system.

  4.2 Provision of technical support at the central and provincial level on social and environmental
  safeguards, monitoring and evaluation, and conduct of independent audits.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost

  The project was appraised to cost US$180 million. It was revised down to US$99.64 million and the actual
  cost was US$64,72 million.

  Financing

  The project was financed by an IDA grant of US$150 million.

  Borrower Contribution

  At appraisal, the borrower was expected to contribute US$30 million. Actual contribution from the borrower
  was US$11.41 million.

  Dates

  The project was approved in June 2017 and became effective in March 2019. A restructuring mission that
  served as an informal midterm review was organized in 2021. The project closed in December 2023 as
  planned.

  Restructuring

  The project underwent one level II restructuring in December 2023, only days before its closing date. It
  entailed i) changes in Results Framework, ii) changes in components and costs, iii) partial cancellation of
  financing, and iv) reallocation between disbursement categories.

  The targets for 2 PDO level indicators and 4 intermediate indicators were reduced. Among the PDO
  indicators, the target for 'Area of coastal forest restored and managed according to agreed criteria (ha)' was
  reduced from 50,000ha to 4,150 given that forest protection is no longer financed under the project. The
  35,000 ha target for PDO-level Indicator 2 - 'Coastal protection forests, in project area, under
  management/protection of local communities (ha)' was removed and kept as zero. The ICR (para 32) notes
  that the decision to keep the indicators for forest protection and livelihood activities but with zero targets
  reflected, on the one hand, discontinued project support to these activities as they were not expected to be

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Forest Sector Modernization & Coastal Re (P157127)



   completed within the closing date, and, on the other hand, MARD’s commitment to finance these activities
   post-closing.

   Split Rating

   The restructuring did not involve changes to the PDO. The project became less ambitious as the targets
   were revised down. This review will apply a split rating.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Situation

At appraisal, the Socialist republic of Viet Nam had achieved consistent growth and poverty reduction for
over 30 years (ICR, para 1). The high growth had been achieved at the cost of rapid depletion of natural
resources, compromising ecosystem services. Viet Nam was also one of the most natural hazard-prone
countries in the region. Its vulnerability to climate change, including sea level rise and extreme weather
events, posed a threat to poor rural households that engaged in climate-sensitive activities such as crop
cultivation, livestock rearing, fishing, and forestry – more than 80 percent of the near-poor lived in rural
areas.

The Government of Viet Nam (GoV) had invested in physical structures to increase the resilience of coastal
areas. But their effectiveness had declined over the years (ICR, para 2) like, for example, the dikes built in
Northern and Central Viet Nam to protect nearly 630,000 ha. Afforestation and reforestation of coastal
forests, such as mangroves, had been shown to offer sustainable alternatives to physical structures to
improve coastal resilience and livelihoods, but Viet Nam's coastal forests were severely degraded. The
government had taken measures to improve coastal planning by adopting an integrated coastal zone
management program; however, it had not been able to implement it effectively because of a lack of data
and limited provincial capacity to develop well-integrated plans.

Country Strategy

The PDO aligned with the country’s policy for managing, protecting, and sustainably developing coastal
forests in response to climate change (Decree No. 119/2016/ND-CP, August 23, 2016). The PDO was
consistent with the policy’s goals of natural disaster mitigation, ecological protection, climate change
response, adaptation to sea level rise, and improvement of the livelihoods of communities involved in
forestry. The PDO supported Viet Nam’s ongoing green growth efforts and NDCs, with a focus on restoring,
developing, and sustainably managing coastal forests to reinforce resilience against floods and storms. The
PDO remained consistent with the implementation of more recent strategies, including the Sustainable
Forestry Development Program for 2021–2025 (Resolution 84/NQ-CP, August 5, 2021) and the Viet Nam
Forestry Development Strategy for 2021–2030 with a Vision to 2050 (Decision No. 523/QD-TTg, April 1,
2021) (ICR, para 38).

Bank Strategy


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Forest Sector Modernization & Coastal Re (P157127)



               The PDO remains relevant to the World Bank’s strategy to support Viet Nam. Enhancing climate change
               resilience and modernizing agricultural and natural asset management are some of the priority reforms
               identified in the Country Climate Diagnostic Report published in 2022, as well as the Systematic Country
               Diagnostic that informed the current Country Partnership Strategy/ CPF, which is the same as the one at
               appraisal (ICR, para 37).

               Level at which the PDO is Pitched

               The PDO is pitched at the level of outputs. The legal agreement (page 4) and PAD (para 24) add that
               achieving the PDO would contribute to the recipient’s efforts to enhance coastal resilience to climate
               change. The Restructuring Paper (para 20) further clarifies that coastal resilience would be broader than
               physical resilience to coastal climatic hazards to encompass the socioeconomic resilience of coastal
               communities to a wider range of climatic impacts.

               Summary: Viet Nam’s steady growth over three decades had come at the cost of deterioration of its natural
               resources. Its vulnerability to climate change also exposed its poor, who live in coastal rural areas, to
               climate risks. Physical measures that had been taken in coastal areas were becoming less effective and
               biological measures had shown promise. The PDO to improve forest management is highly relevant to
               GoV’s strategies to build coastal resilience and the World Bank’s strategy to support the country in
               enhancing resilience to climate change. Overall, the relevance of the PDO is rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve coastal forest management in the project Provinces.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC)

                             The retroactively developed ToC articulated in the ICR (para 7 and Figure 1) states that project activities and
                             inputs, such as i) developing plans, studies, and tools for financing (spatial plans, site assessments for
                             afforestation, and obtaining market-based financing through payment for ecosystems services (PFES) tool),
                             ii) establishing seedling production facilities, iii) planting coastal forests, iv) training community groups on
                             forest management and giving them seed funds to invest in livelihoods and v) constructing and rehabilitating
                             coastal infrastructure that augments the survival and effectiveness of protection forests, producing project
                             outputs, such as forest area planted, community investment packages given, and nurseries developed with
                             capacity to supply quality seedlings would contribute to improved management of forests.


                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Forest Sector Modernization & Coastal Re (P157127)



The critical assumptions in the ToC were that i) project activities would lead to improved spatial plans and
reliable supply of seedlings, ii) communities could be motivated to manage coastal protection areas, and iii)
survival and effectiveness of protected forests could be improved with infrastructure.

The ToC was plausible. It aimed to address two key concerns: weak capacity at provincial levels to develop
integrated spatial plans and the absence of livelihood opportunities that led communities to engage in
unsustainable activities that degraded forests. The project activities could be expected to overcome the two
concerns, although creating livelihoods adequate to diminish community incentives to exploit forests
unsustainably would have been difficult to achieve. Attributing project activities to more sustainable use of
forests required evidence on community use of forests before and after project implementation.

Outputs

      4,041 ha of coastal forest were planted and rehabilitated under the project, falling short of the original
         target of 7,800
      91 percent share of native species seedlings were used in the annual total seedlings delivered under
         the project, exceeding the original target of 20 percent
      No tool was developed under the project utilized by MARD to implement PFES pilot, falling short of
         the original target of doing so

Outcomes

      7 seedling producers had improved quality seedling supply capacity as the result of project
         intervention, falling short of the original target of 20
        97 communities/household groups were involved in community-based management/protection of
         coastal protection forests, falling short of the original target of 350
        100 percent of community investment packages achieved the investment proposal objectives,
         exceeding the original target of 80 percent
        100 percent of rural productive infrastructure were supported by the project with cost-sharing
         arrangement, exceeding the original target of 80 percent
        6,303 people benefited from the project supported packages, falling short of the target of 25,000; Of
         them, 4,134 were women, falling short of the original target of 10,000
        4,041 ha of coastal forest were restored and managed according to agreed criteria, falling short of the
         original target of 50,000
        Zero ha of coastal protection forests, in project area, was under management/protection of local
         communities (groups/individual households) compared to the original target of 35,000 ha
        99.56 percent of target beneficiaries rated project interventions ‘Satisfactory’ or above, exceeding the
         original target of 80 percent; Of them, 99.9 percent of women rated satisfactory or above, exceeding
         the original target of 80 percent

The achievement of the objective was measured by three indicators: i) coastal area restored and managed
according to agreed criteria, ii) the coastal protected forests managed/protected by local communities, and iii)
the level of satisfaction of beneficiaries with project interventions.

The project fell significantly short on the original key outcome indicators: less than 10 percent of the targeted
coastal area was restored and managed, zero area came under the management of local communities, and


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Forest Sector Modernization & Coastal Re (P157127)



only 25 percent of the targeted number benefited from project supported packages. The rating of project
interventions as ‘satisfactory’ or above by the beneficiaries exceeded the target, but it appears to have been
related to the nature of benefits they received. A small fraction of the beneficiaries (10 out of 2,298) that rated
the interventions as ‘average’ did not receive livelihood or infrastructure packages as others did (ICR, para
48).

For the ‘coastal area restored and managed according to agreed criteria’, the PAD recommended that the
‘agreed criteria’ would be developed in year 1 and that it could include technical norms for ensuring that the
planted areas survive and thrive beyond the life of the project and has a forest composition that mimics, to the
extent possible, natural strands that can buffer against climate events (page 35). The Bank team noted that
a decision was made between the Bank and the government to use relevant government regulations as
agreed criteria rather than developing project-specific ones. The area reported is based on plantings that
adhered to Viet Nam’s national standards in terms of suitability for local conditions and survival rate (para 43).
The ‘area managed according to agreed criteria’ is effectively the same as ‘coastal forest planted/
replanted". The government regulations referred to above specify detailed rules around post-planting,
including the frequency of post-planting tending and the acceptable minimum seedling survival rates, both by
species. The team clarified that during implementation, it was confirmed that all areas planted (except for
small areas affected by flooding and pest) met these rather stringent criteria. This is the reason why the same
value was reported for the outcome and output. However, as time goes by from the planting, these two values
will likely diverge as presumably it would be difficult to for all the planted areas to continue to meet the
minimum survival rates over the longer term

The ToC employed postulated that helping provinces develop integrated plans and tools for financing,
restoring/planting coastal forest with improved seedling supplies, and training communities in forest
management along with support to invest in livelihoods would lead to improved management of forests. A
financial tool developed was not utilized. The activities developed capable nurseries but planting fell short.
Investment support to communities met their objectives but the extent of support was less than planned.
Communities became motivated to protect/manage forests but not in sufficient numbers. The achievement of
key outcomes, area restored/managed according to criteria and area managed by communities, was hindered
by slower than planned delivery of project outputs.

Falling severely short of the targets for restoring and managing coastal areas and obtaining community
management/protection of coastal forests, the efficacy in achieving the objective is rated negligible.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve forest management in the project Provinces.

Revised Rationale
ToC
The revision did not require changes to the ToC presented earlier. the changes only made achievement of the


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 18
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Forest Sector Modernization & Coastal Re (P157127)



                            objective less stringent by eliminating the requirement that some of the forests shoud be protected/managed
                            by communities.

                            The achievements against original targets reported above are also valid for the restructuring. For the
                            restructured targets, achievements were as follows:

                            Outputs

                                  4,041 ha of coastal forest were planted and rehabilitated under the project, falling short of the revised
                                   target of 4,150

                            Outcomes

                                  7 seedling producers had improved quality seedling supply capacity as the result of project
                                   intervention, falling short of the revised target of 10
                                  6,303 benefited from the project supported packages, falling short of the revised target of 7,500; Of
                                   them, 4,134 were women, exceeding the revised target of 3,000
                                  4,041 ha of coastal forest restored and managed according to agreed criteria, falling short of the
                                   revised target of 4,150

                            The achievement of the revised objective is measured by only two indicators, with the target for one of the
                            indicators, the area restored and managed according to criteria, reduced to less than ten percent of the
                            original target. The required level of satisfaction with project interventions remained the same.

                            Under the revised objective, the project performed better on the key indicator: 97 percent of the targeted
                            coastal area were restored and managed.

                            The project fell short on meeting the number of people that benefited from project supported packages.

                            The project nearly met the revised target of the key outcome indicator. In an exchange on July 23, 2024, the
                            Bank team noted that reforestation in coastal areas with brackish water requires trees to be tended for
                            several years to ensure survival. The developed PFES tools were not implemented. Falling also short on
                            some of the intermediate outcomes, such as using PFES tools to raise resources and developing nurseries
                            with the capabilities of supplying quality seedlings, the efficacy in achieving the revised objective is rated
                            Modest.



                            Revised Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale


                                                                                                                               Page 8 of 18
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             Forest Sector Modernization & Coastal Re (P157127)



         The ToC employed assumed that preparing plans, establishing nurseries, planting coastal forests, training
         communities in management and supporting them with funds to invest in livelihoods would improve the
         management of forests. The project fell severely short of meeting the original targets for key outputs and
         outcomes including the area managed under an agreed criteria and area under community
         management/protection. The efficacy in achieving the original objective was rated negligible.



         Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
         Negligible                                               Low achievement
 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Under the revised targets, the area restored and managed according to criteria, reduced to less than ten
         percent of the original target. The ‘area managed according to agreed criteria’ is effectively the same as
         ‘coastal forest planted/replanted. The project nearly met the revised outcome targets but fell short on some
         key intermediate indicators such as developing nurseries with adequate capabilities and delivering project-
         supported packages for improved coastal forest management. The developed PFES tools were not
         implemented. The efficacy in the achievement of the revised objective is rated Modest.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                       Primary Reason
         Modest                                                   Low achievement


 5. Efficiency
At appraisal, the economic analysis assessed benefits from component 2 (protecting and restoring coastal forest
systems) and component 3 (improving livelihoods of coastal economies). The sources of restoration benefits
considered were coastal protection, erosion control, maintenance of fish nurseries, carbon sequestration, food
from the coastal forest system, and recreation and tourism (PAD, Annex 4, para 2). The expected benefit from
improved livelihoods was increased incomes of beneficiaries.

Assuming a project life span of 31 years, social value of carbon at US$30 per ton, 80 percent rate of success for
coastal forest plantations, fishery from 50 percent project mangrove areas and tourism from 30 percent
mangrove areas, and 30 percent success of livelihood models beyond the life of the project, the analysis yielded
an EIRR of 57.4 percent. The EIRR remained robust even when the value of carbon sequestration was not
considered. An economic analysis done at restructuring showed an EIRR of 48 percent (project paper, para
18).

The analysis at closing, considering with and without scenarios and applying the assumption made at appraisal,
generated an EIRR of 18.2 percent. However, it came down to 3.6 percent if the social value of carbon
sequestration was not included (ICR, para 51). The ICR notes (para 60) that if information were collected on
actual benefits from the mangroves planted under this project rather than using average values, the benefits
would be positive even without the carbon benefits but the reasoning is not convincing in the absence of
information that project areas would have offered higher than average benefits.



                                                                                                           Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Forest Sector Modernization & Coastal Re (P157127)



Several factors influenced the efficiency of implementation (ICR, para 53). Slow decision-making by the
government, flood damage caused by a typhoon in 2020, and travel restrictions imposed during the COVID
pandemic hindered project implementation (ICR, para 53).

The nearly two-year gap between approval and effectiveness was a result of slow GoV processes – such as in
allocating budget for the project and signing of on-lending agreements – at the central level. Implementation
was also affected by cumbersome internal approval processes – such as several rounds of consultations among
different departments for decisions on livelihood packages – at the province levels (ICR, para 69).

The changes made to Viet Nam’s policy and legal environment, including the 2019 amendment to the Law on
Public Investment and subsequent changes in decrees and circulars, delayed implementation to begin only in
early 2020, nearly three years after project approval (ICR, para 70).

The initial restructuring package was prepared by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) in
October 2021 and discussed with the World Bank immediately after, but the Prime Minister approved the
changes in October 2023, two months before project closing. Under the restructuring plan, subcomponents 2.1
(forest protection) and 3.1 (livelihood subprojects) would be fully financed by GoV, but no government funding
was available for the activities in the interim.

Once implementation began, investment preparation activities, such as identifying suitable areas for planting,
were delayed by a lack of standards for some coastal forest species and silvicultural practices (ICR, para 71).
Administrative delays in the provinces also delayed afforestation activities that could only be implemented during
short coastal forest planting seasons in some of the provinces. Additionally, some provinces had approved other
economic development projects, such as economic zones and industrial areas, in the areas that were initially
identified for the project.

Estimated economic returns lower than projected and avoidable delays in implementation due to cumbersome
processes at provincial levels and slow decision-making at the central level, leading to partial cancellation of the
project, earn this project a Modest rating for efficiency in implementation.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                  57.40
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                               18.20
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


                                                                                                      Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Forest Sector Modernization & Coastal Re (P157127)



6. Outcome

The PDO to improve forest management in coastal areas of Vietnam was highly relevant to the country’s and
the Bank’s strategies to make coastal communities resilient. Delayed implementation due to slow decision-
making by the government and unavoidable natural calamities required a restructuring that considerably
reduced the scope and ambition of the project. The efficacy of implementation judged on the basis of original
targets was negligible. By the revised targets as well, the efficacy was modest. Lower than projected returns
and delays that resulted in partial cancellation of the grant earned the project a rating of modest in efficiency.

The outcome with original targets was unsatisfactory. The outcome with revised targets was only marginally
better at moderately unsatisfactory. Since 97 percent of the disbursements were pre-restructuring, the overall
outcome is Unsatisfactory, as shown below.

                                                 Original Targets        Revised Targets
Relevance of PDO                                 High
Efficacy                                         Negligible              Modest
Efficiency                                       Modest
1 Outcome ratings                                Unsatisfactory (2)      Moderately Unsatisfactory (3)
2 Share of disbursement                          97%                     3%
3 Weighted value of the outcome rating           1.94                    0.09
                                                 Unsatisfactory
4 Final outcome rating
                                                 (1.94 + 0.09 = 2.03, rounding to 2.0)
a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government risk

Communities protecting and managing forests was an important aspect of improving forest management. At
restructuring, the GoV agreed to finance the two activities that are critical to incentivizing communities.
Central and provincial authorities have committed to allocating the resources needed to manage and protect
forests involving rural communities. Any budget constraint that they may face, which might jeopardize
allocations to this activity, poses a risk to expected and realized outcomes.

Institutional risk

Provincial laws prevent inappropriate land use changes in coastal forests, but deterioration in socioeconomic
conditions due to external shocks may lead communities to encroach on forests or engage in unsustainable
activities that degrade the forested areas. Their incentives would also depend on whether the livelihood
investments they have made with support from the project continue to benefit them. Budgetary constraints
faced by provinces could also prevent them from maintaining coastal roads and other infrastructures funded




                                                                                                      Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Forest Sector Modernization & Coastal Re (P157127)



by the project. Diminished livelihood opportunities for communities poses risk to sustainably managing
forests.

Climatic risk

Although coastal forests were planted to increase resilience to climate change, climate change could also be
a risk if the climate predictions are conservative and/or extreme weather events occur before plantations
have grown into permanent forests with deep enough roots to withstand harsh conditions (ICR, para 89).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The design included activities (improved planning, planting, and livelihood support to communities) that
  could be expected to lead to outputs and outcomes that would contribute to achievement of the
  objectives. The technical design drew on several background studies and experience from countries in
  the region facing similar ecological issues (ICR, para 66). Stakeholder workshops were conducted to set
  targets based on the provinces’ capacity, mitigate concerns regarding seedling availability, and identify
  appropriate stakeholders and beneficiary groups.

  The design assessed the risks as substantial by noting that the grant mechanism to transfer funds to
  provinces was complex considering the subnational capacity to implement, but suggested mitigating
  against it by providing the needed technical assistance (ICR, para 67). It also recognized that cross-
  sectoral coordination would be challenging given Viet Nam’s administrative systems. It recommended
  steering committees that bring leadership together and more technical support. However, the technical
  support and steering committees turned out to be inadequate to overcome the administrative inertia. The
  risk assessment and mitigation measures proposed were inadequate. For example, the design did not
  adequately anticipate the probability of internal GoV regulation changes, the delays caused by extreme
  weather events (major floods in several project provinces), and the lack of sustainability strategy
  development for livelihood investments to ensure their sustainability.

  There was also limited implementation readiness. Once implementation began, the completion of
  investment preparation activities, including confirmation of the eligibility and suitability of planting areas,
  was delayed by a lack of standards for some coastal forest species and silvicultural practices. Difficulties
  also occurred in land clearance and handover for mangrove planting due to the presence of aquaculture
  activities in some of these areas.

  The M&E designed had shortcomings. The criteria for defining improved forest management, a key
  outcome indicator, was left to be determined in the first year. Some of the Intermediate indicators could
  have been defined better (refer section 9). The ICR notes that the project could have also allocated a
  larger budget allocation to strengthen M&E capacity.

  Given the shortcomings in implementation readiness, failing to anticipate the extent to which
  cumbersome administrative processes might come in the way of effective implementation and effective



                                                                                                       Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Forest Sector Modernization & Coastal Re (P157127)



  mitigation measures, and the design of an M&E that also left many definitions unclear, the quality at entry
  of this project is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Through eight official missions by teams with appropriate composition of expertise, the Bank team provided
 adequate supervision (ICR, para 86). Missions’ Aide Memoires, Management Letters, and ISRs were
 candid in highlighting issues and responded promptly to address them, and ISR ratings accurately reflected
 progress and issues.

 The ICR also notes that the World Bank team established a strong relationship with the Government
 counterparts and provided the needed technical guidance on time (para 92). The World Bank efforts to
 expedite GoV processes were nonetheless unsuccessful. In an exchange on July 25, 2024, the Bank team
 noted that the country processes for approving a restructuring were as complex as that of approving a new
 project.

 An MTR was not conducted. The Bank team noted in the same exchange that it was a mistake but around
 the same time they conducted an exercise for restructuring that was more elaborate than an MTR.

 At project closing, a handover plan was agreed upon with the client, to achieve the original targets, along
 with a PCAP to monitor the noted ongoing works.

 The quality of supervision too is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

 Overall, there were significant shortcomings in preparation, The supervision – although it performed the
 routine tasks – was inadequate to overcome the deficiencies at entry, and an MTR was not conducted. The
 overall Bank performance is rate Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The design captured project inputs, outputs, and the outcomes but not adequately. The PDO was pitched
 at a level of outputs; the PDO indicators were predictive proxy indicators (PAD, para 28) that increased the

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Forest Sector Modernization & Coastal Re (P157127)



 likelihood that project activities contributed to coastal resilience. The design could have benefited from
 more specific indicators to track both project outputs and outcomes.

 The PDO indicators were seemingly appropriate and measurable, but without clear definitions. The
 definition of “managed according to agreed criteria” was left to be decided in the first year. Some of the
 intermediate outcome indicators were not clearly defined. For example, “community investment packages
 that have achieved the investment proposal objectives.” There weren’t enough indicators to track both
 outputs and their outcomes for monitoring. For example, there was no indicator to suggest how many
 investment packages were supported. Similarly, the target is a “yes” for PFES tool developed and utilized.
 The indicator could have been more specific in terms of the number of tools and their effectiveness in
 delivering payments to stakeholders for preserving ecosystem services.

 The project could have also benefited from a larger budget allocation to strengthen local M&E capacity
 (ICR, para 82).



b. M&E Implementation
  The Central Program Coordinating Unit (CPSU) implemented the M&E using a web-based monitoring
  tool that it developed and with information coming from the PPMUs. The CPCU’s monitoring team
  conducted periodic activity reviews and site visits to assess project progress and to discuss it with
  contractors and PPMU officials. The CPCU prepared reports on a semiannual and annual basis, which
  summarized key implementation progress and indicated potential issues to be followed up by the World
  Bank team during missions (ICR, para 83).

  At restructuring, post-planting verification reports, provincial-level data collection templates, and contracts
  were reviewed to harmonize the methodologies for data collection. The CPCU too faced capacity
  limitations. It was provided with M&E support through the hiring of an M&E specialist during the last two
  years of project implementation (2022–2023).

  The CPCU was unable to launch its planned M&E consultancy contracts partly due to the delay in
  processing project restructuring. The World Bank team mobilized two M&E consultants to assist in setting
  up a central repository of project data, including a web-based platform, which was effectively used by
  PPMUs to share data to track progress toward meeting project performance indicators (ICR, para 78).

  The country submitted a project completion report but required support from the World Bank team and
  had challenges with data quality and timeliness (ICR, para 77).



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data informed the identification of implementation issues and the restructuring, including
  adjustments to the Results Framework. However, it took some time for the M&E system to be fully
  functional in the provinces, and data quality issues were observed, including lack of supporting evidence
  and different degrees of understanding about results indicators across provinces.

  Given the shortcomings in design, implementation and utilization, the overall M&E rating is Modest.



                                                                                                      Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Forest Sector Modernization & Coastal Re (P157127)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental

   The project was categorized as B (Partial Assessment) for environmental assessment. The environmental
   safeguards policies triggered were Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP 4.04),
   Pest Management (OP 4.09), Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11), and Forests (OP 4.36). They were
   triggered due to the potential adverse impacts on ecosystems, natural habitats, and physical cultural
   resources from activities such as forest plantation and restoration and construction, rehabilitation, and/or
   operation of small infrastructure works.

   The project complied with the requirements and procedures set out in the Environmental and Social
   Management Plan (ESMP). An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared
   at appraisal.

   Social

   The safeguard policies that were triggered by the project were Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) and
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12). triggered communities and restrictions of local communities’ access
   to forests, forest products, and coastal protection forests.

   To manage these impacts and ensure adequate compensation to affected people, the client developed an
   Ethnic Minority Planning Framework (EMPF), a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and a Process
   Framework (PF), which were disclosed in-country and in the World Bank before appraisal. Involuntary
   resettlement and restriction to resources were flagged as potential issues at project design, but they did not
   materialize. During implementation, an Ethnic Minority Development Plan was developed for Quang Ninh
   province (the only province with ethnic minority presence in the project area) and implemented satisfactorily.
   Further, eight Social Assessments were prepared and implemented for the project provinces.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management

   Overall, the FM of the project was consistently rated Moderately Satisfactory. The project submitted
   audited financial statements of acceptable quality on time, but the submission of interim financial reports
   were occasionally delayed. The CPCU coordinated with the World Bank and with the relevant authorities
   on budgeting and planning, fund flows, reporting, and auditing and guided the PPMUs. Delayed annual


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Forest Sector Modernization & Coastal Re (P157127)



   budget allocations (around March each year) by provinces or insufficient funds to cover planned activities
   was an FM issue that the project faced because of lengthy approval processes.

   The ICR provides no information on any external audit conducted.

   Procurement

   Overall, the procurement performance by the CPCU and the PPMUs was Moderately Satisfactory. Delays
   were faced initially because of capacity limitations, which required training in procurement and contract
   management across all levels. Inefficiencies in appraisal/approval processes, late budget allocations,
   particularly for medium-term investment plans of the Government, and gaps in technical capacities and
   procurement planning issues slowed procurement in the first 2.5 years of implementation. In the three
   years, 2020, 2022, and 2023, all goods/civil works packages using IDA funds were implemented through
   Viet Nam electronic procurement system, following the World Bank’s procurement procedures ensuring
   competition, fairness, transparency, and efficiency in procurement. Procurement substantially improved
   later in the project, accelerating to complete 197 packages (US$72.4 million including US$65.8 million of
   IDA funding and US$6.6 million from counterpart funds) that were cleared on Systematic Tracking of
   Exchanges in Procurement (STEP). No complaint or indication of fraud or corruption was found, and no
   mis-procurement was declared during project implementation.

   Grievance redress

   Grievance redress mechanisms was set up and functioned in all the provinces as required by the ESMF.
   There were no complaints, including on social and environmental safeguard issues. At project closing, the
   upgrading of a 600 m of a 3 Km rural road section was incomplete; a Post-Closing Action Plan (PCAP) was
   agreed to by the GoV and the World Bank to ensure follow-up compliance monitoring.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                       IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                  Shortcomings in quality at entry
                                Satisfactory          Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial



                                                                                                    Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Forest Sector Modernization & Coastal Re (P157127)



12. Lessons

The ICR presented five lessons. Three of them that are likely to be widely applicable are presented
below with some editing.

In designing activities that need to be appropriate for specific situations – such as coastal
afforestation plans – consultations with local communities can improve the outcomes (ICR,
para 90). Even with the shortened implementation period, the survival rate of coastal forest
plantation and restoration was significantly higher under the Forest Sector Modernization and
Coastal Resilience Enhancement project (FMCR) than in similar projects implemented previously in
Viet Nam without incorporating local knowledge. In implementing FMCR, local experts assessed the
sites before planting. The process consumed time and required rejecting unsuitable areas, reducing
the planted area, but it paid off in terms of high survival rates. The role played by local communities,
particularly the planting and tending of trees by women, also contributed to the success.

Analyzing political economy and government decision-making processes as part of
assessing risk can help identify the mitigation measures needed to insulate the project from
cumbersome decision making processes (ICR, para 91). Implementation of the project was
challenged by cumbersome central and province-level internal approval procedures, which affected
key results. Strengthened coordination between technical experts and decision-makers would have
better aligned technical solutions with broader political and economic considerations.

Collecting robust data that reflect the unique characteristics of each location can help in
comparing options for their cost-effectiveness and choosing the interventions that align with
ecological and economic goals of the project. Site-specific analyses can help in comparing
mangrove restoration with alternative coastal protection measures to highlight cost-effectiveness;
and the conditions for natural regeneration versus planting need to be evaluated to choose the
method that aligns with the ecological and economic goals of the project.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR offers a near complete narrative encompassing the context in which the project was developed, the
nature of its activities, implementation difficulties, the reasons for restructuring and partial cancellation of the
grant, and the project outcomes. The report employs sound methodology to link project outcomes with outputs,
using available information and offering details in footnotes. It presents appropriate reasoning for rating various
aspects of the project. It identifies the deficiencies. For example, in the design of a key outcome indicator.
Crisply written, the report offers a logical narrative. It identifies appropriate lessons grounded in the experience
of the project.




                                                                                                      Page 17 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Forest Sector Modernization & Coastal Re (P157127)



The ICR could have explained why an MTR was not conducted. The ICR could have been more outcome-
oriented. For example, it could have offered at least limited information from the assessments that were done to
determine whether the investment packages had achieved the objectives. Overall, the quality of the ICR is
rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 18 of 18
