     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO Nat'l Roads & Airport Infrastructure (P122007)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0024159

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P122007                                      BO Nat'l Roads & Airport Infrastructure

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Bolivia                                      Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-49230                                    31-Dec-2016                                         80,588,721.14

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 05-May-2011                                  02-Aug-2023

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             109,500,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                               95,340,585.42                                              0.00

 Actual                                           80,588,721.14                                              0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                  Fernando Manibog              Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and in
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 3) is:

   " To improve (i) year-round transitability of the San Buenaventura - Ixiamas national road: and (ii)
   safety, security and operational reliability of the Rurrenabaque Airport."



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO Nat'l Roads & Airport Infrastructure (P122007)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  02-Mar-2022

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   There were three components (PAD, page 4).

   1. Improving the San Buenaventura - Ixiamas National Road. The estimated cost at appraisal was
   US$118.20 million. The actual cost was US$67.63 million. The actual cost was lower than the appraisal
   estimate due to the reduced scope.

   This component aimed to improve the San Buenaventura - Ixiamas National Road through: (i) an asphalt
   concrete pavement; (ii) rehabilitating drainage and other road protection measures: (iii) constructing 21
   bridges; and (iv) providing support for audits.

   The scope of this component was reduced through the project restructuring (discussed below). The activity
   of rehabilitating the San Buenaventura - Ixiamas National Road was dropped and the target for constructing
   bridges was marginally increased from 21 to 22.

   2. Improving the Rurrenabaque Airport. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$6.00 million. The actual
   cost was US$13.34 million. The actual cost of this component was higher than the appraisal estimate due to
   the increased project scope.

   Activities in this component aimed at supporting phase II of the Rurrenabaque airport improvement program
   through constructing: (i) a new taxiway, apron, control tower, operations building, rescue and firefighting
   buildings, an access road and a passenger terminal; (ii) installing aviation control rescue and firefighting
   equipment; and (iii) support for audits.

   The scope of this component was expanded with the project restructuring to include: (i) paved fire truck
   access, airport perimeter fencing works, platform construction taxiway and a drainage system; (ii) safety,
   meteorological and security equipment including medical, firefighting maintenance and security equipment,
   an ambulance and air navigation system; and (iii) operational support to the Airport and Aviation Services
   Administration (AASANA).

   3. Institutional strengthening of the National Road Agency (ABC), AASANA and other relevant
   entities. This component was to be financed by the government. The estimated cost at appraisal was
   US$5.00 million. The actual cost was US$0.69 million. The actual cost of this component was significantly



                                                                                                  Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BO Nat'l Roads & Airport Infrastructure (P122007)



  lower than the appraisal estimate as most of these activities were not completed. There were three sub-
  components:

  a. strengthening ABC and AASANA's institutional capacity through technical assistance (TA) and training
  for monitoring and implementing the Good Governance and Anti-Corruption Action Plan.

  b. strengthening ABC's monitoring capacity through: (i) installing checkpoints to prevent illegal logging; (ii)
  purchasing equipment for inspections in areas under the Authority on Forest and Land (ABT); (iii) TA for
  studies aimed at: (1) assessing illegal logging in project areas and recommendations for diminishing it; (2)
  updating the policy on forest concession and implementation instruments; (iv) acquiring high resolution
  satellite images for tracing changes in forest cover; and (iv) conducting technical workshops for indigenous
  population on municipal authorities on sustainable forest management.

  c. strengthening the National Service for Protected Areas (SERNAP's) monitoring capacity, through: (i)
  providing personnel, equipment and vehicles for preventing illegal logging and poaching in the eastern
  border of the Madidi National Park; (ii) constructing a campground facility to serve as headquarters for park
  rangers; (iii) conducting workshops to strengthen coordination among stakeholders in the National Park: (iv)
  preparing annual operational plans for the Park and its buffer zone; and (v) TA for designing a financially
  sustainable mechanism for managing the park and a legal and policy framework for granting ecotourism
  concessions and promoting tourism.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal (inclusive of price and physical contingencies) was
  US$129.20 million. The actual cost was US$80.58 million. The actual cost was lower than the appraisal
  estimate due to the significantly reduced scope of component one activities.

  Project financing. The project was financed by an International Development Association (IDA) credit of
  US$109.50 million. US$5.49 million of the credit was cancelled (discussed in section 10). The revised
  estimate of the credit was US$104.00 million. The amount disbursed was US$80.58 million. The ICR (page
  40) noted that there were significant exchange rate changes during implementation.

  Borrower contribution. The borrower contribution was estimated at US$19.70 million. There was no
  borrower contribution during implementation.

  Dates. The project was approved on May 5. 2011, became effective 11 months later on April 10, 2012, and
  was scheduled to close on December 31, 2016. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was held on January 16,
  2017. The project closed six and half years behind schedule on August 2, 2023 for a total implementation
  period of 12 years.

  Other changes. There were six Level 2 restructurings.

  Through the first restructuring on December 28, 2016, the closing date was extended by 19 months
  from December 31, 2016 to September 30, 2018, due to a failed procurement process for the road sector
  activity and slow implementation of the Rurrenabaque airport works due to land acquisition issues.




                                                                                                     Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO Nat'l Roads & Airport Infrastructure (P122007)



   Through the second restructuring on July 25, 2018, the closing date was extended by two months from
   September 30, 2018 to November 30, 2018, to enable the government to close longstanding procurement
   issues.

   Through the third project restructuring on October 2, 2018, the closing date was extended by 46
   months from October 30, 2018 to August 7, 2022 for completing the airport sector activities.

   The main change made through the fourth project restructuring on November 12, 2019:

         At government request, the Bank reallocated funds from component one to component two
          activities. While progress in component one activities (road activities) was limited, component two
          (airport activities) showed progress. The scope of the airport activities was expanded with funds
          partly reallocated from road sector activities.

   The following changes were made through the fifth project restructuring on March 2, 2022:

         The activity of rehabilitating the San Buenaventura - Ixiamas National Road was dropped and the
          scope of component one activity was increased to constructing 22 bridges. The PDO - level results
          indicators on transport costs and its targets were revised to reflect that construction of bridges would
          still reduce transport costs and improve transitability, although not to the same magnitude as the
          original scope,
         The implementing agency for component two activity was changed from the dissolution of AASANA
          to a new implementing agency - Bolivian Aviation and Airports (NNBOL).

   Through the sixth project restructuring on August 2, 2022, the closing date was extended by a year
   from August 7, 2022 to August 2, 2023 due to the delays in implementation of component one and two
   activities.

   Split rating. Although the PDO was unchanged, the scope of component one activity was reduced
   substantially with the fifth project restructuring. when 64% of the credit was officially disbursed. The ICR
   uses 50% disbursement for the split rating exercise and does not provide convincing reasons for using
   50%. This review is based on a split rating of objectives, when 64% was officially disbursed before
   restructuring per OPCS guidelines.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Bolivia is landlocked and geographically divided into three categories: lowlands, valleys
and high plateau, with differences in terms of accessibility and traffic volumes.

Road sector context. The transport sector, with roads being predominant, played a critical role in
integrating diverse areas. The sector faced many challenges resulting from Bolivia's landlocked condition,
geography, and vulnerability to climate events. Rain patterns caused rivers to swell, and together with



                                                                                                      Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BO Nat'l Roads & Airport Infrastructure (P122007)



               geological conditions, threatened bridges and roads. Other challenges related to weaknesses in the sector
               management of the national road agency (ABC).

               Air sector context. Air transport in Bolivia had a significant weight in domestic travel. In 2008, Bolivian
               airports handled 3.6 million passengers, about 78% of which were domestic. The Rurrenabaque airport
               played a key role in ensuring connectivity during extreme climatic events and evacuating people during
               emergencies. The Administration of Airport and Aviation Services (AASANA), responsible for planning and
               managing Bolivia' airports, was self-financed through airport taxes and the continuous underfunding of this
               agency adversely affected the airports operation and maintenance.

               Government strategy. At appraisal, the National Development Plan (PND) approved in 2006, articulated
               the need for reducing poverty and social exclusion through developing trade and specifically highlighted the
               need for integrating the national transport system through infrastructure investments. The PDO continues to
               be relevant to the Government strategy. The PND for 2021-25 articulated the need for promoting national
               and international integration through roads and identified the Rurrenabaque airport as a crucial airport for
               Bolivia.

               World Bank (WB) strategy. The PDO was well-aligned with two pillars of the Interim Strategy Note for
               2010 -2011 at appraisal; Pillar I: Productive Development and Support to development of agricultural
               production along the San Buenaventura- Ixiamas corridor. and Pillar II: Sustainable development by
               promoting environmentally-friendly tourism. The PDO is well-aligned with the Country Partnership
               Framework (CPF) for 2023-2026, particularly its high-level objective two of improving income earnings for
               vulnerable households through improving connectivity. Given that poor road connectivity is a key
               bottleneck, the CPF recognized the importance of investing in transport infrastructure such as bridges to
               facilitate access to markets and services.

               Previous Bank experience. The Bank had previously financed the Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance
               Project (2002-2011). The scope of this current project was broader than the previously financed project.
               This project included, in addition to rehabilitating roads and bridges, investments aimed at improving the
               safety, security, and operational reliability of the Rurrenabaque Airport. While the previous project did not
               have an institutional component, this project included activities aimed at institutional strengthening of the
               ABC, AASANA and other related entities such as the Protected Areas National Service (SERNAP) and
               Forests and Land Authority (ABT). The overall level of ambition of the project was appropriate. The
               relevance of PDO is rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                                                                                                                        Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BO Nat'l Roads & Airport Infrastructure (P122007)



PDO 1. To improve year-round transitability of the San Buenaventura - Ixiamas national road

Rationale
Theory of change. The causal links between inputs, outputs and outcomes were logical and the intended
outcomes were monitorable. The outputs of activities such as improving roads and bridges on the more than
20 river crossings along the road and strengthening the capacity of ABC and other relevant entities, were
likely to help in realizing the outcome of improving year-round transitability of the San Buenaventura Ixiamas
national road and aid in the long-term development outcome of economic integration. The results framework
assumes the following: (i) The completion of works is not disrupted by major natural events: and (ii) The
implementing agency is adequately staffed.

Outputs.

      22 bridges were built (including 21 new bridges and replacing one defective bridge), as compared to
       the original target of 21.
      The project partially improved the road condition through widening, adjusting the alignment area,
       building culverts, and paving seven kilometers (km) of roads as compared to the target of 114 km.
      The project implemented a fire early warning system (EWS) to alert of any impacts that could be
       caused with the improvement of accessibility brought about by the bridges constructed under the
       project.

Most of the activities aimed at institutional strengthening of the ABC and other transport entities were not
implemented.

Outcomes.

The outputs described above were expected to contribute to: (i) improving the year-round transitability of the
road; and (ii) reducing transport cost to road users, through reducing vehicle operating costs and monetary
value of travel time.

      There were no transit interruptions on the San Buenaventura Ixiamas national road when the project
       closed even in the rainy season, as compared to the baseline when the road was impassable for 75
       days a year.
      In the dry season before the project, travel time by cars on the national road was three hours. With
       project interventions, travel time reduced to two hours. In the rainy season, travel time when the road
       was virtually impassable before the bridges were constructed, travel time was five hours. With project
       interventions, travel time in the rainy season reduced to two hours.
      Transport costs were reduced for all vehicle types after the project, although short of the original
       target. Transport cost for cars were reduced by 38% (as compared to the original target of 63%), for
       pick-ups by 41% (target 68%), for buses by 40% (target 66%), for trailer trucks by 19% (target 51%),
       for larger trucks by 23% (target 51%), for medium trucks by 23% (target 52%), for large trucks by 36%
       (target 39%) and for articulated trucks by 37% (target 41%).
      The ICR (para 29) noted that bus companies reduced transport fares and increased the frequency of
       trips on the road. Beneficiaries mentioned that bus fares for a trip from San Buenaventura to Ixiamas
       were reduced from 50 Bolivian Bolivianos (BOB) before the project to 30 BOB after the project, while
       bus fares for a trip from La Paz to Ixiamas were reduced from 120 BOB to 90 BOB.


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BO Nat'l Roads & Airport Infrastructure (P122007)



While the project did aid in improving the transitability of the road, transport cost reduction was far below the
original target. Efficacy of this objective is therefore rated as modest before restructuring.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
PDO 1. To improve year-round transitability of the San Buenaventura - Ixiamas national road


Revised Rationale
The objective was not revised. However, the project scope was drastically reduced as the original targets
were deemed to be over-ambitious.

Outputs.

As discussed above.

Outcomes.

      There were no transit interruptions on the road as compared to baseline when the road was
       impassable for 75 days a year.
      Travel time by cars were reduced from three hours to two hours. In the rainy season, travel time by
       cars reduced from five hours to two hours.
      Transport costs were reduced for all vehicle types. Transport cost for cars reduced by 45% (as
       compared to the revised target of 48%), for pick-ups by 38% (target 41%), for light buses by 43%
       (target 46%), for medium buses by 44% (target 47%), for heavy buses by 48% (target 50%), for light
       trucks by 38% (target 41%), for medium trucks by 35% (target 38%), for large trucks by 36% (target
       39%) and for articulated trucks by 37% (target 41%).
      As noted above, bus companies reduced transport fares and increased the frequency of trips on the
       road.

The project aided in improving the transitability of the road. Transport costs were reduced for all vehicle types.
Although short of the revised target, they were close to the revised targets. Efficacy of this objective is rated
as substantial after restructuring.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BO Nat'l Roads & Airport Infrastructure (P122007)




Objective
PDO 2. To improve the safety, security and operational reliability of the Rurrenabaque Airport.

Rationale
Theory of change. The causal links between inputs, outputs and were logical. The intended outcomes were
monitorable. The outputs such as a new taxiway, apron, control tower, operational and rescue and firefighting
buildings, access road and passenger terminal, equipment for aviation control and rescue and firefighting
equipment together with strengthening the institutional capacity of AASANA, were likely to help in improving
the safety, security and operational reliability of the Rurrenabaque Airport. The results framework assumes
the following: (i) The completion of works is not disrupted by major natural events: and (ii) The implementing
agency maintains adequate staff.

Outputs.

The following activities were completed as targeted.

      The taxiway, apron, control tower, operational building, platform, passenger terminals, fire truck
       access were constructed: A secure perimeter fencing was installed: and equipment for the airport's
       safe and secure operation were acquired.

The activities associated with acquisition of the runway lighting system, equipment for the rescue and
firefighting service and a truck to support the monitoring and maintenance of airport infrastructure were
eventually dropped.

The project design included activities aimed at institutional strengthening of AASANA. Most of these activities,
which were to be financed by the government were not completed.

Outcomes.

The outputs described above were expected to increase the number of inbound and outbound flights from the
Rurrenabaque Airport.

      The number of inbound and outbound flights from the Rurrenabaque Airport increased from 65% at
       the baseline to 95% when the project closed, exceeding the target of 90%. The ICR (para 31) noted
       that in the past, up to 35% of the flights from the airport were cancelled due to the runway surface
       condition. The ICR notes that after the COVID-19 pandemic, national flights from the airport increased
       to 295 in 2022 and up to 530 in 2023 and the number of airport passengers increased to 4,912 in
       2022 and 10,120 in 2023.

The ICR (para 31) acknowledges that the outcomes were not fully attributable to project activities as
improvements were made to the airport by AASANA prior to the project. However, it is reasonable to
conclude that the project activities significantly contributed to improving the operational reliability and
decrease in cancelled flights from the airport due to safety and security reasons. Efficacy of this objective is
rated as substantial.



Rating

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 17
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 BO Nat'l Roads & Airport Infrastructure (P122007)



                              Substantial


                              OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
                              Revised Objective
                              PDO 2. To improve the safety, security and operational reliability of the Rurrenabaque Airport.

                              Revised Rationale
                              The objective and the targets were not revised.



                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Efficacy of PDO 1 was modest before restructuring as the transport cost reduction was far below the original
                            targets. Efficacy of PDO 2 is rated as substantial, but marginally so since the ICR (para 31) acknowledges
                            that the outcomes were not fully attributable to project activities as improvements were made to the airport by
                            AASANA prior to the project. However, it is reasonable to conclude that the project activities contributed to
                            improving the operational reliability and decrease in cancelled flights from the airport due to safety and
                            security reasons. The overall efficacy is rated as Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Efficacy of PDO 1 is substantial after restructuring, as the revised targets were realized. Efficacy of PDO 2 is
                            rated as substantial. The overall efficacy is rated as Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency



                                                                                                                                Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BO Nat'l Roads & Airport Infrastructure (P122007)



Economic analysis. A cost-benefit analysis was conducted for component one activities using the Highway
Design and Management Model four, version 2 (HDM -4). The activities accounted for 91% of the appraisal
estimate and 82% of actual cost. The benefits were assumed to come from improved transitability due to
savings in passenger and freight vehicle operating costs (VOCs) and time savings due to travel time reduction
for vehicles. The Net Present Value (NPV) at 10% discount rate at closure was US$0.5 million, compared to the
NPV of US$25.7 million at appraisal. The ex post Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was 13%, compared
to the ex ante EIRR of 15.5%. The NPV and EIRR at closure were lower than the appraisal estimate due to
factors such as increase in construction period, decrease in scope of road network and pavement extension,
lower than expected traffic flows and vehicle composition change (with a higher percentage shift from larger
vehicles to motorcycles). The ICR (para 37) noted that the Project's impact on Carbon dioxide emissions was
minimal.

Administrative and operational Issues during implementation. There were several shortcomings in the initial
years due to factors such as: (i) an eleven-month delay between approval and effectiveness due to delays in
signing the subsidiary agreements with the ABC and AASANA; (ii) a failed procurement process leading to cost
escalation; (iii) poor contractor performance, which resulted in the contractor's abandonment of works in April
2017 and subsequent termination of the contract. The abandonment of the original road civil works contract led
to sunk costs which eventually led to a significant reduction in project scope; (iv) slow implementation of airport
sector activities due to land compensation issues; and (v) cost escalations related to the scaled-up works on
bridges, weigh stations and tolling plazas. These factors contributed to cost and time overruns, with the scope of
works under component one reduced to the construction of 22 bridges instead of completely improving the San
Buenaventura- Ixiamas road and the project closing six and half years behind schedule.

The activities pertaining to the institutional strengthening of ABC, AASANA and other transport entities, which
were to be financed by the government, were dropped due to lack of government funding.

 Overall efficiency is rated as Modest mainly due to the low EIRR and NPV at closing and the administrative and
operational shortcomings during implementation.




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     91.00
 Appraisal                                                 15.50
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     82.00
 ICR Estimate                                              13.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BO Nat'l Roads & Airport Infrastructure (P122007)




6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the Government strategy and Bank strategy is High. Efficiency is Modest due to
the operational shortcomings during implementation. Efficacy of the first objective is modest before the
restructuring when the scope was significantly reduced was disbursed and substantial after restructuring. Most
of the institutional strengthening activities (including the critically important activity focusing on controlling illegal
logging) were cancelled. The overall outcome is rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory before restructuring and
Moderately Satisfactory after restructuring. Taking the share of disbursements before and after restructuring,
overall outcome is rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Table: Overall Outcome Rating

Rating Dimension                                             Original Scope                    Revised Scope
Relevance of Objective                                                             High
Overall efficacy                                                 Modest                          Substantial
PDO 1                                                            Modest                          Substantial
PDO 2                                                                       Substantial
Efficiency                                                                    Modest
Outcome rating                                         Moderately Unsatisfactory     Moderately Satisfactory
Numerical Value of the outcome rating                             3                             4
Disbursement                                                     64%                          36%
Weighted Value of the outcome rating                        3*0.64=1.92                   4*0.36 = 1.44
Final Outcome Rating                                             3.36 (Moderately Unsatisfactory)
a. Outcome Rating
    Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical Risk. The technical risk to the sustainability of project investments is Moderate. The ICR (para
82) notes that the National Roads Agency (ABC) had a well-established road conservation and maintenance
program through hiring of companies for routine and sometimes periodic maintenance, and microenterprises
for cleaning and other minor works, that has proven to work well. According to the clarifications provided by
the team, resources for road maintenance come from the following: (i) Vias Bolivia, the national tolling entity,
that provides the National Road Agency with 53% of the collected funds for primary road network
conservation purposes; (ii) 15% of all hydrocarbon and derived substances direct taxes, including special
gasoline and diesel oil taxes); (iii) grants, credits or loans from national government; (iv) grants, credits or
loans from international financing organizations; (v) special permits and/or fines resulting from the application
of the Law on Dimensions and Load (for heavy traffic); (vi) other complementary resources assigned by the
national government for conservation of the primary road network; (vii) extraordinary necessary transfers;
and (viii) transfers from the National Account for Road Conservation. In addition, ABC was completing a
collection of data regarding the 22 bridges. Likewise for airports, the implementing agency also has a
maintenance program.



                                                                                                           Page 11 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BO Nat'l Roads & Airport Infrastructure (P122007)



The ICR acknowledges that climate change-induced increased flooding and landslides could threaten the
sustainability of investments, particularly roads.

Government commitment. There is a risk to the sustainability of investments, given that institutional
strengthening activities envisioned under the project (including activities focused on controlling illegal
logging) were not completed due to a lack of government funding.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank prepared this project based on the experience from the Bank-financed Road Rehabilitation and
  Maintenance Project (2002-2011). Lessons incorporated at design included: (i) recognizing that capacity
  building should not be limited to the implementing agencies, in isolation from the wider context of
  institutions involved in the sector (discussed in section 3); and (ii) given governance
  weaknesses, developing a Good Governance and Anti-Corruption Plan (GAC) for helping ABC and
  AASANA improve governance practices.

  The implementation arrangements made at the appraisal were appropriate. The ABC, the agency
  responsible for managing the primary roads, was in charge of implementing the component one activity,
  and the AASANA was responsible for implementing the component two activity.

  The Bank team identified several risks at appraisal, including risks with human resources and safeguards
  and the fiduciary management capacity of the implementing agencies. The mitigation measures included
  capacity building and support for the executing agencies. Even with these measures, the project risk was
  rated as High at appraisal (PAD, para 38). The arrangements made at appraisal for safeguards and
  fiduciary compliance were appropriate (discussed in section 10).

  There were significant shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry. One, the technical aspects of the project were
  not ready for effectiveness. given the relatively short preparation time of this project from identification to
  the Board date. Draft bidding documents of component one and two activities were not updated during
  preparation, which led to procurement delays and extensions of the closing date, as the designs and
  bidding documents had to be updated during implementation. Two, there were cost overruns, especially
  in the road sector activities, and the financing gap led to a reduction in project scope. And three, the
  design included activities aimed at building and strengthening institutions. These activities were to be
  wholly financed by the government. The lack of ownership of the agencies led to the non-completion of
  these activities, and the Bank did not have the leverage to oversee the implementation of these
  activities.

  In view of these shortcomings, the Bank's performance at Quality-at-Entry is rated as Moderately
  Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating

                                                                                                       Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO Nat'l Roads & Airport Infrastructure (P122007)



  Moderately Unsatisfactory



b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR (para 78) noted that supervision missions were carried out at least twice a year and more
 frequently during critical phases of the project. Virtual follow-up meetings were held bi-weekly during critical
 phases of the project. Bank supervision team worked closely with the ABC and provided Hands-on
 Extended Support (HEIS) and this helped in procurement of the 22 bridges after the restructuring of 2020.
 The Bank also incorporated experts specialized in bridges to the team to counter the risk that the
 contractors might neglect quality control. This helped in completing the construction of bridges without any
 quality problems. The Bank also demonstrated flexibility by narrowing the road sector activity to a level that
 was achievable within a reasonable framework. The support provided by the team aided in safeguards
 compliance. The continuity of leadership was more or less maintained, with four task team leaders during
 the actual project implementation period of 12 years.

 There were moderate shortcomings in supervision. Towards the end of the project, the Bank's focus was
 on completing component one and two activities, while paying less attention to component three
 (institutional strengthening of ABC, AASANA and other entities: Moreover, better prioritization of
 acquisitions could have helped in enabling the implementing agency to acquire illumination for the airport's
 night flights. The Bank was also not able to receive timely updated values for the indicators in the Results
 Framework.

 Overall Bank performance is rated as moderately unsatisfactory, due mainly to the shortcomings at Quality-
 at-Entry.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The key outcome indicator linked to the road sector interventions measured transitability of the road
 through savings in vehicle operating cost and reduced travel time. This indicator did not however directly
 address the outcome of whether there was year-round transitability during the rainy season. Regarding the
 airport sector, the indicator measured the number of inbound and outbound flights operated from the
 Rurrenabaque Airport, as per the published schedule. While this indicator was appropriate, it was not fully
 attributable to the project activities, as the number of inbound and outbound flights from the airport would
 also depend on the interventions that had previously taken place on the airport. There were no appropriate
 indicators for the envisioned institutional strengthening activities. ABC and AASANA were to be responsible



                                                                                                     Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO Nat'l Roads & Airport Infrastructure (P122007)



 for data collection and monitoring the results indicators from project inception until project closing, with
 support from a consultant financed under the project.



b. M&E Implementation
  An appropriate indicator - that tracked year-round transitability on the road as compared to in the baseline
  when the road was impassable for 75 days a year during the rainy season - was introduced with the
  project restructuring.

  The ICR (para 64) noted that M&E implementation faced significant challenges, due to the rotation of
  both the technical and managerial staff in the implementing agencies. As there was no dedicated M&E
  specialist in the teams working on the project, reporting responsibilities were with Project supervision
  consultant. Although the consultant submitted progress reports, these reports only provided information
  on physical and financial progress (and not on the PDO level results indicators).



c. M&E Utilization
  Throughout the Project lifetime, indicators in the Results Framework were not routinely updated and
  reported in detail. Hence, the M&E data did not become a valuable tool for monitoring. Given the
  shortcomings in design and implementation, there was little scope for the M&E system to be utilized for
  course corrections during implementation.

  In sum, M&E is rated as Modest, mainly due to the shortcomings in M&E design and implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under the WB safeguard policies.
   Six safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Natural
   Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); Forests (OP/BP 4.36); Physical Cultural Resources (OP?BP 4.11); Indigenous
   Peoples (OP/BP 4.10); and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

   Environmental Assessment, Natural Habitats, Forests and Physical Cultural Resources. The potential
   environmental impacts of project activities were expected to be site-specific, reversible and mitigable. These
   impacts included; (i) deforestation and forest degradation; (ii) biodiversity loss; (iii) illegal logging; (iv)
   degradation of natural habitats; (iv) damage/destruction of physical cultural resources. An Environment
   Impact Assessment (EIA) report and an Environment Mitigation Plan (EMP) were prepared and publicly-
   disclosed at appraisal to address these safeguards (PAD, para 64).




                                                                                                      Page 14 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BO Nat'l Roads & Airport Infrastructure (P122007)



  The ICR (para 69) observed that compliance with environmental safeguards was generally satisfactory,
  although there were some problems during implementation. Special environmental safeguards initiatives
  were implemented such as socio-environmental trainings and a flora and fauna rescue program. The
  liabilities in the environmental liabilities restoration program were resolved by closure and there were no
  issues with the safeguards on Natural Habitats, Forests and Physical Cultural Resources.

  Indigenous Peoples (IP). ABC conducted a Social Assessment (SA) and prepared and publicly-disclosed
  an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) at appraisal to address issues pertaining to IP (PAD, para 54). The ICR
  (para 67) noted that there were some delays in the implementation of the IPP, as a result of which the
  execution of the IPPs was extended until the end of the project. The ICR noted that the issues with
  indigenous peoples were resolved to date.

  Involuntary Resettlement. ABC prepared and publicly-disclosed a Resettlement and Compensation Plan
  (PRIPA) to address adverse impacts relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement (PAD, para
  57). The ICR (para 67) notes that the compliance with social safeguards was satisfactory, although there
  were shortcomings during implementation. A post-closing action plan was developed to enable the ABC to
  complete outstanding Project social safeguards commitments. Regarding the Grievance Redress
  Mechanism (GRM), although there were some pending cases at project closure, they have been resolved to
  date.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Assessment (FA). The Bank conduced a FA of ABC and AASANA at appraisal. The PAD (para
  50) noted that as the project design was straightforward with clearly defined activities, the project was to
  rely on the existing financial arrangements at ABC and AASANA. While ABC had implemented externally-
  financed projects, AASANA had limited experience with such projects. The overall FM risk was rated as
  substantial at appraisal (PAD, para 51). The ICR (para 74) noted that FM of the Project encountered
  numerous challenges due to the constrained capabilities of the implementing entities. According to the
  information provided by the team, the unqualified audits were submitted, although with delays.

  Procurement Assessment. The Bank conducted a procurement assessment of ABC and AASANA at
  appraisal. The AASANA had no experience of implementing externally-financed projects. Several
  mitigation measures were incorporated at design such as developing a procurement plan.

  The ICR (para 72) noted that the Project faced procurement problems in several instances of delays due to
  a combination of factors including, a failed bidding process for civil works, limited capacity of procurement
  staff in AASANA and frequent staff turnover. There was a case of mis procurement for the
  supervision contract for road sector activity. Both the original contractor's and supervision firm's contracts
  were investigated by the World Bank's Integrity Vice-Presidency. The outcome of the investigation was
  released on September 12, 2019, resulting in a 28 month disbarment of the supervision firm. The Bank
  undertook remedial measures, including partial cancellation of funds in the amount of US$5.49 million,
  partial refund and reprimand.




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO Nat'l Roads & Airport Infrastructure (P122007)



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were no unintended impacts.



d. Other
   Not applicable.



11. Ratings
                                                                                     Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                     Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                     The weighted final outcome
                                                                                     rating after the project
                                 Moderately              Moderately
Outcome                                                                              restructuring when 64% of the
                                 Satisfactory            Unsatisfactory
                                                                                     credit was disbursed, is
                                                                                     moderately unsatisfactory.
                                                                                     Bank performance is rated as
                                 Moderately              Moderately                  moderately unsatisfactory mainly
Bank Performance
                                 Satisfactory            Unsatisfactory              due to the shortcomings at
                                                                                     Quality-at-Entry.
Quality of M&E                   Modest                  Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. Preparation of necessary technical studies for major transport infrastructure investments
at design would help in minimizing implementation delays. In this project, the road designs
were not prepared during preparation. This contributed to delays following effectiveness, as final
engineering designs had to be prepared.

2. Allocation of Bank financing could help in ensuring that capacity building activities are
carried out in countries with implementation capacity constraints. The design of this project
had several activities aimed at building institutional capacities of the implementing agencies and
other relevant entities in the country context. However, Bank financing was not allocated for these
activities and hence did not have leverage to ensure that these activities are implemented. Most of
these activities were not completed due to lack of government funding.




                                                                                                       Page 16 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BO Nat'l Roads & Airport Infrastructure (P122007)



3. Adopting timely actions for addressing the situation can help in countries with capacity
constraints. In this project, at Government request, the Bank provided Hands-on Implementation
Support (HEIP) to help the government in implementing construction of bridges.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written and clear. The theory of change articulated in the text clearly shows the clear causal
links between the project activities (inputs), outputs and the intended outcomes. The analysis provided in the
text is adequate for assessing project performance. The ICR draws reasonably good lessons from the
experience of implementing this project. The photographs provided in Annex Seven helps the reader to
visualize the changes made after the project in the project-intervened areas.

There were shortcomings. The ICR acknowledges that 64% of the Bank financing was officially disbursed
before the project restructuring when the project scope was significantly decreased. The ICR, however, uses a
50% disbursement figure before restructuring. The ICR states that this is in part due to the delay in decision-
making by the GOB regarding the restructuring (para 40), which is not a convincing reason for using a 50%
figure for the split rating exercise. Another minor shortcoming is the length of the ICR. The main body of the text
at 26 pages is significantly more than the recommended length of 15 pages.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 17 of 17
