     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Livelihood Enhancement & Association of (P153591)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024173

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P153591                                    Livelihood Enhancement & Association of

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Cambodia                                   Social Sustainability and Inclusion


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-59600                                  30-Nov-2022                                         20,154,901.71

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Feb-2017                                30-Nov-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            20,170,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             20,170,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                         20,154,901.71                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero       Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p. 4) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 15),
   the Project Development Objective (PDO) of this Livelihood Enhancement and Association of the Poor
   (LEAP) project was “to improve access of poor and vulnerable households in selected communities to
   financial services, opportunities for generating income, and small-scale infrastructure, and to provide
   immediate and effective response in case of an eligible crisis or emergency.”



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Livelihood Enhancement & Association of (P153591)



   This review will assess project performance against this PDO that have been parsed into the following
   four sub-objectives:

         to improve financial services access of poor and vulnerable households in selected communities
         to improve access to opportunities for generating income of poor and vulnerable households in
          selected communities
         to improve access to small-scale infrastructure of poor and vulnerable households in selected
          communities
         to provide an immediate and effective response in case of an eligible crisis or emergency

   The fourth sub-objective of the PDO was not triggered, therefore no assessment of project performance is
   made in this review:



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1: Improving Livelihoods for Rural Poor and Vulnerable Households: (US$14.48 million at appraisal,
   US$14.57 million, actual). This component was to finance seed grants to form and strengthen associations
   of poor and vulnerable households in 47 communes in the Siem Reap Province (SRP). These grants were
   to enable associations to engage in productive activities individually or jointly. This component was also to
   finance technical assistance and capacity building for members of self-help groups (SHGs), producer
   groups (PGs), or agricultural cooperatives (ACs) (agricultural cooperatives) to increase access to assets,
   skills, employment opportunities, technology, and markets using a participatory and demand-driven
   approach. This component was also to finance small-scale community infrastructure and services in
   response to the priority needs of the beneficiaries and contribute to their productivity and income generating
   potential. Investments were to include small-scale storage or warehouses, water supply and sanitation
   facilities, small-scale irrigation schemes, community access roads, and on-farm water management
   practices. The beneficiaries followed the existing annual participatory identification and planning process to
   prioritize their proposed investments. The Sangkat Fund Project Implementation Manual (PIM) was to be
   used to implement community subprojects. This component was to be implemented in the Siem Reap
   Province (SRP).

   2: Improving Livelihoods for Urban Poor and Vulnerable Households: (US$3.72 million at appraisal,
   US$3.64 million, actual). This component was to finance skills development training such as motorbike
   repair, sewing, and hospitality services directed at unemployed youth and women from poor households;
   employment support services such as job placement and career counseling directed at graduates of skills
   development training programs; and construction of productive infrastructure using a community-driven
   approach, where people from the poor households were to be consulted to identify and prioritize community
   infrastructure investments to improve livelihood and increase productivity. These investments were to
   include tertiary roads, footpaths, water supply, drainage systems, and street lighting. This component was
   to be implemented in the Phnom Penh capital (PPC).


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Livelihood Enhancement & Association of (P153591)



  3: Project Management: (US$1.97 million from IDA and US$2 million in counterpart funding for a total of
  US$3.97 million at appraisal; US$1.95 million in IDA and US$0.57 million in counterpart funding or a total of
  US$2.52 million actual). This component financed operating costs related to project
  implementation, supervision, and coordination, including environmental and social management framework
  (ESMF), procurement, financial management (FM), monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and communication.

  4: Contingent Emergency Response: (US$0.00 million at appraisal, US$0.00 million, actual). This
  component was to be triggered by a government request to finance recovery and reconstruction support in
  an eligible emergency. The component was not triggered.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The original total project cost was US$22.17 million including price and physical
  contingencies. The original total IDA contribution was US$20.17 million. The credit disbursed was
  US$20.15 million.

  Financing: The International Development Association (IDA) financed this credit.

  Borrower Contribution: The government committed US$2.0 million in counterpart funds and disbursed
  US$0.57 million.

  Dates: The credit was approved on February 24, 2017, and made effective on May 26, 2017. The Mid Term
  Review (MTR) was conducted on January 13, 2021. The original closing date was on November 30, 2022.
  On June 28, 2022 a level 2 restructuring extended the closing date by one year, from November 30, 2022,
  to November 30, 2023 due to initial implementation delays and the later impact of COVID-19 that disrupted
  the agricultural supply chain and shutdown tourism related businesses. In addition, the restructuring made
  the following changes to the targets of the intermediate results indicators:

        Dropped one indicator “Agricultural producers receiving training who report improved returns to
         labor” with an original target of 75 percent because this indicator was not relevant to the type of
         support provided by the project.
        Added two indicators with corresponding original targets to distinguish the sustainability, scale, and
         efficiency of capacity-building efforts for producer groups (PGs) and agricultural cooperatives (ACs):
               o percent of trained agricultural producers that adopted new practices or technologies, target
                 70 percent
               o number of agricultural cooperatives formed that carry out marketing activities, target 9
        Revised targets for the following intermediate results indicators:
               o reduced the original target for the number of self-help groups supported from 1,250 to 1,000
               o reduced the original target for the total amount of savings mobilized from US$700,000 to
                 US$560,000
               o reduced the original target for the number of client training days from 500,000 to 390,000
               o reduced the original target for the number of female client training days from 275,000 to
                 214,500
               o reduced the original target for the number of participants receiving skills development
                 training from 2,100 to 1,300



                                                                                                  Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Livelihood Enhancement & Association of (P153591)



               o increased the original target for the number of subprojects with a post completion operation
                  mechanism from 102 to 214. Residents of the target communities expressed higher needs
                  and funds were available to meet those.

   Split Rating: The PDO was not revised. The PDO-level outcome indicators and its targets were not
   changed. The components were not changed. One output indicator was dropped. Two new output
   indicators were added with accompanying targets. Targets of 6 output indicators were reduced or increased
   as noted above. These changes did not affect the Theory of Change (TOC) or had any implications on the
   achievement of the outcomes. Thus, a split evaluation is not conducted.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context: 80 percent of Cambodia’s population lives in rural areas. Most depend on agriculture for their
livelihood. Lack of technical know-how, limited access to technical extension services or market information,
and poor infrastructure limit those dependent on agriculture for their livelihood and their ability to participate
in key value chains. In addition, poor rural households lack a voice and institutions to empower them. In
2009, the government implemented the Livelihood Enhancement and Association of the Poor (LEAP)
project in six communes in Siem Reap to complement the Tonle Sap Smallholder Development project
financed by the Asian Development Bank and the International Fund for Agricultural Development and
implemented in 58 rural communes. The pilot LEAP project established 100 self-help groups (SHGs).
These SHGs opened the door to further build capacity, offer resources for economic activities, increase
incomes, and foster savings.

Country Plans: The Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) adopted a National Strategic Development
Plan 2019–2023 (NSDP) and a Rectangular Strategy Phase IV (2019–2023) that aimed to reduce poverty.
The NSDP prioritized food security, poverty reduction for all, and support for about 20 percent of
households that had moved out of poverty but remained vulnerable to shocks by improving their livelihoods.
The Rectangular Strategy prioritized human resource development, economic diversification, private sector
development and employment, and inclusive sustainable development. The country also had a Five-Year
Strategic Plan for Strengthening Gender Mainstreaming and Women’s Empowerment, or Neary Ratanak V
(2018–2023), with a primary focus on empowering women through institutional support.

World Bank Country Partnership: The PDO remained relevant and contributed to all three Focus Areas of
the World Bank Group’s Cambodia Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the period FY2019–
2024. Focus Area 1 was to promote state efficiency and boost private sector development. Objective 3
under this focus area was to “Expand and improve sustainable infrastructure services.” Focus Area 2 was
to foster human development. Objective 4 under this focus area was to “Enhance the quality of targeted
levels of education,” and Objective 5 was to “Expand access to quality early childhood services.” Focus
Area 3 was to improve agriculture and strengthen the sustainable use of natural resources. Objective 8
under this focus area was to “Improve agricultural productivity and promote diversification.” The PDO also
remained relevant to the CPF’s cross-cutting theme of strengthening governance, institutions, and citizen
engagement by fostering the participation of the poor and women in local institutions, developing skills,
promoting economic development, and strengthening community institutions and local governance.


                                                                                                       Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Livelihood Enhancement & Association of (P153591)



               World Bank Experience in the Sector and in the Country: In 2010, the World Bank financed a pilot
               project in the Siem Reap Province to improve the livelihood and social capital of the rural poor in select
               communes.

               The project facilitated the formation of self-managed institutions of the poor and strengthened them by
               giving them access to financing and linking them to markets and key value chains. The lessons from this
               pilot informed this project’s PDO formulation. The government included this Livelihood Enhancement and
               Association of the Poor project for financing as part of its re-engagement with the World Bank beginning in
               2015. Also included in the World Bank’s Cambodia Country Engagement Note for FY 2016-FT2017 were 6
               other projects that aimed to improve service delivery and reduce vulnerability.

               Overall, the PDO remained highly relevant at closing to the government’s plans and supported the World
               Bank re-engagement strategy with Cambodia. The PDO was relevant to the government’s development
               priorities to enhance the agriculture sector, invest in infrastructure, and develop human resource, including
               financially supporting women from poor and vulnerable households in the Siem Reap Province (SRP) and
               the Phnom Penh Capital (PPC). The PDO was pitched at an appropriate level to match the development
               needs of organizing small groups to increase their incomes and access modern technologies of production.
               The PDO formulation also addressed the need to access financing and acknowledged that small-scale
               infrastructure investments could contribute to achieving these objectives.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve access to financial services of poor and vulnerable households in selected communities

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: No Theory of Change (TOC) was required at appraisal, but a TOC was reconstructed for
                             the ICR based on the causal linkages established by the input, outputs and expected outcomes of the results
                             framework in the PAD. The financing of training would be aimed at rural poor households from the 47
                             communes in Siem Reap to form groups and strengthen their capacity individually or in groups to enhance
                             their productive activities by having access to financial services. Such access would lead them to gain assets,
                             skills, technology, and market shares. The inputs and outputs were to improve efficiency, enhance
                             productivity, and build pro-poor market systems for small and marginal producers so that they can participate
                             in higher value chains.

                             Inputs were to be financing the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries, and Forestry (MAFF) and other technical
                             service providers to deliver technical support to improve production efficiency, enhance productivity, provide
                             access to technology extension, logistics infrastructure, and information services such as training in basic

                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Livelihood Enhancement & Association of (P153591)



financial literacy, microenterprise business planning, basic accounting, and record keeping, good governance
practices. Communes would on-lend from the Community Livelihood Investment Funds US$1,000 to
US$1,500 to each self-help group whose members have no access to formal banking institutions. Federations
would also be linked to other financial institutions for additional resources. Linking producers to markets
would also be part of the inputs.

Outputs were to be the self-help groups or agricultural cooperatives that the rural poor households would
form for productive endeavors. Additional outputs would include mobilized savings, and grants given to
SHGs, PGs, and ACs to pay for technical assistance and market linkage services.

Outcomes were to be the building of pro-poor market systems so that small and marginal producers could
better participate in higher market values chains.

No critical assumptions were provided. The TOC was logical and established a causal link between inputs
and outputs. However, the lack of critical assumptions showed some gaps between outputs and outcomes.
For example, identifying the conditions in accessing financial services - from (traditional) financial institutions
or (non-traditional) grants provided by the project - that could lead to exceeding the expected number of
beneficiaries or sustaining their improved positions in the value chain.

OUTPUTS:

      975 Self-Help Groups (SHGs) or savings groups in Siem Reap Province were supported, slightly
       falling short of the target of 1,000. The 975 SHGs had 11,314 members, 10,096 or 89.3 percent of
       them were women. There were 1,228 SHG committee members, of which 1,121 were women. The
       ICR did not provide targets for these reported achievements.
      These SHGs mobilized US$1.11 million in savings, exceeding the target of US$0.56 million.

The ICR reported on the following additional output achievements, not included in the RF and hence without
target values:

      46 producer groups were established with 1,097 members, of which 986 or 89.9 percent were women.
       368 members formed the PG committees of which 321 or 87.2 percent of them were women.
      8 agricultural cooperatives with 330 members of which 285 or 86.4 percent were women were
       established. 64 members formed the AC committee, of which 50 or 78.1 percent were women.

OUTCOMES:

      73 percent of the Self-Help Groups (SHGs) received a rating of moderately satisfactory or better. The
       target of 80 percent was not achieved because the full-scale institutional strengthening and capacity
       building support was hampered by initial start-up delays and later delays from COVID-19.
      The project had 570,788 direct project beneficiaries, far exceeding the target of 100,000. 51 percent
       were female, exceeding the target of 40 percent. A higher than planned adoption rate of new
       technologies by producers led to a higher-than-planned number of beneficiaries.
      96.2 percent (from a sample of 14,236 respondents, accumulated from annual beneficiary surveys
       conducted in Siem Reap and Phnom Penh Provinces, as clarified by the World Bank Task Team)
       reported that the project investments met their needs exceeding the target of 90 percent.


                                                                                                      Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Livelihood Enhancement & Association of (P153591)




      97.6 percent or 43,927 female beneficiaries reported that the project investments met their needs
       almost achieving the target of 45,000 female beneficiaries. The World Bank ICR Task Team clarified
       that this target set at appraisal was unclear. They extrapolated the 43,927 from the positive response
       of 97.6 percent x the target of 45,000.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial. The project substantially
achieved its goal of improving access to financial services.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve access to opportunities for generating income of poor and vulnerable households in selected
communities.

Rationale
Theory of Change: No Theory of Change (TOC) was required at appraisal, but a TOC was reconstructed for
the ICR based on the results framework in the PAD. The inputs were to lead to outputs that would lead to
expected outcomes.

Inputs: were to include training and technical assistance to develop beneficiary skills of women and
unemployed youth from poor households to improve their employability. Such inputs were to include the
conduct of local labor market surveys, training assessments, selecting beneficiaries, employability and skills
training, career counselling, voucher provision, job placement, and employment support. Inputs were also to
include facilitating partnerships with the tourism sector by conducting basic English language training,
hoteling, and other tourism related opportunities.

Outputs: were to include the training days conducted in the various aspects of enhancing employment
opportunities, distinguishing those who graduated to become wage earners and those who became self-
employed. In addition, outputs were to include the formation of agricultural cooperatives to conduct marketing
activities and small grants to trainees for business start-ups.

Outcomes: were to include the new employment opportunities, whether as wage earners or self-employed by
those who have received and graduated from the training activities.

No critical assumptions were provided. The TOC was logical. The causal link between inputs and outputs was
well established. The training provided contributed to increase in employment opportunities and hence
increase in potential income earnings. Those who participated in the training ended up either as self-
employed in business start-ups or as wage earners. Those who were trained were youth and women from
poor households who were unemployed or underemployed.

OUTPUTS:



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Livelihood Enhancement & Association of (P153591)




      67,559 client days of training were delivered, not achieving the target of 390,000 client days. Client
         day equals the number of clients who completed training multiplied by the number of days of training.
         The target was not achieved because all training was cut short or postponed during the COVID-19
         pandemic. Training participants were to come from the self-help, producer or agricultural cooperative
         groups that were to have been mobilized but the targets were also unmet. Those subsequently
         mobilized during the later stages of implementation received less training than anticipated.
        48,324 female client days of training were delivered, not achieving the target of 214,500.
        87 percent of trained agricultural producers adopted new practices or technologies, exceeding the
         target of 70 percent. The Siem Reap management team conducted a post training follow-up and
         assessment of those who participated in pig and poultry raising training to report this achievement.
        8 agricultural cooperatives were formed and conducted marketing activities, almost achieving
         the target of 9 cooperatives. Marketing activities included collection of market price information on
         inputs such as feeds for livestock, seeds, farming tools; and chicken, pigs, vegetables, and handicrafts
         from Producer Groups.
        1,319 participants received skills development training, achieving the target of 1,300. The training
         was delivered by 22 training agencies to 784 participants from Siem Reap and 10 training agencies to
         535 participants from Phnom Penh. From Siem Reap, 715 graduated, 493 were wage earners and
         188 were self-employed. From Phnom Penh, 487 graduated, 422 were wage earners and 321 were
         self-employed. The skills training included air conditioning repair and maintenance, cosmetology,
         culinary, barista, sewing, electricity wiring, and vehicle repairs.

OUTCOMES:

      87.7 percent of participants who received skills development training received new or improved
         employment or increased their income, exceeding the target of 80 percent. This consisted of 50
         graduates from Siem Reap and another 50 from Phnom Penh who received small business capital
         grants to start their own businesses.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective of improved access to opportunities for generating
income is rated Substantial. Evidence points to increased incomes after receiving training. The
beneficiaries were either self-employed in business start-ups or were wage earners following the training. The
training targeted unemployed youth and women from poor households.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve access to small-scale infrastructure of poor and vulnerable households in selected communities

Rationale




                                                                                                   Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Livelihood Enhancement & Association of (P153591)



Theory of Change: No Theory of Change (TOC) was required at appraisal, but a TOC was reconstructed for
the ICR based on the results framework in the PAD. The inputs were causally linked to outputs and to the
expected outcomes.

Inputs: were to include the financing of small-scale community infrastructure subprojects and services that
beneficiaries prioritized. Beneficiaries were to follow the existing annual participation planning process to
advocate their needs in the Community Investment Plan. The Sangkat Fund Project Implementation Manual
was to be used to plan and implement the small-scale infrastructure investment priorities.

Outputs: were to be the completed subproject infrastructure investments such as community access roads or
footpaths, water supply and sanitation facilities, street lighting, small scale storage facilities or warehouses,
small scale irrigation schemes, and on-farm water management practices.

Outcomes: were the productive and income generating activities derived from accessing the community
small-scale infrastructure and services. In addition, the outputs above were expected to reduce the
vulnerability to disaster and climate risks such as droughts and floods in the long term. No outcome indicators
were noted associated with the reduced loss of lives or damage to property, or ability to adapt to natural or
economic shocks.

No critical assumptions were provided. The TOC shows logical links between inputs, outputs, and outcomes.
The outputs were to lead to the target beneficiaries using improved infrastructure services to access the
markets and participate in productive endeavors after overcoming the barriers brought by poor infrastructure.

OUTPUTS:

      95 percent of small-scale infrastructure sub-projects were completed, exceeding the target of 80
       percent. 208 of the 219 completed subprojects were assessed as of good quality. These small-scale
       infrastructure subprojects included roads, water supply, community ponds and wells, irrigation
       facilities, solar street lighting, animal feed mills, and agricultural cooperative buildings.
      100 percent of the 219 completed subprojects had post-project community engagement or operations
       and maintenance (O&M) arrangements, exceeding the target of 85 percent.

Technical audits followed the guidelines of the Sangkat Fund Project Implementation Manual. The World
Bank helped prepare the Sangkat Fund Project Implementation Manual and adopted its use for World Bank-
financed projects. The government also adopted the manual for use in all its subprojects. The manual
includes safeguard provisions consistent with World Bank policies.

OUTCOMES:

      96.2 percent of the beneficiaries reported that the project investments met their needs exceeding
       the target of 90 percent. 51 percent of the beneficiaries were women, exceeding the target of 50
       percent.
      570,789 direct project beneficiaries consisted of 422,464 from Siem Reap and 148,325 from Phnom
       Penh, exceeding the target of 100,000. A higher than planned adoption rate of new technologies by
       producers led to a higher-than-planned number of beneficiaries.
      291,102 were female beneficiaries. The target of 50,000 was exceeded.


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Livelihood Enhancement & Association of (P153591)



                            Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial. Evidence demonstrated that
                            access to small-scale infrastructure was achieved. The ICR notes that improvement of community
                            infrastructure has provided a significant benefit in many aspects of people's daily activities, including better
                            access to school, market, work, public places, and social and health care services; improved living conditions
                            of poor and vulnerable households in both urban and rural areas, and enhanced productivity and income. It
                            would have been useful to be specific and quantify to what extent or which type (productive endeavors or
                            access to markets) improved as a result of the improved access to completed infrastructure assets.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


                            OBJECTIVE 4
                            Objective
                            To provide an immediate and effective response in case of an eligible crisis or emergency

                            Rationale
                            The CERC was not triggered. Thus, this objective is not assessed.



                            Rating
                            Not Rated/Not Applicable


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall, the efficacy of this LEAP project to achieve its objective to improve the access of poor and vulnerable
                            households to financial services, to income generating opportunities, and reducing poverty is rated
                            Substantial, as the documented achievements show that each of the three sub-objectives were substantially
                            achieved.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Efficiency: No economic and financial analysis of this community driven development
   operation was conducted at appraisal. The economic analysis design included provisions for conducting simple
   cost-benefit analysis for rural livelihood interventions using estimated cost and revenue streams to estimate

                                                                                                                              Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Livelihood Enhancement & Association of (P153591)



gross margins, cost-benefit ratios, and internal rates of return, where applicable. Income-generating
interventions of the project activities and the completion of small-scale infrastructure investments were noted to
benefit 20,000 rural poor households or about 80,000 persons in 47 communes in the 9 districts of Siem Reap
province and another 5,000 urban poor households or about 20,000 persons in 13 Sangkats in the Phnom Penh
capital. An ex-ante financial analysis noted a 100 to 300 percent increase in gross margins in agricultural
production, particularly in vegetables, after adopting better technology and better access to infrastructure, such
as irrigation, as planned. A small-scale irrigation activity was estimated to have a 30 to 40 percent financial rate
of return.

A cost-benefit analysis was conducted at closing. The analysis used a discount rate of 8.5 percent, slightly less
than the 8.78 market interest rate for borrowings in KHR in 2022, but slightly higher than the 8.35 market interest
rate for borrowing in US dollars (ICR, footnote 10). The project's estimated Net Present Value (NPV) ranged
from US$4.7 million over a 7-year period to US$37.7 million over a 10-year period. The corresponding estimated
internal rates of return (IRR) ranged from 13 to 41 percent. The benefit-cost ratios ranged from 1.2 to 2.4. Higher
IRRs in the longer term were expected because beneficiaries of livelihood activities were expected to acquire
more knowledge and capital over time, leading to an increase in income. Infrastructure investments were also
expected to yield additional benefits over time.

No comparison of economic efficiency rates at appraisal and at closing is possible.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: Project management staffing led to implementation delays in the
first two years and with the COVID-19-related delays in the final implementation period justified the one-year
extension of the closing date. A higher-than planned adoption rate of new technologies by producers led to a
higher-than-planned number of beneficiaries. Significant loan resources were mobilized despite the lower than
planned number of formed SHGs and ACs. The implementation challenges reasonably justified the one-year
extension of the project closing date. The credit disbursed nearly 100 percent of its commitment.

Overall, the project efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.




                                                                                                      Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Livelihood Enhancement & Association of (P153591)



6. Outcome

The relevance of objective is rated High because the PDO at closing remained relevant to both the country’s
poverty reduction development plans and priorities and the World Bank’s reengagement strategy with
Cambodia. The efficacy of the project to achieve its first, second, and third sub-objectives, and its overall PDO
is rated Substantial. Efficiency is rated Substantial due to the high economic efficiency at closing and as
supported by the sensitivity analysis in Annex 4 of the ICR. Outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose risks to the development outcomes of the project:

      Government ownership or commitment. This is a moderate risk. In this project, poor households
       benefited from their participation in the small-scale infrastructure, skills training, and formation of
       saving groups. They were introduced to processes to gain access to basic services and livelihoods.
       The risk remains that those processes would not be sustained over time, just as the formation of
       various groups were not sustained after the pilot in Siem Reap preceding this project. To mitigate this
       risk, an action plan covering the period January to December 2024 is expected to be implemented.
       The government has approved a budget to implement this action plan.
      Stakeholder ownership risk. This is a moderate risk. The implementing entities developed a
       strategy to sustain the technical capacity, knowledge, saving capital, and assets obtained under the
       project. SMTs and MAFF were expected to hand over these assets to responsible agencies.
      Financial risk. This is a moderate risk. Continuous monitoring of project results would require
       resources. Using the MIS and monitoring data in the Ministry of Interior and respective implementing
       agencies; funds and technical support to maintain the small infrastructure built by the project; and
       delivering advisory services to SHGs, PGs, and ACs would need to continue to maintain or improve
       their production, marketing efforts, and access to finance. As noted above, the government has
       committed to finance an annual budget to implement the exit strategy of this project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The World Bank team incorporated the following lessons from the pilot LEAP project and best practices
  from analytical research on self-help groups conducted by the Consultative Group to Assist the Poor
  (CGAP) to inform project design: (i) the need for longer-term institutional and technical capacity support
  to the entities created under the pilot such as the 100 SHGs, two commune-level federations, and more
  than 50 producer groups, by institutionalizing the links between Commune Level Federations (CLFs),
  Sangkat Level Federations (SLFs), and the Commune Councils; (ii) identifying intermediate level

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Livelihood Enhancement & Association of (P153591)



  indicators for social capital created and outcome level indicators for rating self-reliance to monitor group
  performance; (iii) targeting the poorest households that may have been excluded during the pilot phase:
  (iv) making membership voluntary, homogeneous to avoid elite capture, and acknowledging rural
  households with migrant labor workers; (v) group-determined savings and intra-lending norms such as
  initially using own savings only; encouraging continuous contributions to grow savings by accumulating
  interest earnings; (vi) encouraging early links with microfinance institutions and commercial credit
  providers; (vii) promoting good use of funds to reduce vulnerabilities; and (viii) aggregating power through
  federated structures. In addition, the World Bank team focused on reducing poverty by including skills
  training to increase the income of poor and migratory households. The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries
  and Forest was an appropriate implementing entity because of the target rural households' predominance
  of agriculture and fishery-based livelihoods. The Bank team identified substantial implementation and
  fiduciary risks. Mitigating measures identified in the pilot project assessment were adopted in design,
  including capacity-building measures at all levels and a communication strategy to ensure prompt
  response to implementation challenges.

  Overall, the World Bank performance at entry is rated satisfactory. The identified implementation risks
  were to be mitigated by continuous training and support during implementation.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank conducted 13 supervisory missions over the 6-year project period including virtual ones
 during the COVID-19 pandemic. During the initial years the World Bank provided hands-on training and
 joint technical missions, to support shortcomings in financial management, procurement, environment, and
 social safeguards compliance, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E). The MTR mission was conducted on
 January 13, 2021. The World Bank team consisted of a task team leader (TTLs) based in-country for the
 life of the project, and key team members (livelihood specialist, engineer or infrastructure specialist, and
 M&E). Three TTLs changed hands with no major changes in the technical team’s composition. TThe World
 Bank addressed challenges encountered in the first two years of the project and during the COVID-19
 pandemic by responding promptly with hands-on support and clear guidance. Restructuring extended the
 project period by a year to complete the activities and achieve the project objectives. The World Bank team
 prepared an exit strategy with clear actions and responsibilities for local governments and communities to
 implement.

 Overall, the quality of World Bank team supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 Overall World Bank performance is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Livelihood Enhancement & Association of (P153591)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PDO was clear and outcome-focused. The results framework effectively reflected the causal link
 between inputs/activities, outputs, and expected outcomes. The M&E system was based on the results
 framework. A web-based MIS platform was to use mobile data connectivity and smartphone or tablet
 capabilities to facilitate real-time data collection on physical and financial progress, results, and impact.
 CERC indicators were to be measured when triggered. The ICR acknowledged that the indicators in the
 results framework were limited. For example, an indicator to reflect how activities led beneficiaries to
 better deal with a crisis or emergency shock was missing. The outcome indicators were also more at an
 intermediate level. Some indicators were not specific (e.g., beneficiaries for infrastructure, SHGs, and skills
 development), which could lead to double counting. This was, however, addressed during implementation
 (see below). The indicator “clients day of training provided” did not specify which training was to be
 measured. Outcome 3 was largely based on surveys and could have been complemented with more
 tangible indicators as discussed earlier.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Project Coordination Office implemented the M&E system as designed. The results framework,
  Community Operations Manual (COM), and the Project Implementation Manual implemented the M&E,
  The M&E team supported and trained SMTs and facilitators to monitor results, conduct field monitoring
  visits, and prepare project reports. Procurement delays (agreement on the terms of reference, finding a
  qualified consultant firm) delayed data collection to complete the baseline study. Several planned studies
  and assessments were not adequately designed or analyzed. The government could not find qualified
  consultants, or the report was not useful, not relevant, or delayed implementation meant not delivered in
  time to inform the project’s needs (for example, the tracer study). The MIS took time to implement. Data
  on progress against indicators only started in June 2019 including data on livelihood activities conducted
  by SHG members using both savings and seed grant funds. The Mid Term Review (MTR) assessed the
  relevance and quality of the indicators, resolved the issues of double counting beneficiaries across
  components, boosted data collection practices, upgraded MIS to capture livelihood activities of SHG
  members, conducted grading exercises to identify SHGs that required additional capacity building, and
  offered grants for district and sangkat facilitators skills development training. The findings informed the
  restructuring that led to a one-year extension, dropped an ill-defined output indicator, added two new
  indicators to better measure outputs of added capacity building activities, and revised targets for 5 output
  indicators according to what could be completed in the remaining project period.



c. M&E Utilization
  Management used M&E data for decision making, to inform restructuring, and design corrective
  measures to improve project performance and outcome. These included extending the project


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Livelihood Enhancement & Association of (P153591)



  period, adjusting targets for output indicators, and operational adjustments to achieve the PDOs during
  the remaining period. However, important studies such as a tracer study and gender assessment that
  would have informed implementation were significantly delayed and did not serve its purpose.

  Overall, M&E is rated Substantial. While the shortcomings in indicators are acknowledged, these were
  not significant. Sufficient evidence from the M&E data and the RF led to substantial ratings of the
  efficacy of the project to achieve outcomes of the three sub-objectives.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards: The project was categorized as an Environmental Assessment (EA) Category
   “B” and triggered a partial assessment under OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment given the small-scale
   and dispersed nature of the project’s activities, including civil works, agricultural and livelihood activities,
   and community services. The project also triggered the following safeguards: OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats,
   because of the possibility that some agriculture, livestock, and fisheries activities and small-scale
   infrastructure would affect natural resources, including wetlands, protected areas, and biodiversity; OP/BP
   4.11 Physical and Cultural Resources, because the Siem Reap province was a cultural heritage site; and
   OP/BP 7.50 International Waterways because the project activities could extract water indirectly linked to
   the tributaries of the Mekong River. The project activities were not expected to adversely change the quality
   or quantity of water flows of the Mekong River, and an exception to the requirement of notifying riparian
   countries was allowed under para 7(a) of OP 7.50 (PAD, paragraph 76). The Environmental and Social
   Safeguards Management Framework (ESMF) included a chance find procedure for physical cultural
   resources to comply with the requirements of OP/BP 4.11. The final safeguards instruments were initially
   disclosed locally in Khmer and in English on September 29, 2016 and again on January 10, 2017 at the
   Ministry of Interior in Phnom Penh capital hall, in Siem Reap Provincial Administration offices, their
   respective websites and in the World Bank’s external website.

   Social Safeguards: The project complied with the social safeguards policies (ICR, paragraph 71). The
   project triggered OP/BP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples and OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement because some
   subprojects could require minor land acquisition. RGC’s Ministry of Health guided health-related safeguard
   measures during the COVID-19 pandemic. Good practices and lessons learned during the COVID-19
   pandemic included the use of the Telegram digital platform to monitor civil work progress and safeguard
   implementation and compliance. There were no pending safeguard actions at closing, and no incidents or
   accidents occurred during project implementation. Compliance with OP/BP 4.12 policy was guided by the
   approved Resettlement Policy Framework. Voluntary land donation was adequately assessed and
   documented.

   The project relied on the RGC’s existing Complaint Handling System (CHS) at the subnational level to
   report on local authorities' performance, use of Sangkat funds, and other issues as part of the grievance
   redress mechanism. Letters could be posted in complaint boxes or person. The project strengthened CHS’s
   functionality by introducing an intake form and a logbook and conducting sensitization workshops. The

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Livelihood Enhancement & Association of (P153591)



   project’s website and project sites included the CHS contact information. Complaints were integrated into
   the bi-annual and annual progress reports. At closing, all 35 grievances recorded were resolved. The
   complaints were on the quality of the small-scale infrastructure, delays in disbursement of stipend and seed
   grants, location of training schools and internships, and requests for setting up own businesses.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: The project complied with World Bank financial management (FM) guidelines and
   procedures (ICR, paragraph 73). The project built its financial management on the government’s existing
   structures. The FM manual, PIM and COM, internal controls, and disbursement were adequately
   maintained. Delayed deployment of FM staff in the first two years of implementation also delayed the
   installment of accounting software and delayed the submission and affected the quality of Annual Work
   Plan and Budget (AWBP), financial reports, and two IFRs (January–June 2020 and July–December 2020).
   The World Bank team conducted training following the MITR, intensified hands-on support to the project
   staff on disbursement, bookkeeping, internal auditing, project close-out procedures and other FM issues.
   Financial management improved and the annual audits were submitted on time. No significant audit
   findings were reported.

   Procurement. The project complied with World Bank procurement guidelines and procedures (ICR,
   paragraph 74). Procurement activities were delayed during the first two years of implementation because
   of lack of implementation capacity to prepare and approve terms of references for consultancies, and
   internal coordination challenges to assemble procurement packages. Procurement challenges delayed the
   completion of a baseline study. The World Bank team conducted additional procurement training on
   procedures and the use of the World Bank’s Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP).
   Procurement improved and all procured goods and construction works were delivered at closing. The
   Ministry of Interior reportedly intends to integrate community participation in procurement in implementing
   small-scale infrastructure works in the future.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Satisfactory



                                                                                                 Page 16 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Livelihood Enhancement & Association of (P153591)



                                                                               While acknowledging the
                                                                               shortcomings, these are not
                                                                               significant as the M&E system
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Substantial               and RF provided sufficient
                                                                               evidence for a Substantial rating
                                                                               of Efficacy and an overall
                                                                               Satisfactory rating of Outcome.
Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The operation offered the following lessons:

      If capacity building is combined with small livelihood grants, these may empower poor
       households. In this project, economic development was to be delivered to poor households
       by enhancing soft skills, building technical capacities using participatory means, and using
       these as incentives to access financial resources for livelihood opportunities. Participating
       beneficiaries gained skills and resources to sustain livelihoods and jobs, as reflected in its
       "Teach the community how to fish" motto.
      Forming SHGs may deliver income-generating opportunities to impoverished and
       vulnerable communities. In this project, a systematic approach was initiated by building
       institutional capacity, establishing, and strengthening SHGs to become sustainable
       community institutions. This approach requires time and optimal use of resources. One way
       was to collaborate with service providers and NGOs specializing in community engagement
       to boost SHG capacity. This collaboration is vital when faced with a limited government
       capacity to deliver such support.
      A customized, flexible, and inclusive community participatory approach may be
       beneficial when working with marginalized communities to design, implement, and
       monitor local investment projects. This project's inclusive approach meant fostering social
       capital while contributing to local economic development. Women and vulnerable populations
       were actively involved. Beneficiaries were informed about objectives, approaches, and
       activities. They were made aware of their participation's short- and long-term social and
       economic benefits. Beneficiaries began to trust local authorities because of their flexibility
       and responsiveness. Community members gained a sense of ownership from these
       participatory engagements. This approach heightened participation in project training, in
       forming savings groups, and in engaging in community meetings. Such participation
       maximized the project's impact and a sense of ownership that contributes to the
       sustainability of project outcomes.
      Using resources to raise awareness, training, and mentoring of women
       beneficiaries may strengthen women's participation and boost their economic
       position. In this project, financial assistance was used to foster women’s confidence, amplify
       their voices, and empower them to assert agency. The project facilitated an inclusive
       environment for women to participate and optimize benefits from project activities. Other
       similar projects may engage traditional male leaders while nurturing women's leadership
       skills and making available relevant networking opportunities. These strategies may further



                                                                                                 Page 17 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Livelihood Enhancement & Association of (P153591)



         enhance gender equality and empower women to contribute to more sustainable and
         impactful development outcomes.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a clear picture of the operation and followed the guidelines. The report was internally
consistent. The reconstructed theory of change showed the causal links of how the activities informed the
project outcomes, although with acknowledged missed opportunity during restructuring to identify better
indicators of some of the expected outcomes. Annexes provided additional information to support the
achievements reported, including the sensitivity analysis to support project efficiency. The evidence supported
the ratings. Lessons were based on the project experience, including the impact of household participation in
planning and implementing small-scale infrastructure investments. The overall quality of the report is rated
Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 18 of 18
